SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Adopted: April 15, 2002 
Effective: April 26, 2002 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
SKOKIE, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
George Van Dusen 
Mayor 
____________ 
Pramod C. Shah 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Michele L. Bromberg 
Karen Gray-Keeler 
Ralph Klein 
Randall E. Roberts 
Edie Sue Sutker 
Ilonka Ulrich 
Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Michael M. Lorge 
Corporate Counsel 
____________ 
John T. Lockerby 
Manager 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1979 Code, as supplemented through 1999, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1979 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant State law have been included. A table listing the State law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between Sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Barbara Meyer, Corporation Counsel, Mark Vanderpool, Assistant Village Manager, Keith Glatz, Purchasing Agent, and Marlene Williams, Village Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Skokie, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 2002. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 02-4-C-3077 
An Ordinance Revising, Amending, Enacting, Codifying and Consolidating the General Ordinances of the Village of Skokie, Illinois, Providing for the Repeal of Ordinances Not Included Therein, With Certain Exceptions, and for Other Purposes 
WHEREAS, the Village of Skokie is an Illinois home rule municipality pursuant to Article VII, Section 6, of the Illinois Constitution 1970; and 
WHEREAS, on June 11, 1979 the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Skokie adopted the recodification of the Code of Ordinances for the Village of Skokie (Skokie Village Code, 1979); and 
WHEREAS, the Corporation Counsel and Village Manger recommended to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, at a public meeting duly held, that the Village Code be updated and that the Mayor and Board of Trustees adopt the recodification of the Code of Ordinances; and 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Board of Trustees concurred in the aforesaid recommendation; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Skokie, Cook County, Illinois: 
Section 1: For the purposes of revising, amending, enacting, codifying and consolidating the general ordinances and laws of the Village of Skokie, Illinois, and pursuant to the home rule powers granted to the Village of Skokie under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Illinois, the following chapters, to wit, Chapters 1 through 118, inclusive, attached hereto and incorporated by reference as if set forth verbatim herein, are hereby adopted and passed as and for the general ordinances of the Village of Skokie, Illinois, and shall constitute and be known as the "Skokie Village Code, 2002" 
Section 2: The provisions of the Skokie Village Code, 2002, shall take effect and be in force upon the passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form by the Village Clerk as required by law. 
Section 3: The provisions appearing in the Skokie Village Code, 2002, insofar as they are substantially the same as those of the Skokie Village Code, 1979, regardless of their location and numbering, and those of all other ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of said Skokie Village Code, 2002, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. Provisions of the Skokie Village Code, 1979, as amended through and including April 15, 2002, not set forth in the same or substantially the same form in the Skokie Village Code, 2002, except as hereafter provided, shall be deemed repealed by this Ordinance. Any ordinance amending the Skokie Village Code, 2002, adopted on or after April 16, 2002, shall be deemed to amend the Skokie Village Code, 2002. Where an ordinance adopted on or after April 16, 2002, amended any portion of the Skokie Village Code, 1979, which was renumbered or relocated so as to be retained and included as a successor provision of the Skokie Village Code, 2002, said ordinance shall be deemed to have amended the successor provision of the Skokie Village Code, 2002, wherever located. 
Section 4: The repeal provided for in Section 3 of this Ordinance shall not be deemed to repeal any ordinance not amending or having been codified into the Skokie Village Code, 2002. 
Section 5: The repeal provided for in Section 3 of this Ordinance shall not be deemed to repeal the Zoning Regulations as contained in the Skokie Village Code, 1979, Chapter 21, as has been amended from time to time. 
Section 6: The repeal provided for in Section 3 of this Ordinance shall not be deemed to affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or any claim, contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Ordinance; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Village or any evidence of the Village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Village; nor shall said repeal affect the administrative ordinances and resolutions of the Village not in conflict or inconsistent with the Skokie Village Code, 2002; nor shall said repeal affect any annual appropriation ordinance of the Village, any ordinance or resolution concerning, levying or imposing any tax or imposing any fee other than that set forth specifically in the Skokie Village Code, 2002; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution relating to wages, salaries and bonds of any Village officer or employee; nor shall said repeal affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the Village on any person or entity; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution concerning or relating to the annexation or to extending or reducing the boundaries of the Village; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution establishing the grades of streets and avenues and the several railroad tracks in the Village; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution establishing, naming or vacating any street, alley or other place or assuming jurisdiction over same; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution relating to or granting powers to other governmental entities or relating in any way to the construction, operation and maintenance of the Village's water supply or sewer system, or any other municipal utility; nor shall said repeal affect any ordinance or resolution concerning the transfer of prisoners to places of accommodation, elections, zoning ordinances or variations or special uses granted pursuant thereto, the transfer, acceptance, lease, sale or purchase of any real or personal property, or any ordinance or resolution concerning special assessments or special taxing districts; nor shall said repeal affect any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Section 7: That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. 
Adopted this 15th day of April, 2002. 
Ayes: 7 (Piper, Bromberg, Perille, Gelder, Roberts, McCabe, Van Dusen) 
Nays: 0 
Absent: 0 
	/s/   
      Village Clerk 
 	 
Approved by me this 
15th day of April, 2002. 
	/s/   
      Mayor, Village of Skokie 
 	 
Attested and filed in my office 
this 16th day of April, 2002; 
and published in pamphlet form 
according to law from April 
16th, 2002 to April 26th, 2002. 
/s/   
      Village Clerk 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Title of Code; amendments. 
(a)  Title. This Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the "Skokie Village Code." 
(b)  Amendments part of Code. Any additions or amendments to this Code are incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Skokie Village Code includes such additions and amendments. 
(c)  Recording of amendments. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep at least 1 copy of the Village Code. 
(d)  Record of ordinances. The records mentioned in this section shall be kept in addition to the record of ordinances which the Clerk is required to keep by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 1.01) 
State Law reference— Revision and codification of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3 et seq.; ordinance book as prima facie evidence, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms used in this Code, unless specifically defined in this Code, have the meanings prescribed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes for the same terms. 
(b)  Terms used in this Code have the following meanings: 
County means Cook County. 
Illinois Compiled Statutes and statute mean the latest edition of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and any amendments thereto. 
Illinois Municipal Code means Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.). 
Person means any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate, club, association, corporation or other entity. As applied to partnership or associations the word includes the partners or members thereof; as applied to corporations it includes the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for the act referred to. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
State means the State of Illinois. 
This Code means the Skokie Village Code. 
Village means the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 
Village Board and Board of Trustees mean the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 
(Code 1979, § 1.02; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, 5 ILCS 70/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of existing ordinances; ordinances not affected by Code; effect of Code on prior offenses and rights. 
(a)  All general ordinances or parts thereof heretofore adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and not included in this Code are repealed, except the following, which are hereby continued in full force and effect: 
(1)  Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issuance of municipal notes or bonds. 
(2)  Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments or establishing special taxing districts. 
(3)  Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries. 
(4)  Ordinances granting franchises or rights to persons or corporations. 
(5)  Ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication, opening, grading, naming, improvements, altering, widening or vacating of any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public grounds. 
(6)  Ordinances respecting the annexation of territory to the Village, or the conveyance, acquisition, or acceptance of real property or easements in real property. 
(7)  Ordinances authorizing or relating to particular public improvements. 
(8)  Ordinances relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities, except where this Code may contain provision for such matters, in which case this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions only. 
(9)  Zoning ordinances or ordinances pertaining to specific parcels of property. 
(10)  Any special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this Code. 
(11)  Any special ordinances providing for the indemnification of Village officials and employees. 
(b)  The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of heretofore existing ordinances, are continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments. Any act done, offense committed, or right accruing or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior hereto shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if the repeal had not been effected. 
(Code 1979, § 1.03)  
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances repealed not reenacted. 
No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this Code, unless specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance does not impair or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby. 
(Code 1979, § 1.04)  
Sec. 1-5. - Jurisdiction of Code. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the Village. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the Village to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits. 
(Code 1979, § 1.05)  
Sec. 1-6. - Penalties. 
(a)  Standard penalty. 
(1)  Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance or in any rule or regulation of the Village any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code, any ordinance or any rule or regulation the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person, upon the violation of any ordinance, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $750.00 for each and every subsequent day until such time as it is abated, corrected or no longer exists. The Corporation Counsel may file a civil action to recover any penalty or fine, as imposed by an Administrative Law Officer, Judge, or any appropriate entity or tribunal so authorized, against any such person; provided, however, that the filing of such civil action shall preclude incarceration or imprisonment. 
(2)  In addition to any other fine or penalty provided for by this section or any other section of this Code, the court may also impose as a sentence any one of the following: 
a.  An amount of restitution to any person or entity suffering personal injury or property damage as the result of the conduct; 
b.  A period of community service; 
c.  Mandatory attendance at remedial counseling, treatment or educational sessions. 
(b)  Revocation or suspension. The revocation or suspension of a license, registration or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any penalty being enforced. 
(c)  Establishment of escrow accounts. The Village Manager's designee, with the approval of the Village Manager or Corporation Counsel, is authorized to establish escrow accounts to assist the Village in resolving disputes relating to: 
(1)  The issuance of a permit, license or certificate of occupancy; or 
(2)  Conditions relating to a Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals case. The terms of the escrow account shall be determined by the Village Manager, the Village Manager's designee or the Corporation Counsel. 
(d)  Violations. 
(1)  Each act of violation, and each subsequent day the violation continues shall elicit a fine not to exceed $750.00 until such time as the violation no longer exists. 
(2)  There shall be a presumption of a continuing violation until adjudicated or until the Village Manager, or designee, determines that the violation has been abated, corrected or no longer exists. 
(3)  Daily fines for the violation shall accrue for the duration of time as outlined in Section 1-106(d)(2). 
(4)  The imposition of the accruing fine, or any part thereof, shall be at the discretion of the Administrative Law Officer or Judge. 
(e)  Notice. Upon service of a citation for any violation of this Code, it shall be sufficient to provide notice of continuing daily fines, if no compliance has been achieved, by mail to the last known address of the respondent cited or with service of the citation. 
(f)  Applicability and Exemption. 
(i)  Except for Chapter 2, Article XII, Traffic Law Enforcement, the penalty provided by this section applies to the amendment of any section of this Code or a code adopted in this Code by reference, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(ii)  Each act of violation of Chapter 2, Article XII, and each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. Violations of this Article shall follow the penalties specifically set forth in the Article. 
(g)  References to sections include applicable penalty. Reference to a section of this Code shall be understood also to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(h)  Failure of officers to perform duties. The failure of an officer or employee of the Village to perform an official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided in the section creating the duty. 
(i)  In the event any provision of this Section is in direct contravention with provisions in Chapter 2, Article XII, of this Code, then the provisions of Chapter 2, Article XII, shall control. 
(Code 1979, § 1.06; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 13-3-C-3967, § 1, 3-4-2013) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1; "misdemeanor" defined, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1, 730 ILCS 5/5-1-14; enforcement of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-7; adoption of penalty clauses by reference, prohibition, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-4; "petty offense" defined, 730 ILCS 5/5-1-17; sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor, 730 ILCS 5/5-8-3; authorized fines, 730 ILCS 5/5-9-1.  
Sec. 1-7. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept settlement amounts specified in this section in settlement for violations of this Code or any Village Ordinance and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. The Village Manager as authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees may establish procedures for the issuance of notices of violations requiring appearance at an administrative hearing or court. If an appearance is not required the Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue a notice of violation specifying settlement amounts as provided for in this section. 
Violation Category 	Settlement amount if paid prior to the initial due date 	Settlement amount if paid after initial due date, but prior to Administrative Hearing or Summons & Complaint 	Settlement amount if paid after Summons and Complaint has been issued 
Parking and Motor Vehicle Equipment Violations except for parking at an expired parking meter or violations related to parking places reserved for persons with disabilities or violations related to parking in, by or near fire hudrants and designated fire lanes 	$ 35.00 	$ 45.00 	$100.00 
Expired parking meter violations 	15.00 	45.00 	100.00 
Violations related to designated disabled spaces 	250.00 	300.00 	350.00 
Violations relating to Fire Hydrants and Fire Lane 	100.00 	150.00 	200.00 
All other code and ordinance violations 	50.00 	60.00 	
 
This Section shall not be applicable to parking, standing, compliance, or automated traffic law violation notices, that are subject to, and processed through, the administrative adjudication system specified in Chapter 2, Article XII, of this Code. The provisions of Chapter 2, Article XII shall govern the fines and penalties applicable to all violations processed through that system. 
(Code 1979, §§ 12.1032, 13.24, 14.19, 23.09, 51.57; Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, §§ 1—8, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 07-6-C-3517, § 1, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 2, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 1-8. - Aiding or abetting violation. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets the commission of any act prohibited by this Code may be prosecuted and upon conviction is punishable as if such person had directly committed such act. 
(b)  Responsibility of parent, guardian or property owner. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or person in control of a minor to permit any minor to violate any of the provisions of this Code. There shall be a presumption that such parent, guardian, or person in control of a minor or the owner of property where a minor has committed an offense under this Code shall be considered to have permitted such an act. 
(Code 1979, § 1.07)  
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of provisions. 
Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this Code is separable, and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this Code or any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision. 
(Code 1979, § 1.08) 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, 5 ILCS 70/1.31.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Community development, ch. 30; fees for licenses, services and permits, ch. 46; administration and enforcement of day care home regulations, § 54-163; administration and enforcement of longterm care facilities regulations, § 54-225; human relations, ch. 58; law enforcement, ch. 62; library, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 98; administration and enforcement of hotel-motel tax regulations, § 98-143; administration and enforcement of infrastructure maintenance fee regulations, § 102-37; utilities, ch. 110; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 118-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.; managerial form of municipal government, 65 ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq.; corporate powers and duties, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
The corporate seal of the Village shall be a circular disc with the words "Village of Skokie, Cook County, Illinois" on the outer circle and the word "Seal" in the interior circle. 
(Code 1979, § 3.19) 
State Law reference— Authority of Village to have a corporate seal, 65 ILCS 5/2-3-8.  
Sec. 2-2. - Village flag. 
The Village flag shall consist of a rectangle with a green background and shall contain 2 gold vertical stripes on each end. One of these stripes shall symbolize the original name of "Niles Center" and the other stripe shall symbolize the present name of "Skokie." In the center of the flag there shall be a large gold Indian arrowhead containing the profile of an Indian with a chief's headdress. This symbolizes the original inhabitants of the area. Below the Indian head there shall be the number "1888" arranged vertically, which shall indicate the date of incorporation of the municipality. 
(Code 1979, § 3.26)  
Sec. 2-3. - Datum for levels and grades. 
(a)  The base line or datum for the Village levels and grades is hereby established as measured from the plane of the low-water line of Lake Michigan of the year A.D., 1847, as established by the Trustees of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, which was adopted by the Chicago Council as "Chicago City Datum." The datum was determined A.D., 1903, by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, precise levels to be 579,938 feet above mean ocean levels. 
(b)  The bronze tablet set in a projecting buttress front face stone water table, east of the south entrance of St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church, which church is located at the intersection of Lincoln Avenue and Niles Center Road, Skokie, Illinois, is hereby established as Benchmark No. 1 at an elevation of 43,459 feet above the Village datum as established in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 3.20)  
Sec. 2-4. - Use of Village-owned meeting rooms. 
(a)  Village-owned meeting rooms are available for educational, cultural and public information events of Skokie organizations. 
(b)  All meetings held in Village-owned meeting rooms shall be open to the public and press. 
(c)  No admission fees may be charged by organizations using Village-owned meeting rooms. 
(d)  The Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Any organization which violates the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be prohibited from conducting its meetings in Village-owned meeting rooms. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to units of local government, school districts, the Village or its boards and commissions and its employees and officers when acting under the provisions of the Meetings of Public Agencies Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 3.18)  
Sec. 2-5. - Damaging or interfering with public property. 
It shall be unlawful to damage, deface or interfere with any property belonging to the Village without written authority from the Village Manager or the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.21) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.  
Sec. 2-6. - Surety bonds. 
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the Village is required in exercising the duties of any office or position, or in the issuance of a license or permit or for the exercise of special privilege, the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this State as a surety company, in the absence of specific provision to the contrary by ordinance. Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the Village against any loss or liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may order a new surety or sureties to be secured on such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within 10 days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or the principal's assignee, the Board of Trustees shall declare the bond to be void, and thereupon such principal or assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as a condition of which the bond was required. 
(Code 1979, § 3.23) 
State Law reference— Bonds, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.  
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Board of trustees, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Composition; election; functions. 
The Board of Trustees shall consist of the Mayor and 6 Trustees. The Trustees shall be elected by the electors of the Village to office for 4-year terms as is provided by statute. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be the legislative department of the Village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 2.01)  
Sec. 2-32. - Oath of members. 
The members of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 2.02)  
Sec. 2-33. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the Board of Trustees shall receive such annual compensation as is fixed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees from time to time by the adoption of an ordinance in accordance with the Illinois Constitution and State statute. 
(Code 1979, § 2.02) 
State Law reference— Compensation of members of corporate authorities, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15.  
Sec. 2-34. - Vacancies. 
(a)  A vacancy occurs in the office of Trustee by reason of resignation, failure of 1 or more Trustees to be elected or to qualify, death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime, abandonment of office, or removal from office, or by removal of residence from the Village. 
(b)  If a vacancy in the office of a Trustee occurs during the term for which the Trustee was elected, such vacancy shall be filled as provided by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50. 
(Code 1979, § 2.03)  
Sec. 2-35. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
Commencing on Monday, January 3, 1983, the regular meetings of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be held at the Village Hall on the first and third Monday evenings of each month. The Village Clerk shall be required to post notice of the annual schedule of the regular meetings prior to January 1 of each year. Meetings shall be called to order at 8:00 p.m. If such meeting date should fall on a holiday, or if there is no quorum present, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next business day or as determined by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may temporarily hold its meetings in any other convenient place upon giving at least 24 hours' public notice. 
(Code 1979, § 2.04) 
State Law reference— Meetings, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25.  
Sec. 2-36. - Applicability of Open Meetings Act. 
All meetings of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be held in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 
(a)  A verbatim record of all closed meetings in the form of an audio record shall be made by the Village Clerk or designee. A statement shall be made at the beginning of each recording identifying the participants and the purpose of the closed meeting. All verbatim records of closed meetings are hereby declared confidential and are not subject to release except as required by Section 2.06(e) of the Illinois Open meetings Act. The Village Clerk shall maintain the verbatim record for a minimum of eighteen months from the date of the closed meeting. Each verbatim record shall be labeled with the date, time and place of the meeting. 
(b)  The Village Clerk shall create written minutes of all closed meetings. The minutes shall include: (i) exemption applicable to the closed meeting; (ii) the date, time and place of the meeting; (iii) the elected officials that are present and those that are absent; (iv) the identity of other persons present; (v) a summary of discussion; and (vi) a record of any vote taken. The approved minutes are deemed to be the official record of the minutes and verbatim record shall not be part of the official record of any meeting. 
(c)  Unless otherwise required by law or ordered by a court, no person shall have access to any verbatim record. The prohibition on the review of a verbatim record does not apply to the Village Clerk, Village Manager or Corporation Counsel, who may review a verbatim record if they deem it necessary. In the event the Village Clerk, Village Manager or Corporation Counsel deem it necessary to review a verbatim record, that person shall notify the other two persons in writing. A review of a verbatim record shall only take place in the Office of the Village Clerk and in the presence of two or more of the aforesaid individuals. The Village Clerk shall maintain a log indicating date, time and persons present of any review made of verbatim records. Notwithstanding any other provision, none of the three aforementioned individuals shall have the authority to review a verbatim record wherein they are the subject of the meeting. 
(d)  On a regular basis, the Village Clerk shall send a written notice to the Mayor, Trustees, Village Manager and the Corporation Counsel listing all verbatim records scheduled for destruction. The notice shall include a synopsis of the subject of the closed session for which the verbatim record was created. The Village Manager and Corporation Counsel shall jointly determine whether it is necessary to preserve a verbatim record for the purposes contemplated by Section 2.06(e) of the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall so instruct the Village Clerk if their determination is that the record needs to be preserved or that it may be erased or destroyed. 
(e)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall semi-annually, at the second meeting in January and the second meeting in June, consider the status of written minutes and verbatim records of executive sessions held by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
(Code 1979, § 2.05; Ord. No. 04-2-C-3251, § 1, 2-17-2004)  
Sec. 2-37. - Notice of meetings. 
(a)  Whenever required, notice shall be either given by mail deposited in a U.S. mail receptacle or post office or deliveries by messenger, or may be given to Board of Trustees members at a prior regular or special meeting and noted in the recorded minutes. Notice may be waived in writing at any time, and the attendance of a Board of Trustees member at a special meeting or the member's voting on any issue shall constitute a waiver of notice as to such issue, without any written waiver. 
(b)  Where written notice is required, notice shall be mailed or delivered to the last known address of the Board of Trustees member by regular mail, and deposited in a U.S. mail receptacle or post office not less than 48 hours prior to the time set for the call to order of the meeting. 
(Code 1979, § 2.06) 
State Law reference— Special meetings, call, notices, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25.  
Sec. 2-38. - Quorum and majority vote. 
(a)  A quorum of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall consist of a majority of the entire Board of Trustees. Any 4 of the 7 members of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum. A quorum shall be necessary to transact the business of the Board of Trustees. Members of the Board of Trustees shall only be considered in attendance at a meeting if such member is physically present. Attendance by electronic means at a meeting of the Board of Trustees is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  A majority vote of the Board of Trustees, unless otherwise stated, shall consist of not less than 4 members. A majority vote shall be required to adopt any ordinance or resolution or take affirmative action on any motion, the nature of which is other than procedural. 
(Code 1979, § 2.07) 
State Law reference— Quorum of corporate authorities, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20; vote required, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40.  
Sec. 2-39. - Presiding officer. 
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees. The Mayor shall vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An Acting Mayor or a Mayor Pro Tempore shall vote in such person's capacity as a Trustee, but shall not be entitled to another vote in such person's capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore shall announce the result of the Board of Trustees vote. 
(Code 1979, § 2.08) 
State Law reference— Presiding officer at meetings, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30.  
Sec. 2-40. - Veto powers of Mayor. 
All resolutions and motions (i) which create any liability against the Village, or (ii) which provide for the expenditure of appropriation of its money, or (iii) to sell any Village property, and all ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees, shall be deposited with the Village Clerk. 
If the Mayor approves of them, the Mayor shall sign them. If the Mayor disapproves of any, the Mayor shall return them to the Board of Trustees with the Mayor's written objections at the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees. The Mayor may disapprove of any 1 or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, or the Mayor may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the Mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with the Mayor's written objections within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of the Mayor's signature. 
(Code 1979, § 2.09) 
State Law reference— Veto power, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45.  
Sec. 2-41. - Passage over veto. 
Every resolution and motion specified in Section 2-40 and every ordinance which is returned to the Board of Trustees by the Mayor shall be reconsidered by the Board of Trustees. If, after such reconsideration, 2/3 of all the Trustees elected to the Board of Trustees shall vote to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the Mayor's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on a question of passage over the Mayor's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(Code 1979, § 2.10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50.  
Sec. 2-42. - Meetings to be open to public. 
All meetings of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be open to the public except as provided by ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1979, § 2.11) 
State Law reference— Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-43. - Disturbing meetings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the Board of Trustees or of any committee thereof. Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon being found guilty of disturbing a meeting, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 2.12) 
State Law reference— Rules of expulsion, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15.  
Sec. 2-44. - Rules of order. 
The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of the Board of Trustees, except where in conflict with the following rules: 
Rule 1. The agenda for a regular or special meeting shall be prepared by the Manager. The Manager or designee shall cause a copy of the agenda to be posted on the last business day prior to the meeting date. Trustees, the Corporation Counsel or department heads desiring matters to be placed on the agenda shall so notify the Manager within time sufficient for the Manager to prepare the agenda and distribute copies to Mayor and Board of Trustees. Each Trustee or department head shall also designate any matters which are to be placed on the consent agenda. The consent agenda contains all routine matters which do not require further discussion. All items on the consent agenda are to be marked with an asterisk on the regular agenda. Before the vote is taken, any item will be dropped from the consent agenda at the request of the Mayor, a Trustee, or any person in attendance at the meeting. That item will then be taken up at its regular place on the printed agenda. The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour at which the meeting shall have been called. The Board of Trustees shall take up business in the following order: 
a.  Pledge of Allegiance. 
b.  Call meeting to order and roll call. 
c.  Approve consent agenda. 
d.  Approve minutes of last meeting. 
e.  Approve voucher list. 
f.  Proclamations. 
g.  Recognitions, presentations, and awards. 
h.  Appointments, reappointments and resignations. 
i.  Report of the Village Manager. 
j.  Report of the Corporation Counsel. 
k.  Unfinished business. 
l.  New business. 
m.  Plan Commission cases. 
n.  Miscellaneous. 
o.  Citizens' comments. 
p.  Adjournment. 
Rule 2. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and may speak upon and decide all questions of order. 
Rule 3. The Mayor may call upon any member of the Board of Trustees to temporarily perform the duties of the chair, but such substitution shall not extend beyond an adjournment. 
Rule 4. Every question or motion when seconded shall be stated by the Mayor before it is open for debate. When a question is put the vote shall be conducted by a roll call vote. The Village Clerk shall enter the words "omnibus vote" in the journal in lieu of entering the names of the members of the Board of Trustees and each of their votes for all items which are on the consent agenda. 
Rule 5. All Board of Trustees committees shall consist of 3 members, of which the Mayor may be 1, and such committees shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Trustees. 
Rule 6. Every member, previous to speaking, shall address the presiding officer as "Mr. Mayor," but shall not proceed with the member's remarks until named and recognized by the chair. 
Rule 7. If any member disregards the rule of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor or any member may call the member to order, and when called to order the member shall take the member's seat, unless permitted to explain. 
Rule 8. Every member, when a question is taken, shall vote unless excused by the Board of Trustees, or if the member is directly interested in the question, in which case the member shall abstain from voting. 
Rule 9. After a resolution or a motion is stated by the Mayor, it shall be deemed to be in the possession of the Board of Trustees, but it may be withdrawn by the maker thereof with the consent of the Trustee seconding prior to the call for the vote by the Mayor. 
Rule 10. When a motion is in the possession of the Board of Trustees, no other motion shall be received, except as specified in this rule, which shall have precedence in the order stated as follows: 
a.  To fix the time to adjourn. 
b.  To adjourn. 
c.  To take a recess. 
d.  To raise a question of privilege. 
e.  To call for the orders of the day. 
f.  To lay on the table. 
g.  To call for the previous question. 
h.  To limit or extend limits of debates. 
i.  To postpone to a certain time. 
j.  To commit or refer. 
k.  To amend. 
l.  To postpone indefinitely. 
m.  To call the main motion. 
Rule 11. The motion to adjourn or lay on the table shall be decided without debate, and the motion to fix the time to which to adjourn and the motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except: 
a.  When a member is in possession of the floor. 
b.  While the members are voting. 
c.  While the vote is being verified. 
d.  When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken. 
e.  When adjournment was the last preceding motion. 
Rule 12. All votes shall be by roll call. 
Rule 13. An amendment to a motion does not require a separate vote on the amendment if the movants of the original motion concur with the amendment. 
Rule 14. When a Trustee calls for the question, it signifies a request of the chair to close debate and to vote on the pending motion. 
Rule 15. No vote shall be called for on an ordinance at the same meeting at which it shall be first introduced unless there first be a unanimous vote of the members present to suspend the rules; providing that no less than 5 members of the Board of Trustees are present and voting on the motion to suspend the rules. This rule shall not apply to any ordinance the subject matter of which was the subject matter of a recommendation of a commission, board, committee or staff member charged with the making of a recommendation to the Board of Trustees at a regular meeting. Every ordinance when first introduced shall have its title read, the contents explained and the date it will next be considered announced. 
Rule 16. A vote may be called for on all resolutions at the same meeting at which the resolution is first introduced. Resolutions of a routine nature may be placed on the consent agenda. 
Rule 17. All ordinances, before passage, shall be approved as to form by the Corporation Counsel of the Village. 
Rule 18. For purposes of identification, all ordinances shall be numbered consecutively and shall be further identified by using the last 2 digits of the year in which the ordinance is passed followed by a hyphen, followed by a numeral designating the month in which it is passed. Such ordinances may be further identified by a classification system based upon the subject matter. 
Rule 19. For purposes of identification, all resolutions shall be numbered consecutively and shall be further identified by using the last 2 digits of the year in which the resolution is passed followed by a hyphen followed by an "R." Such resolutions may be further identified by a classification system based upon the subject matter. 
Rule 20. The Village Clerk shall cause to be published in pamphlet form or by publication those ordinances which the statutes of the State require to be published, within the limit prescribed by statute. 
Rule 21. Special committees of Trustees or of citizens may be appointed at any time by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Trustees, to consider any special problems or issues of concern. 
Rule 22. All standing and special committees to which any matter may be referred shall report thereon, in writing, at a designated regular meeting, giving the facts and their opinion thereon, and the report shall be signed by a majority of the committee. 
Rule 23. When a question before the Board of Trustees contains several propositions, any member may call for a division of the question, so as to take a vote on each proposition separately. 
Rule 24. All petitions addressed to the Board of Trustees shall be in writing and filed with the Village Clerk, who shall present the petitions to the Board of Trustees, except as otherwise provided by statute. 
Rule 25. All resolutions, proclamations and ordinances adopted by the Board of Trustees shall be filed and preserved by the Village Clerk. 
Rule 26. In all cases when a resolution or motion shall be entered in the minutes of the Board of Trustees, the name of the member moving, the name of the member seconding and the exact vote shall also be entered in the minutes. 
Rule 27. Copies of all reports, proposed ordinances and resolutions shall, wherever possible, be made available to all members of the Board of Trustees. 
Rule 28. No contract to which the Village is a party shall be considered as having been entered into unless it is in writing and has been approved by the Board of Trustees at a public meeting. 
Rule 29. Any person or delegation may be recognized by the Mayor to speak on any matter under discussion. Each speaker should come forward, give the speaker's identity, and state the speaker's address. Unless otherwise specified by the Board of Trustees, a speaker's presentation shall be limited to 5 minutes. 
Rule 30. Plan Commission recommendations shall be considered within 120 days after the close of the Plan Commission hearing on a case. The Board of Trustees shall perform one of the following acts: 
a.  Concur with the recommendation; 
b.  Reject the recommendation; 
c.  Table further consideration to a date certain or until such time as further information may be received; or 
d.  Refer the matter back to the Plan Commission for further study or hearing. 
If the Board of Trustees fails to take any action within 6 months, it shall be considered a denial of the Plan Commission's recommendation. A majority vote shall be required to concur with any recommendation of the Plan Commission. A majority vote of the members present shall be sufficient to table or to refer back. If a required vote cannot be had because of the absence of any 1 or more members of the Board of Trustees, the matter shall be tabled to the next regular meeting at which the required attendance may be had. Where the recommendation of the Plan Commission is to deny a petition, and the recommendation has not been concurred with by the Board of Trustees as required by this rule, the next question immediately presented to the Board of Trustees shall be the affirmative motion to pass upon the petition as required. A favorable majority vote shall be required to adopt the motion. The Corporation Counsel shall prepare and present to the Board of Trustees an ordinance where required to effect the action of the Board of Trustees as soon after the consideration of the matter by the Board of Trustees as possible. No ordinance shall be adopted except by affirmative vote as stated in this section. 
Rule 31. Any member acting or appearing in a disgraceful manner, or who uses violent, obscene, or insulting language to or about the Mayor and/or any member of the Board of Trustees, or who does not obey the order of the chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the members present, or expelled from the meeting by a 2/3 vote of all the elected members. 
Rule 32. All new business introduced at any meeting shall be referred to the appropriate committee or the Village Manager or lie over until the next meeting. 
Rule 33. Any or all of the preceding rules may be temporarily suspended by the unanimous vote of all the Board of Trustees members present or may be amended by the majority vote of the Board of Trustees. 
Rule 34. The Village Manager shall determine bid reports which are of a routine nature and shall have them placed on the Manager's report as consent agenda items. 
Rule 35. A motion to reconsider can only be made at the regularly scheduled meeting following the meeting at which the vote to be considered was taken. The motion to reconsider must be made by a member who voted with the prevailing side. 
(Code 1979, § 2.13; Ord. No. 10-2-C-3735, § 1, 2-1-2010)  
Sec. 2-45. - Emergency interim successor for vacancies: Mayor, Clerk and Trustee. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to ensure a functioning government during, or as a result of, a disaster, as defined herein, by ensuring that there is a procedure to fill vacancies in the offices of the Mayor, Clerk or Trustee. A vacancy that is permanent shall always be filled on a permanent basis if there is a quorum of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following words or phrases are defined as follows: 
(1)  "Unavailable" means either that a vacancy in office exists, or that the lawful incumbent of the office is unable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. 
(2)  "Emergency interim successor" means a person designated pursuant to this Section, in the event the officer is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office or until a successor is appointed or elected and qualified as may be provided by the constitution, statutes, charters and ordinances or until the lawful incumbent is able to resume the exercise of the powers and discharge of the duties. 
(3)  "Disaster" means a situation in which an occurrence or threat of catastrophic and widespread injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, epidemic and explosion. A disaster occurs when the Governor declares that a disaster exists, or for a local disaster, when the Village Manager or Mayor and Board of Trustees declares that a disaster exists. 
(c)  Determination of vacancy. In the event that any of the offices of Mayor, Clerk or Trustee(s) becomes vacant, then those persons remaining in the offices of Mayor and Trustees shall declare the office vacant. The vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Section 3.1-5-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code and with Chapter 2 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(d)  Determination of vacancy in a disaster. In the event that the person duly serving as Mayor, Clerk or Trustee(s) becomes unavailable during, or as a result of a disaster, then those persons remaining as Mayor and Trustees shall declare the office vacant and shall determine whether such vacancy is permanent or temporary. 
(1)  If the vacancy is permanent and a quorum of the Mayor and Trustees may be achieved, then the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Section 3.1-5-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code and the Chapter 2 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(2)  If the vacancy is determined to be permanent and a quorum of the Mayor and Trustees can not be achieved, then the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with paragraph (e) of this Section. 
(3)  If the vacancy is determined to be temporary, then the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with paragraph (f) of this Section. The determination of whether the vacancy is temporary shall be based upon the reasonable expectation of the unavailable officer resuming his or her powers and duties within ninety days. 
(e)  Permanent vacancy. In the event a permanent vacancy occurs in any of the offices of Mayor, Clerk or Trustee during, or as the result of, a disaster, and a quorum of the Mayor and Board of Trustees is not possible, then one or more emergency interim successor(s) shall automatically succeed to the office of Trustee until there are a sufficient number of the Mayor, if available, and Trustees, including emergency interim successors serving as Trustees, to achieve a quorum. Upon achieving a quorum, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall fill any and all permanent vacancies, including any vacancy for which an emergency interim successor is serving, in accordance with Section 3.1-5-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code and Chapter 2 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(f)  Temporary vacancy. In the event a temporary vacancy occurs in the office Mayor or Clerk during, or as a result of, a disaster, then the Board of Trustees shall designate one of its remaining members as Emergency Interim Mayor, or Clerk, as the case may be. In the event a temporary vacancy occurs in the office of Trustee(s), then one or more emergency interim successor(s) shall automatically succeed to the office of Trustee on a temporary basis. An emergency interim successor shall serve as a temporary designee of the office until such time as the person, for which an emergency interim successor had been named, is available to continue in the performance of official duties, then the duly elected person shall resume his or her prior office and the emergency interim successor shall resume serving in the capacity held prior to her or his designation as an emergency interim successor. In the event the office of Mayor, Clerk or Trustee(s) is declared to be temporarily vacant during, or as a result of, a disaster, and the vacancy continues for ninety days or more, then the office shall be declared to be permanently vacant and the vacancy shall be filled consistent with the procedures established in subparagraph (e) above. 
(g)  Order of succession. In the event of a disaster, and it becomes necessary for an emergency interim successor to serve in the capacity of Mayor, Clerk or Trustee(s), then the person appointed to the following named positions shall serve as an emergency interim successor(s) in the order of succession listed below. 
(1)  Chairman of the Plan Commission; 
(2)  Chairman of the Police and Fire Commission; 
(3)  Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals; 
(4)  Chairman of the Appearance Commission; 
(5)  Vice Chairman of the Plan Commission; 
(6)  Vice Chairman of the Police and Fire Commission; 
(7)  Vice Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals; 
(8)  Vice Chairman of the Appearance Commission; and 
Should it be necessary to continue the order of succession, the next person designated would be the member with the most seniority on the Plan Commission, and if exhausted, then the next person designated is the member with the highest seniority on Police and Fire Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Appearance Commission, respectively. Emergency Interim Trustees shall be designated until the number of Trustees and emergency interim successors serving as Trustees is sufficient to constitute a quorum. 
(h)  Special election. In the event an emergency interim successor is performing the duties of Mayor, Clerk or Trustee(s) due to a permanent vacancy, and such person is performing the duties prior to the date specified in Section 3.2-10-50 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50 (2002), which would require a special election to fill the unexpired portion of the term, then the special election shall be conducted in accordance with the Illinois Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-8-C-3377, § 1, 8-1-2005)  
Secs. 2-46—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries saved from repeal, § 1-3(3); special ordinances providing for indemnification of Village officials and employees saved from repeal, § 1-3(11); police powers of Village officers and employees, § 2-357; Animal Control Officer, § 18-5. 
State Law reference— Municipal officers generally, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-5-5 et seq.; functions and duties of certain municipal officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5 et seq.; employees and employment, 65 ILCS 5/10-1-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Form of government. 
(a)  The Village has adopted the managerial form of government as provided in 65 ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq. The Village Board of Trustees shall be elected at large by the electors and shall consist of a Mayor and 6 Trustees as provided in 65 ILCS 5/5-2-12 and 65 ILCS 5/5-2-15. 
(b)  The election for the Mayor, Village Trustees and Village Clerk shall be conducted as a partisan election pursuant to 10 ILCS 5/7-1 et seq. and 10 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq. The results of a consolidated election conducted for the aforesaid offices shall be certified and proclaimed by resolution of the Mayor and Board of Trustees at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Board of Trustees following the official canvass and certification of the consolidated election results. Upon passage of the resolution, the outgoing Mayor and Board of Trustees shall adjourn their meeting and a new meeting shall be convened at the call of the outgoing Mayor. At the new meeting, the newly elected officials shall take their respective oaths and commence their terms of office. 
(Code 1979, § 3.01; Ord. No. 05-4-C-3351, § 1, 4-4-2005)  
Sec. 2-62. - Elections. 
Elections for municipal officers shall be held as is provided by statute, and at the time prescribed by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.22) 
State Law reference— Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.; elected officers generally, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5 et seq.; elected Village officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5 et seq.  
Sec. 2-63. - Indemnification. 
(a)  It is found and declared by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village as follows: 
(1)  The Village has the power to indemnify its officials, both elected and appointed, and employees pursuant to law and the Constitution of the State. 
(2)  It is in the best interests of the Village to provide for the indemnification of its officials, both elected and appointed, and employees against claims, expenses and liabilities such persons may be subject to by reason of those persons acting in their capacity as officials, both elected and appointed, or employees of the Village. 
(b)  The Village shall indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed claim, action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, administrative or investigative, by reason of any act or omission, error, misstatement or misleading statement, or neglect or breach of duty which could reasonably be construed to have been committed, attempted or allegedly committed or attempted by such person (a "wrongful act") in the discharge of such person's duties in the person's capacity as an official, either elected or appointed, or employee of the Village, against expenses (including attorneys' fees), judgments and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by the person in connection with such action, suit or proceeding, if such person acted in good faith and in a manner which the person reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the Village. This indemnification shall not apply to any claim, suit, action or proceeding: 
(1)  Which is for the return by any such official, either elected or appointed, or employee of any remuneration paid in fact to such person without the previous approval of the Village if it shall be determined by a judgment or other final adjudication that such remuneration is in violation of law or if such remuneration is to be repaid to the Village under a settlement agreement; 
(2)  Which is for an accounting of profits made from the purchase or sale by such official, either elected or appointed, or employee of securities of the Village under any federal or State law; 
(3)  Which is brought about or contributed to by the fraudulent or dishonest acts of such official, either elected or appointed, or employee if a judgment or other final adjudication adverse to such official, either elected or appointed, or employee establishes that acts of active and deliberate dishonesty were committed or attempted by such official, either elected or appointed, or employee with actual dishonest purpose and intent and were material to the cause of action so adjudicated; 
(4)  Which is brought about or contributed to by any criminal activities of such official, either elected or appointed, or employee, except, in the case of such official, either elected or appointed, in respect of a wrongful act taken by a majority of the Board of Trustees, or in the case of such official, either elected or appointed, or employee, specifically directed by such a majority; 
(5)  Which is based upon or attributable to such official, either elected or appointed, or employee having gained any personal profit or advantage to which such person was not legally entitled, whether or not (i) a judgment or other final adjudication adverse to such person establishes that such a person in fact gained personal profit or other advantage to which the person was not entitled, or (ii) the official, either elected or appointed, or employee has entered into a settlement agreement to repay such personal profit or advantage to the Village; 
(6)  For which the Village is not authorized by law to provide indemnification to the official, either elected or appointed, or employee; 
(7)  Brought by the Village at the direction of its Board of Trustees against an official, either elected or appointed, or employee; or 
(8)  Brought against any Fire or Police Pension Board member for any acts arising from or in the course of the member's duties as a Pension Board member, due to the independent nature of such boards. 
(c)  The Village shall indemnify only those officials, both elected and appointed, or employees of the Village from whom or with respect to whom the Village has received written notice of a wrongful act. To the extent practicable, any notice from such official, either elected or appointed, or employee shall be mailed as soon as practicable and shall identify the official, either elected or appointed, or employee seeking indemnification and contain information with respect to the time, place and circumstances of the wrongful act, the names and addresses of any injured persons and the names of any available witnesses. In the case where legal proceedings have commenced, indemnification may be denied if the official, either elected or appointed, or employee has failed to mail to the Village, within 10 days after receiving service of process, a copy of such process relating to a wrongful act, unless (i) the Village has otherwise received a copy of, or written notice of, such process, or (ii) the failure to notify within such 10-day period does not adversely impact upon the Village's ability to defend such claim. 
(d)  The Village shall indemnify the official, either elected or appointed, or employee for any damages, expenses, court costs and legal fees incurred in connection with any settlement of a claim, action or proceeding where such settlement has been approved in advance by the Village. 
(e)  Any indemnification under subsection (b) of this section (unless ordered by a court) shall be made by the Village only upon a determination that indemnification of the person is required by this section. Such determination shall be made: 
(1)  By the Mayor and Board of Trustees by a majority vote of a quorum of the Board of Trustees who were not parties to such claim, suit, action or proceeding; 
(2)  If such quorum is not obtainable, or, even if obtainable and a quorum of disinterested Board of Trustees members, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion; or 
(3)  By a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(f)  Expenses incurred by any person who may have a right of indemnification pursuant to this section in defending a civil claim, suit, action or proceeding shall be paid by the Village in advance of the final disposition of such claim, suit, action or proceeding as authorized by the Board of Trustees upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of such person to repay such amount to the Village, unless it shall ultimately be determined that such person is entitled to be indemnified by the Village pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Any official, either elected or appointed, or employee against whom any action, suit or proceeding is brought may employ the official's or employee's own attorney, provided that such attorney is reasonably acceptable to the Village, and provided further that the costs of such attorney shall not be paid by the Village unless the Corporation Counsel's office or unless independent counsel for the Village shall have advised the Village that such official's, elected or appointed, or employee's interests can or should not be represented by the same counsel that represents the Village in such action, suit or proceeding. 
(h)  The indemnification provided under this section shall be in addition to, and not exclusive of, any other indemnity or insurance to which the indemnitee may be entitled, and such indemnitee shall be entitled to look to the Village for such indemnification prior to making any claim under any such other indemnity or insurance. The indemnification provided under this section shall be payable whether or not the Village has obtained insurance therefor, and, in the case of the death of the indemnitee, shall inure to the benefit of the indemnitee's successors. 
(Code 1979, § 3.13) 
State Law reference— Indemnification for injuries caused by police officer, 65 ILCS 5/1-4-5, 5/1-4-6; general provisions relating to immunity, 745 ILCS 10/2-101 et seq.  
Sec. 2-64. - Inspection of records. 
All records kept by any employee or department of the Village shall be open to inspection by the Village Mayor, any member of the Board of Trustees, or the Village Manager at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. However, records pertaining to privacy issues shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1979, § 3.14) 
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Act, 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-65. - Arrests. 
The Village Mayor, members of the Board of Trustees, the Village Manager, and members of the Fire Department, as well as every member of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.15) 
State Law reference— Conservators of the peace, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25.  
Secs. 2-66—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Functions and duties of mayor, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Election; term. 
A Village Mayor shall be elected by the electors of the Village at a general municipal election for a term of 4 years in the year of 1977 and every 4th year thereafter. Such person shall be Mayor of the Board of Trustees, and such person shall hold such office until the person's successor is elected and is duly qualified. Such person shall be referred to as Mayor of the Village of Skokie. 
(Code 1979, § 3.021)  
Sec. 2-82. - Powers and duties. 
The Mayor shall be the official head of the Village for all legal purposes. The Mayor shall at all times have the power and authority to examine and inspect all books and records relating to Village business kept by any Village agent, employee or officer. The Mayor shall sign all proclamations, commissions, resolutions and ordinances issued or adopted by the Board of Trustees, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.022)  
Sec. 2-83. - Vacancies; Acting Mayor. 
(a)  A vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor by reason of resignation, failure of a Mayor to be elected or to qualify, death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime, abandonment of office, or removal from office, or by removal of the Mayor's residence from the Village. 
(b)  If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor during the Mayor's term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next election of Trustees, unless the vacancy is filled by a special election as provided by statute. 
(c)  During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until a Mayor is elected and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the election of an Acting Mayor by the Board of Trustees. 
(d)  The Acting Mayor shall be paid the Mayor's salary for the period of time such person shall serve as Acting Mayor, and such person may be referred to as the Mayor. 
(Code 1979, § 3.023)  
Sec. 2-84. - Mayor Pro Tempore. 
If a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor incapacitates the Mayor from the performance of the Mayor's duties, but does not create a vacancy in the office, the Board of Trustees shall elect 1 of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tempore. The Mayor Pro Tempore, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor. No additional salary or compensation shall be paid the Mayor Pro Tempore for acting as Mayor Pro Tempore. 
(Code 1979, § 3.024)  
Sec. 2-85. - Appointments by Mayor. 
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint such boards, commissions, committees or other agencies as may be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees or as may be authorized by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.025)  
Sec. 2-86. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of the Mayor's office, the Mayor shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.026)  
Sec. 2-87. - Compensation. 
The Mayor shall receive such annual compensation as is fixed by the Board of Trustees from time to time by the adoption of an ordinance in accordance with the Illinois Constitution and State statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.027)  
Sec. 2-88. - Additional powers and duties. 
In addition to the powers otherwise described in this division, the Mayor shall perform all such other duties and acts and have all additional powers that are or may be prescribed by the law of the State or the ordinances of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.028) 
State Law reference— Functions and duties of mayor, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5 et seq.  
Secs. 2-89—2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VILLAGE CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of clerk, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Election; term. 
A Village Clerk shall be elected by the electors of the Village at a general municipal election for a term of 4 years. Such person shall hold office until the person's successor is elected and is duly qualified. 
(Code 1979, § 3.031)  
Sec. 2-112. - Oath. 
The Village Clerk shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute, and shall receive such compensation as may, from time to time, be provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.032)  
Sec. 2-113. - Compensation. 
The Village Clerk shall receive such annual compensation as is fixed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees from time to time by the adoption of an ordinance in accordance with the Illinois Constitution and State statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.032)  
Sec. 2-114. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the Clerk's office, the Village Clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as provided by statute, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Clerk's duties. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.033) 
State Law reference— Bond of municipal officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.  
Sec. 2-115. - Vacancies. 
In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall appoint a successor as is provided by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.034) 
State Law reference— Vacancies, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50 et seq.  
Sec. 2-116. - Duties. 
(a)  Signatures. The Village Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts, licenses, permits, ordinances, and resolutions and such documents as shall require this formality. 
(b)  Disposition of money collected. The Clerk shall turn over all money received by the Clerk on behalf of the Village to the Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt of such money; and with such money the Clerk shall give a statement as to the source thereof. 
(c)  Accounts. The Clerk shall keep the accounts showing all money received by the Clerk and the source and disposition thereof, and such other accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance. 
(d)  Publication of annual Treasurer's report. The Village Clerk shall cause the annual Treasurer's report to be published in accordance with applicable laws. 
(e)  Records. In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the Clerk is required by statute to keep, the Clerk shall keep a register of such licenses and permits as are issued by the Clerk, and the payments thereon, and such other records as may be required by the Board of Trustees. 
(f)  Seal. The Clerk shall be the custodian of the Village seal, and shall fix its impression on documents whenever this is required. 
(g)  Custody of documents. The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the Village which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by the Clerk, so that ready access thereto may be had. 
(h)  Attendance at meetings of Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Mayor and Board of Trustees and shall be responsible for recording the proceedings thereof; provided, however, in the absence of the Clerk or Deputy Clerk, the Mayor and the Board of Trustees may appoint a substitute. 
(i)  Office hours. The office of the Village Clerk shall be open during all regular business hours established for the Village Hall. 
(j)  Additional duties. In addition to the duties provided in this section, the Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions which may be required by statute or ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.04; Ord. No. 01-10-C-3038, § 1, 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 2-117. - Deputy Clerk. 
A Deputy Clerk may be appointed by the Village Clerk with the consent of the Mayor and Board of Trustees to assist the Clerk in the performance of the duties of that office, at such compensation as shall be provided for in the annual budget. 
(Code 1979, § 3.05) 
State Law reference— Deputy clerks, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95.  
Secs. 2-118—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VILLAGE MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Managerial form of municipal government, 65 ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Creation of office. 
The office of Village Manager is hereby created. 
(Code 1979, § 3.061)  
Sec. 2-132. - Appointment; qualifications. 
The Village Manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of such person's executive and administrative qualifications without regard to such person's political beliefs. At the time of the Manager's appointment, the Manager need not be a resident of the Village or of the State, but during the Manager's tenure of office the Manager shall reside within the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.062)  
Sec. 2-133. - Powers and duties. 
The Village Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Village. The Manager shall be responsible to the Mayor and Board of Trustees for the proper administration of all the affairs of the Village. The Manager shall have the power and is required to: 
(1)  Enforce all laws and ordinances of the Village. 
(2)  Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Board of Trustees but shall have no right to vote. The Manager shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the Board of Trustees. 
(3)  Recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees such measures as, in the Manager's judgment, the Manager deems to be in the best interests of the Village. 
(4)  Appoint, suspend or remove all department heads, appointed staff and employees of the Village and prepare any and all documents commensurate with this authority. This shall not be taken to include the elected officers, consultants retained by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, the Corporation Counsel and the Assistant Corporation Counsels, employees in the uniformed fire and police service appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the Plan Commission, and all appointed board and commission members and other committees created by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. Such appointments, suspensions or removals shall be based upon the merit and fitness of such officer or employee, without regard to political belief or affiliation. The Manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(5)  Exercise control of all departments and divisions, except the Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels, now in existence or that may hereafter be created by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, except as limited or restricted by ordinance. 
(6)  Make recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees concerning compensation for each appointive office and position in the Village service, except the Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(7)  Recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees the creating, consolidating and combining of officers, positions, departments or units of the administrative and executive departments of the Village. 
(8)  Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the Village and services maintained by the public utilities in the Village, and the Manager shall see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the Village are faithfully observed. 
(9)  Be the general purchasing agent of the Village; provided, however, that the Manager shall appoint a purchasing agent who shall serve under the direction of the Director of Finance but subject to the authority of the Village Manager. Except where specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, the Village Manager shall be responsible for purchasing all materials, supplies and equipment authorized by the Board of Trustees or for which funds are provided in the budget, but the Manager may not purchase any item which exceeds any appropriation until the Board of Trustees has increased the appropriation. Purchases of goods and services shall be made consistent with this Code and State statutes. The Village Manager may issue rules and regulations covering requisitions and the transaction of the business of purchasing. 
(10)  Sign on behalf of the Village any contract authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, except where the Board of Trustees, this Code, ordinance, or statute directs that some other officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to see that all terms of any contract to which the Village is a party are fully performed by all parties thereto. 
(11)  Prepare or cause to be prepared, on or before May 1 of each year, a budget of estimated funds necessary to defray the expenditure of the Village for the fiscal year; prepare, or cause to be prepared, the annual appropriation ordinance in time for consideration by the Mayor and Board of Trustees during the first month of the fiscal year; and prepare, or cause to be prepared, the tax levy ordinance and upon enactment thereof file a certified copy with the County Clerk. 
(12)  Cause the Village Treasurer to submit to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, promptly following the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the Village for the fiscal year. 
(13)  Present or cause the Director of Finance to present to the Mayor and Board of Trustees each month a statement showing the exact financial condition of the Village as of the end of the preceding month and showing amounts appropriated, amounts expended and unexpended balances in the several items of appropriation. 
(14)  Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the Village and the location of such property. The Manager shall be responsible for the care and custody of all Village property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control. 
(15)  Devote entire time to the discharge of the Manager's official duties. 
(16)  Perform such other lawful duties as may be required by resolution or ordinance of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.063)  
Sec. 2-134. - Compensation. 
The Village Manager shall receive such compensation as the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall fix from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.064)  
Sec. 2-135. - Acting Village Manager. 
If the Village Manager shall be absent from the Village or incapacitated for a period of 30 consecutive days from performing the duties of the Manager's position, a qualified person may be appointed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees to act as Manager during such absence or incapacity, with all the powers and duties of that office, and the compensation to be paid such Acting Village Manager shall be fixed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.065)  
Sec. 2-136. - Vacancies; Manager Pro Tempore. 
In case of a vacancy of the office of Village Manager, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall appoint a Manager Pro Tempore, who shall possess the powers and duties of the Manager until such time as a new Manager is appointed. No Manager Pro Tempore shall hold the position as such for more than 4 months, and no appointment of a Manager Pro Tempore shall be renewed. The compensation to be paid to such Manager Pro Tempore shall be fixed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.066)  
Sec. 2-137. - Removal. 
The Board of Trustees may remove the Village Manager at any time with or without cause by a majority vote of the entire Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.067)  
Secs. 2-138—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OFFICE OF THE CORPORATION COUNSEL 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created an executive office of the Village which shall be known as the Office of the Corporation Counsel and which shall consist of a Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels, together with such additional employees as the Corporation Counsel may from time to time require in the performance and discharge of the duties of the Corporation Counsel. 
(Code 1979, § 3.091)  
Sec. 2-162. - Appointment of attorneys and other personnel. 
(a)  The Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Board of Trustees, and they shall hold office until their respective successors shall be duly appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Additional employees other than attorneys, required from time to time by the Corporation Counsel, shall be hired by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 3.092)  
Sec. 2-163. - Qualifications of attorneys. 
The Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels shall be duly licensed by the Supreme Court of the State, shall be members of the bar in good standing, and shall otherwise be qualified by law to serve as the attorneys for the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.093)  
Sec. 2-164. - Duties of Corporation Counsel. 
(a)  The Corporation Counsel shall be the head of the Office of the Corporation Counsel and shall have full charge of all the law business of the Village and shall be and act as legal advisor of the Mayor and Board of Trustees and of the several officers, boards, commissions and departments of the Village. The Corporation Counsel shall represent the Village in any legal action or matter to which the Village is a party or in which the Village has an interest, before any court, tribunal or commission, unless excused by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  The Corporation Counsel shall regularly attend the meetings of the Board of Trustees; however, the Corporation Counsel may designate an assistant to attend any meeting and empower such assistant to act in the place and stead of the Corporation Counsel. 
(c)  The Corporation Counsel shall direct the other members of the Law Department and shall call upon other members of the legal staff for assistance in performing the duties required of the Corporation Counsel, and may, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, engage such additional specialized counsel as the Corporation Counsel may require. 
(d)  The Corporation Counsel shall devote all the time that may be required to superintend and conduct such law business of the Village as is committed to the Corporation Counsel's charge. The Corporation Counsel shall draw such ordinances as may be required of the Corporation Counsel by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, or any board, commission or department of the Village. The Corporation Counsel shall draw contracts, leases, deeds and other documents and papers connected with any department of the Village, when required by the head of such department, and approve all bonds as to form. The Corporation Counsel shall, with the assistance of the Corporation Counsel's legal staff, prosecute all violations of Village ordinances. 
(e)  The Corporation Counsel shall, when requested, furnish written opinions upon subjects submitted to the Corporation Counsel by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, or any Board of Trustees member, with the approval of and transmission via the Mayor; or any department head, with the approval of and transmission via the Village Manager; and shall perform such other legal services on behalf of the Village as the Board of Trustees may from time to time direct. 
(Code 1979, § 3.094)  
Sec. 2-165. - Required records; inspection of records. 
The Corporation Counsel shall keep in proper records to be provided for that purpose by the Village a register or docket of all actions in court prosecuted or defended by the Corporation Counsel's office, and all proceedings had therein, which books and records shall at all times be open for inspection by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.095)  
Sec. 2-166. - Reports. 
The Corporation Counsel shall each year report to the Board of Trustees the transactions of the Corporation Counsel's office during the previous year, with such recommendations as the Corporation Counsel deems necessary and proper, and in addition shall make such further reports as the Mayor and Board of Trustees may from time to time request. 
(Code 1979, § 3.096)  
Sec. 2-167. - Authority to compromise actions. 
(a)  The Corporation Counsel, with the consent and approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, may compromise any action or cause of action, by or against or involving the Village, upon such terms and conditions as to the Corporation Counsel seem equitable and just, either before or after the filing of an action at law or in equity, when in the judgment of the Corporation Counsel the public interest is thereby served. 
(b)  The Corporation Counsel, or any member of the Corporation Counsel's legal staff, under the direction of the Corporation Counsel, may compromise with the party complained of, either before or after an action has been brought for any violation of a Village ordinance, when, in their individual judgment, public interest does not require that such action be prosecuted, and the Corporation Counsel or they, individually, shall have the power to discontinue any such action, upon terms and conditions as may seem equitable and just. 
(Code 1979, § 3.097)  
Sec. 2-168. - Compensation of Corporation Counsel and Assistant Corporation Counsels. 
The Corporation Counsel and the Assistant Corporation Counsels shall receive such compensation as the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall fix from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.098)  
Sec. 2-169. - Duty of Corporation Counsel to turn over records upon leaving office. 
Upon the resignation or removal from office of the Corporation Counsel, the Corporation Counsel shall forthwith, upon demand, deliver to the Mayor and Board of Trustees all books, deeds, periodicals, leases, contracts, files, records and other documents and papers belonging to the Village or its officers, including all documents pertaining to actions prosecuted by the Corporation Counsel or Assistant Corporation Counsels then pending and undetermined, together with the register or docket referred to in Section 2-165. 
(Code 1979, § 3.099)  
Secs. 2-170—2-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-191—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Financial matters, § 2-991 et seq. 
State Law reference— Finance, 65 ILCS 5/8-1-1. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the Village government which shall be known as the Department of Finance, which shall include a Director of Finance and such subordinates and assistants as the Village Manager shall appoint. 
(Code 1979, § 3.071)  
Sec. 2-212. - Appointment of Director. 
The office of the Director of Finance is hereby created. The Director of Finance shall be the head of the Department of Finance and shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to supervision, direction and control by the Manager and subject to discharge by the Manager, with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 3.072)  
Sec. 2-213. - Appointment and discharge of employees. 
All employees of the Department of Finance shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and all persons appointed shall be subject to discharge by the Manager with or without cause.  
Sec. 2-214. - Compensation of employees. 
All persons appointed under this division shall receive compensation as may be authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.  
Sec. 2-215. - General duties of Director. 
(a)  In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office of the Village, it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to act to promote, secure, and preserve the financial and property interests of the Village. 
(b)  The Director of Finance shall serve as the Village Treasurer, and ex officio as the Village Collector and Comptroller, and in each capacity shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute or ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.072)  
Sec. 2-216. - Specific duties of Director. 
In addition to the duties required by State law, if any, the Director of Finance shall have the following duties, functions and responsibilities: 
(1)  Fiscal supervision. Exercise general supervision over all fiscal matters relating to the functions of every department of the Village government. 
(2)  Auditing of books and records. Examine and audit the books, records and accounts of each department and determine that they are in proper form and balance. 
(3)  Payments. Supervise the prompt payments of all monies received by every department into the Village treasury and provide for the completion and delivery to the Director of Finance of such financial reports as the Director of Finance shall from time to time prescribe and require from such departments. The Director of Finance shall promptly report to the Village Manager every failure by any department to promptly pay into the Village treasury the money received or the failure to complete and deliver to the Director of Finance such financial reports, or the failure of the books, records and accounts to balance. 
(4)  Report of misuse of funds. Report to the Village Manager the defalcation of or misuse by any department, officer or employee of the Village of monies or property belonging to the Village. 
(5)  Collection of special assessments. Supervise and direct the collection and accounting of special assessment funds, and the proceeds received from the sale of bonds, all of which the Director of Finance shall without delay deposit or cause to be deposited in the Village treasury. All monies received on any special assessment shall be deposited in a special account and shall be applied only to payment for the improvement, or bonds or vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made, and such money shall not be used for any other purpose, unless to reimburse the Village for money expended for such improvement. Payments on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the statutes or ordinances and the books, records, and accounts shall be so kept as to readily disclose the proration between payments of principal and interest. 
(6)  Deposit of funds. Deposit the Village funds only in such banks as may be designated by ordinance or resolution. Deposits made by the Director of Finance on such banks shall discharge the Director of Finance from responsibility while the funds and money are on deposit. The Director of Finance shall be subject to the provisions of the statutes relating to municipal treasurers. 
(7)  Accounts of receipts and expenditures. Keep, in proper books, a full and accurate account of all the monies received and disbursed by the Director of Finance in behalf of the Village, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom received and to whom disbursed, the purpose for which the money was received or disbursed, and the nature of the payment. Special assessment collections shall be identified by the warrant number and the installment thereof. 
(8)  Collection of monies and fees due Village. Demand and receive all monies and fees due and owing to the Village. When an indebtedness due the Village shall not be paid upon demand of the Director of Finance, the Director of Finance shall advise the Corporation Counsel thereof. 
(9)  Monthly report to Village Manager. Make a detailed monthly report to the Village Manager as to the business and activities of the Finance Department during the preceding month, together with such other identification, items, and facts as the Manager shall require. 
(10)  Certification of contracts. Certify as to whether an appropriation was made for all contracts, agreements, or other obligations involving the expenditure of public funds entered into by an official of the Village government, and no such contract, agreement, or other obligation shall be valid until so certified by the Director of Finance. The act of certifying may be delegated to a subordinate. 
(11)  Budget duties. Prepare estimates of revenue, and give such other assistance in the preparation of the budget as may be required by the Village Manager. 
(12)  Appropriation balances. Keep all departments, boards, commissions, or institutions currently informed of their classified unencumbered appropriation balances. 
(13)  Accounts. Keep all general accounts of the Village government and of the respective departments, offices, boards, commissions and institutions thereof. 
(14)  Purchasing. Under the direction and as authorized by the Village Manager, supervise the purchasing of all supplies for the use of all departments, boards, officers, commissions, or institutions of the Village government. 
(Code 1979, § 3.073)  
Sec. 2-217. - Warrants; transfer of funds. 
All warrants drawn on the Village Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor, or in his absence by the Village Manager, and countersigned by the Director of Finance, stating the particular fund or appropriation to which the warrant is chargeable, and the person to whom payable; and no money shall be otherwise paid except as may be authorized by statute. Money shall not be transferred by the Director of Finance from one fund to another after receipt by the Director, or appropriated to any other purpose than that for which it has been collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the Mayor and Board of Trustees in the manner and form prescribed by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 3.074) 
State Law reference— Warrants, 65 ILCS 5/8-1-8 et seq.  
Sec. 2-218. - Annual audit of accounts. 
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and not later than 3 months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the Village conducted independently of the Village Manager, made by a competent person, authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of the State, to be selected by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.075) 
State Law reference— Audit of accounts, 65 ILCS 5/8-8-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-219. - Reports. 
The Director of Finance shall monthly furnish the Village Manager with a full and comprehensive report of all matters pertaining to the activities of the Finance Department during the preceding month.  
Secs. 2-220—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86; streets and sidewalks, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 110. 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the Village government which shall be known as the Department of Public Works, which shall include a Director of Public Works and such subordinates and assistants as the Village Manager shall appoint. 
(Code 1979, § 3.111)  
Sec. 2-242. - Appointment of Director. 
The office of the Director of Public Works is hereby created. The Director of Public Works shall be the head of the Department of Public Works and shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to supervision, direction and control by the Manager and subject to discharge by the Manager, with or without cause. The Director of Public Works may but need not be the Municipal Engineer. 
(Code 1979, § 3.111)  
Sec. 2-243. - Appointment and discharge of employees. 
All employees of the Department of Public Works shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and all persons appointed shall be subject to discharge by the Manager with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 3.111)  
Sec. 2-244. - Compensation of employees. 
All persons appointed under this division shall receive compensation as may be authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 3.111)  
Sec. 2-245. - General duties of Director. 
The Director of Public Works shall be the head of the Department of Public Works and shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to such department. 
(Code 1979, § 3.112)  
Sec. 2-246. - Specific powers and duties of Director. 
The Director of Public Works shall be charged with and shall have the supervision, direction and control of and have the duty to: 
(1)  Operate and maintain the Village water distribution system and all intakes, reservoirs, mains, hydrants and equipment, fixtures, and appurtenances thereto and thereunto attached. 
(2)  Maintain and service all streets, curbs, alleys, public ways and highways in the Village and all walks, crosswalks, bridges, tunnels, viaducts, public places and public grounds under the jurisdiction of the Village, and promptly cause the repair or the alteration thereof whenever the circumstances shall require. 
(3)  Regulate, control and have custody of all public buildings which belong to the Village and maintain all Village buildings in good repair. 
(4)  Have charge, control and custody of all mechanical equipment and motor vehicle equipment, and operate, repair and maintain facilities for all equipment. 
(5)  Be in charge of all sewers and drains, basins and flood control apparatus in the streets, alleys and public places in the Village, and keep such sewers, drains, basins and flood control apparatus in good working order and condition and free and clean of obstructions, and make necessary repairs to all sewers, drains and appurtenances as from time to time may become necessary. 
(6)  Prescribe the mode of tapping or opening any sewers or drains and the form, size and material of the connection therewith, as otherwise provided by ordinance, and issue permits to make lateral connections with such sewers and drains. 
(7)  Direct and supervise the manner of using streets, alleys, public ways, highways, and other public places of the Village where improvements are being installed or repairs made, including the erection of electric light, telephone, streetlight, traffic light and other poles or posts, signs, canopies and other overhead structures, and the laying down of gas, water, and other pipes, electric light and telephone conduits and sewers authorized by law or Village ordinance, and, in the absence of a direction by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, determine and approve the location of such improvements or installations. During the progress of construction, alteration, placement or installation as described in this section, the Director of Public Works shall require that the location thereof be adequately barricaded and protected so as to protect the public from damage or injury, and such barricades and protection shall not be removed without the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
(8)  Supervise the removal and disposal of garbage and other household wastes; provided, however, that the abatement or removal of all conditions or nuisances which might affect the public health shall be under the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Health. 
(9)  Direct and supervise the removal of snow from the streets and sidewalks of the Village and the removal from and maintenance of the streets, alleys and public places of the Village free and clean of objectionable weed or plant growth; and remove weeds, brush and rubbish from privately owned property when so directed by the Village Manager. 
(10)  Make or cause to be made and kept in the office of the Director of Public Works a detailed map or plat of all sewers and water distribution mains and appurtenances in the Village distinctly showing all junctions, house connections, equipment and fixtures appurtenant thereto. 
(11)  Perform such other lawful duties which may be directed by Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 3.113)  
Sec. 2-247. - Supervision of engineering services. 
The Director of Public Works shall direct and supervise engineering services required by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.114)  
Sec. 2-248. - Issuance of permits. 
In all cases where provision is made by this Code that the consent of the Director of Public Works shall be obtained to authorize any act to be done, the Director of Public Works may grant a permit therefor, subject to the restrictions of the Code provision in relation thereto. 
(Code 1979, § 3.115)  
Sec. 2-249. - Reports. 
The Director of Public Works shall monthly furnish the Village Manager with a full and comprehensive report of all matters pertaining to the activities of the Department of Public Works during the preceding month.  
Secs. 2-250—2-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Community development, ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the Village government which shall be known as the Department of Community Development, which shall include a Director of Community Development and such subordinates and assistants as the Village Manager shall appoint. 
(Code 1979, § 23.01)  
Sec. 2-272. - Appointment of Director. 
The office of the Director of Community Development is hereby created. The Director of Community Development shall be the head of the Department of Community Development and shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to supervision, direction and control by the Manager and subject to discharge by the Manager, with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 23.01)  
Sec. 2-273. - Appointment and discharge of employees. 
All employees of the Department of Community Development shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and all persons appointed shall be subject to discharge by the Manager with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 23.01)  
Sec. 2-274. - Compensation of employees. 
All persons appointed under this division shall receive compensation as may be authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 23.01)  
Sec. 2-275. - Divisions. 
The Director of Community Development shall have management, direction and control over the following divisions, whose duties are as follows: 
(1)  Building Division. 
a.  Have general charge and supervision of the construction, alteration, repair, erection, remodeling, removal, wrecking, equipment, use, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings, walls, structures or portions or sections thereof and accessories thereto located within the Village, and enforce all Village ordinances relating thereto. 
b.  Have general charge and supervision of all electrical construction, boiler and elevator installation, and plumbing, heating, ventilating, refrigerating and air conditioning systems, and smoke and air pollution therefrom, and the inspection thereof, and enforce all ordinances relating thereto. 
c.  Examine applications for building permits and all plans and specifications in connection therewith, and have charge and supervision of building inspections on all buildings, structures or portions thereof in connection with work that has been authorized by a permit from the Department, including but not exclusive of boiler, elevator, lighting, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, refrigerating and air conditioning equipment. 
d.  Require installation of safeguards which will prevent injury to person or property during construction, require adequate exit facilities in existing buildings and structures, and ensure compliance with all of the building code requirements for the safety, health and general welfare of the public. 
e.  Order all work stopped on construction, alteration, remodeling, repair or removal of buildings and structures when such work is being done in violation of any provision or provisions of any ordinance of the Village, including the zoning ordinances. A verbal stop order shall be promptly reduced to writing and served upon any person found on the job within 1 hour after the utterance of the verbal order and thereafter the work shall not be resumed unless written permission is obtained from the Director of Community Development or designee. Any authorized agent, employee or police officer of the Village may serve the written stop order. 
(2)  Property Maintenance Division. 
a.  Inspect the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, and ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use. 
b.  Issue all necessary notices or orders to correct or remove illegal or unsafe buildings or structures or conditions. 
(3)  Planning Division. 
a.  Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to all map amendments and special uses, variations, exceptions, appeals and applications; designate on the zoning district map each authorized amendment and special use; and keep such records which the Village requires to be kept in regards to zoning. 
b.  Forward to the appropriate reviewing body all documents and information pertaining to applications for special uses, zoning ordinances, amendments, variances, and other matters which are to be referred to the reviewing bodies. 
c.  Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and make recommendations to the Plan Commission at least once a year. 
(4)  Economic Development Division. 
a.  Initiate, direct and review the Village's Community Development Block Grant program. 
b.  Administer the federal government's Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program. 
c.  Assist and coordinate Village efforts in development of industrial, commercial and residential projects, in regards to TIF and redevelopment districts. 
(Code 1979, § 23.02)  
Sec. 2-276. - Reports. 
The Director of Community Development shall monthly furnish the Village Manager with a full and comprehensive report of all matters pertaining to the activities of the Department of Community Development during the preceding month. Among such other matters as shall be relative thereto, there shall be included in the report the number of permits issued, stages of construction, alteration, remodeling or demolition, revocations, stop orders and notice and orders issued, and the total fees charged. 
(Code 1979, § 23.03)  
Secs. 2-277—2-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Authority to maintain a board of health, 65 ILCS 5/11-16-1. 
 
Sec. 2-291. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the Village government which shall be known as the Department of Public Health, which shall include a Director of Public Health and such subordinates and assistants as the Village Manager shall appoint. 
(Code 1979, § 11.01)  
Sec. 2-292. - Appointment of Director. 
The office of the Director of Public Health is hereby created. The Director of Public Health shall be the head of the Department of Public Health and shall be appointed by the Village Manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to supervision, direction and control by the Manager and subject to discharge by the Manager, with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 11.02)  
Sec. 2-293. - Appointment and discharge of employees. 
All employees of the Department of Public Health shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and all persons appointed shall be subject to discharge by the Manager with or without cause.  
Sec. 2-294. - Compensation of employees. 
All persons appointed under this division shall receive compensation as may be authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.  
Sec. 2-295. - Powers and duties of Director. 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Health to enforce all the laws of the State, the rules, regulations, and orders of the State Department of Public Health and the State Environmental Protection Agency and the ordinances of the Village in relation to matters pertaining to the preservation of public health within the Village, and the Director shall: 
(1)  Execute and enforce all rules, regulations and orders of the Department of Public Health and all ordinances of the Village relating to public health and sanitation. 
(2)  Execute and enforce all ordinances of the Village relating to the health standards maintained in every place of business in the Village where services of a personal nature are furnished to the public or where foods, food products, milk, milk products and beverages are either handled, sold, given away, stored, manufactured or processed. 
(3)  Investigate the existence of any reportable communicable disease within the Village and report such disease to the State Department of Public Health, and act without delay in carrying out such measures for controlling the transmission of such disease. 
(4)  Make all necessary sanitary and health investigations and inspections and cause all nuisances, whether public or private, affecting the health of persons in private employment and the public generally to be abated with reasonable promptness in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq. 
(5)  Initiate plans for dealing with public health problems not already included in the Department of Public Health program with the approval of the Village Manager and where required by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(6)  Perform such other duties relating to health and sanitation as the Mayor and Board of Trustees or the Village Manager shall direct. 
(7)  Request the Police Department and such other State or municipal authorities for such assistance as may be deemed necessary in the performance of the duties of the office, and cause the prosecution of offenders violating any of the rules, regulations or orders of the Department of Public Health, or violating any of the Village ordinances relating to public or private nuisances, public health and sanitation. 
(Code 1979, § 11.03)  
Sec. 2-296. - Powers of enforcement officers. 
For the purpose of performing the Director's duties, the Director of Public Health and the Director's deputies and assistants shall have the authority to enforce the health ordinances in accordance with established procedures and practices and shall be permitted, at any reasonable hour, to enter into or upon any house, store or other building or unimproved land, if deemed necessary, in order to make a thorough inspection and examination of the health and sanitary conditions of the premises. All orders and directions emanating from the Department of Public Health shall be issued in the name of the Director or Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 11.04)  
Sec. 2-297. - Reports. 
The Director of Public Health shall monthly furnish the Village Manager with a full and comprehensive report of all matters pertaining to the activities of the Department of Public Health during the preceding month. 
(Code 1979, § 11.07)  
Secs. 2-298—2-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, § 2-461 et seq.; Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund, § 2-491 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Authority to create a fire department, 65 ILCS 5/11-6-1. 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a Village Fire Department for the prevention and extinguishment of fire endangering life and property within the limits of the Village, and beyond the Village limits where contractual or mutual aid fire protection agreements have been or may be made. The Department is also responsible for provision of emergency medical assistance. The term "Department," when used in this division, shall mean the Fire Department for the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 5.01)  
Sec. 2-322. - Personnel. 
The personnel of the Village Fire Department is established as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, determine the number of firefighters necessary for the effective operation of the Fire Department. 
(2)  The Department shall have the following offices and they are hereby created: Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chiefs, and such Captains, Assistant Shift Commanders and Lieutenants as authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees through the annual budget process. 
(Code 1979, § 5.02)  
Sec. 2-323. - Appointments. 
(a)  Generally. All sworn personnel in the Department shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., and rules and procedures of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and applicable collective bargaining agreements, except as may be otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be the ranking officer of the Department. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 5.03)  
Sec. 2-324. - Qualifications of Fire Chief. 
No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Fire Chief unless such person shall possess technical training and knowledge and experience in the matters of firefighting and fire prevention so as to reasonably qualify in such matters. This shall encompass thorough knowledge of policies, regulations and requirements of a fire department and of fire prevention laws and ordinances; considerable knowledge of the principles of public administration with reference to departmental personnel and budget administration; ability to analyze the effectiveness of the Department and to correlate its development with changing conditions in the Village; ability to plan, assign and direct the work of a number of subordinate operating units under emergency conditions; ability to meet tactfully and effectively with public officials and the general public and to present ideas clearly in oral or written form; and ability to provide effective leadership and to maintain harmonious relationships in the Department. Also, considerable experience in a supervisory firefighting position with the responsibility for a major phase of departmental administration, and graduation from an accredited university or college with at least a bachelor's degree supplemented by formal fire training and certification, may be required as may be determined by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 5.04)  
Sec. 2-325. - Duties of Fire Chief. 
The Fire Chief shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  The Fire Chief shall have the custody, subject to the direction of the Village Manager, of all Village property and equipment pertaining to the Fire Department. 
(2)  The Fire Chief shall have control and direction of all personnel of the Village Fire Department. 
(3)  The Fire Chief shall cause to be investigated the cause, origin, and circumstances of any fire or explosion involving a loss of life, injuries to persons or destruction of or damage to property. When, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, reasonable cause exists that the fire or explosion may have been of incendiary origin, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to take custody of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire or explosion and to continue the investigation to conclusion. Proprietary information as identified by the occupant which may relate to trade secrets or processes shall not be part of the public record except as may be directed by a court of law or applicable State statute. 
(4)  The Fire Chief shall from time to time during the year examine the condition of fire apparatus and fire stations, and report such information to the Village Manager. 
(5)  The Fire Chief shall, at least once in 6 months or as deemed necessary, inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings, except for single-family residential property, for the purpose of determining the safety of such buildings, including the sufficiency and adequacy of detection, suppression and alarm systems of doors, passageways, aisles, stairways, and, generally, facilities for egress in case of fire or other accident, the overloading of floors, and storage of combustibles. 
Cross reference— Inspections for fire hazards, § 50-36. 
(6)  The Fire Chief, or a designated subordinate, shall have the right to enter upon the premises wherein any fire has occurred, if necessary, in order to investigate the origin of the fire. 
(7)  The Fire Chief shall attend all major fires occurring in the Village. In the case of the Fire Chief's absence from any fire, it shall be the duty of a Deputy Fire Chief, or the highest ranking officer in command of the fire companies at such fire, to take charge of the Department. Such officer shall have and exercise all powers of the Fire Chief. 
(8)  The Fire Chief shall cause to be examined all buildings and walls reported dangerous or damaged by fire or accident, and shall, when requested by the Village Manager or designee, also examine all buildings under application to raze, enlarge, alter or rebuild, and make a report of the condition thereof as requested. 
(9)  The Fire Chief shall make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners' rules and regulations concerning the Fire Department; provided that, before taking effect, such rules and regulations shall have been submitted to and approved by the Village Manager. 
(10)  The Fire Chief shall evaluate and determine needs for training and plan and direct necessary orientation and in-service measures. 
(11)  The Fire Chief shall make a full and complete annual report to the Village Manager of all Fire Department matters for the preceding year. Such report shall show the number of fires, causes thereof, all accidents by fire, the number of and description of buildings destroyed or damaged, property destroyed by fire and insurance thereon, and such statistics and suggestions as deemed suitable. 
(Code 1979, § 5.05)  
Sec. 2-326. - Authority of Fire Chief and other officers at scene of fire. 
(a)  The Fire Chief, or, in the absence of the Fire Chief, the officer in command at any fire, shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining property. 
(b)  The Fire Chief, or, in the absence of the Fire Chief, the officer in command at any fire, may direct the members of the Fire Department to cut down and remove any building, structure or fence when deemed necessary. 
(c)  The Fire Chief, or any other officer in command at any fire, may prescribe limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, except firefighters, police officers, and those admitted by any officer of the Fire Department, shall go, and the Police Department shall, upon the request of the Fire Chief, or other officer in command of the Fire Department at any fire, enforce the provisions of this subsection. 
(d)  The Fire Chief and other officers of the Fire Department in command at any fire shall have the right to give orders to any person present at a fire concerning the extinguishment of the fire and the removal and protection of property and persons. 
(Code 1979, § 5.06)  
Sec. 2-327. - Badges. 
The Village shall furnish every member of the Fire Department with a badge designating the member's rank in the Department, which shall be returned to the Village upon termination of employment. 
(Code 1979, § 5.071)  
Sec. 2-328. - Interfering with firefighters or other officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a firefighter in performance of the firefighter's duty, or to refuse or neglect to furnish any member of the Fire Department help or information pertaining to the cause or origin of any fire, or to hinder any fire investigation in any manner. 
(Code 1979, § 5.072)  
Sec. 2-329. - Impersonating firefighter or other officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the Fire Department to impersonate a firefighter or officer of the Fire Department at any time, by wearing a uniform, cap, insignia, or badge or in any other way attempting to create the impression that such person is a member or official of the Fire Department. 
(Code 1979, § 5.073)  
Sec. 2-330. - Duty of members to enforce regulations; police powers. 
It shall be the duty of all members of the Fire Department to see that the provisions of this Code relating to the authority, functions and duties of the Fire Department are enforced, and to that end all such members are hereby vested with the power and authority of police officers; provided, however, they shall not be subject to the statutory requirements or privileges of the regular members of the Police Department, or be entitled to any additional compensation. 
(Code 1979, § 5.074)  
Sec. 2-331. - Mandatory retirement age for firefighters. 
The age of 65 shall be the maximum age for the employment of any sworn member of the Fire Department, with the exception of the positions of Chief, Deputy Chief, and Captain and for those affected employees at the time of adoption of Village Ordinance Number 07-7-C-3521, who at the time of their appointment to the department were over 35 years. 
(Ord. No. 07-7-C-3521, § 2, 7-2-2007)  
Secs. 2-332—2-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, § 2-461 et seq.; Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund, § 2-511 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 2-351. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a Village Police Department for the protection of lives and property within the limits of the Village, the enforcement of Village ordinances and related police functions. 
(Code 1979, § 6.01)  
Sec. 2-352. - Personnel. 
Personnel of the Village Police Department is established as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, determine the number of police officials necessary for the effective operation of the Police Department. 
(2)  The Police Department shall have the following offices and they are hereby created: Chief of Police, Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants, and such other and further designations and ranks as authorized by the Board of Trustees through the annual budget process. 
(Code 1979, § 6.02)  
Sec. 2-353. - Appointment of employees. 
All sworn personnel in the Police Department shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4 and rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and applicable collective bargaining agreements, except as may be otherwise provided in this division. 
(Code 1979, § 6.03)  
Sec. 2-354. - Appointment of Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police shall be the ranking officer of the Department. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 6.03)  
Sec. 2-355. - Qualifications of Chief of Police. 
No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Chief of Police unless such person shall possess technical training in and knowledge of principles and accepted good practices and procedures as applied to patrol, traffic control, criminal investigation, crime prevention, juvenile delinquency control work, and general police administration. Such person shall have considerable knowledge of the standards by which the quality of police service is evaluated and the use of police records and their application to police administration. Such person shall have considerable knowledge of the types and uses of firearms, communications, and automotive equipment in modern police work. Such person shall have a knowledge of the function of federal, State, and local jurisdictions and authorities as they relate to police work. Such person shall have the ability to plan, lay out and supervise the work of subordinates performing police activities, and to develop proper training and instructional procedures for those employees, and to maintain a high level of discipline and morale. Such person shall have had experience in modern police work which has afforded progressively responsible experience in a variety of police functions, including responsible supervisory police duties, and graduation from an accredited university, or college with at least a bachelor's degree, supplemented by formal training in modern police administration and practices. 
(Code 1979, § 6.04)  
Sec. 2-356. - Duties of Chief of Police. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to: 
(1)  Provide for the custody, care, and control of the public property of the Police Department, including all firearms and other equipment, and the books and records of the Police Department. 
(2)  Devote full time to the duties and responsibilities of the office. 
(3)  Preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness of the Village. 
(4)  Execute and enforce all ordinances and police regulations and orders of the Mayor and Board of Trustees and of the Village Manager. 
(5)  Protect the rights of persons and property within the Village. 
(6)  Take notice of all nuisances, and at all times render all assistance necessary to departments of the Village in abatement thereof. 
(7)  Take notice of all impediments, obstructions and defects in the walks, streets, avenues and public places of the Village, and remove such impediments, obstructions or defects or cause immediate notice thereof to be given to the proper person, including those whose duty it may be to attend to the removal of such impediments, obstructions or defects, according to the ordinances of the Village. 
(8)  Cause to be executed all orders transmitted to the Chief of Police by the Village Manager. 
(9)  Aid the Fire Department by giving alarms in case of fire, and in clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of all fires so that the members of the Fire Department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their duties. 
(10)  Study police problems in matters of public welfare and administration as related to crime and law enforcement and make recommendations thereon to the Village Manager. The Chief of Police shall investigate, study, and recommend to the Village Manager from time to time traffic regulations, routings, and changes therein with a view to improving traffic conditions and lessening congestion in the streets and other places in the Village. 
(11)  Make such rules and regulations consistent with Board of Fire and Police Commissioners' rules and regulations and applicable collective bargaining agreements concerning the Police Department. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to and approved by the Village Manager before becoming effective. 
(12)  Make a full and complete annual report to the Village Manager of all Police Department operations for the preceding year. Such reports shall show a detailed statement of the transactions of the Police Department for the preceding year, and such statistics and suggestions in regard to the requirements of the Department as the Chief of Police may deem advisable. 
(13)  For the purpose of carrying the provisions of this section into effect, cause to be detailed a sufficient number of the police force to make from time to time, and as often as may be necessary, a thorough and systematic examination of the Village, to ascertain and report to the proper authority for prosecution of all violations of the ordinances. 
(Code 1979, § 6.05)  
Sec. 2-357. - Police powers of Village officers and employees. 
All elected and appointed Village officials and specified employees, including Plumbing and Structural Inspectors, Electrical Inspectors, Sanitarians, Housing Inspectors, and their assistants, Fire Prevention Inspectors, License Officers, and Water Inspectors, are hereby constituted conservators of the peace as law enforcing officers and are hereby authorized and shall have power to: 
(1)  Charge or cause to be arrested by a police officer, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any Village ordinance or any criminal law pursuant to the statutes of the State. 
(2)  Exercise all other powers as the Mayor and Board of Trustees may prescribe. 
(Code 1979, § 6.06) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 2-358. - Special police. 
(a)  Appointment of citizens. The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Village Manager, may, in time of peril, danger, riot, or pestilence, or apprehension thereof, and at all conflagrations, and during any public election or celebration, or unusual congregation of people in the Village, appoint as special police officers as many private persons, of good moral character, not otherwise employed by the Village, for a specified time, as the Chief of Police may deem necessary, and during the term of service such special police officers shall possess only the powers specified by the Chief of Police, and be subject to all rules and regulations covering the Police Department, all applicable Village Ordinances and all applicable statutes and regulations of the State pertaining to police officers of the Village. The Chief of Police shall not authorize any individual special police officer to use a weapon in the course of performing the duties of the special police appointment unless the individual appointee has previously and satisfactorily completed a course of training in the use of weapons in the performance of police duties, which course of training must be authorized and approved for the individual prior to the appointment as a special police officer. 
(b)  Appointment of Village employees. The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Village Manager, may in like manner, and under any of the circumstances mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, appoint persons of good moral character, who may be in the employment of the Village in other branches of the Village government, as special police officers. Village employees appointed as special police officers in accordance with this section shall receive no additional pay for their services as such special police officers. Such special police officers shall possess only the powers and privileges specified by the Chief of Police, and shall be subject to all the rules and regulations governing the Police Department, all applicable Village Ordinances and all applicable statutes and regulations of the State pertaining to police officers of the Village. The Chief of Police shall not authorize any individual special police officer to use a weapon in the course of performing the duties of the special police appointment unless the individual appointee has previously and satisfactorily completed a course of training in the use of weapons in the performance of police duties, which course of training must be authorized and approved for the individual prior to the appointment as a special police officer. 
(c)  Appointment of guards for special duty. The Village Manager may, on application of any person showing the necessity thereof, appoint and swear in any additional number of special police officers to do special duty at any fixed place within the Village, at the charge and expense of the person by whom the application was made. Persons so appointed shall conform and shall be subject to all rules and regulations governing the Police Department, and to such special rules, regulations and restricted powers and privileges as the Chief of Police may make concerning such special police officers. The Chief of Police may, at any time, with the consent of the Village Manager, remove or discharge from service any such special police officers, without assigning any cause therefor. 
(d)  Reports of appointments. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager or designee to report to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, at the first regular meeting of the Mayor and Board of Trustees held after any appointment, all appointments of special police officers made by the Village Manager or the Police Chief, the duration of and the reasons for the appointments of special police officers. 
(Code 1979, § 6.07)  
Sec. 2-359. - Lost, stolen or seized property. 
(a)  Custodian. One of the employees of the Police Department shall be designated by the Chief of Police to be the custodian of lost and stolen property. Such person shall at all times be under the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police. As the custodian, such person shall take possession of all property seized or taken by the police. 
(b)  Disposition. The custodian shall keep a record of all property which may be seized or otherwise taken possession of by the Police Department. If such property shall not be claimed by the rightful owner and possession surrendered to such owner within 30 days from the date of such seizure or taking by the police, the custodian shall proceed to dispose of such property as follows: 
(1)  In all cases where any lost or unclaimed property is delivered into the custody of the Police Department by any person not the owner thereof, the property shall, at the end of the 30-day period, be delivered to the finder for purposes of disposition by the finder as provided in 765 ILCS 1020/27—1020/36. At the option of the finder, the Village may for its own account proceed to dispose of the property in accordance with the provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(2)  Where the Police Department is the original finder or taker of lost or stolen property or where the Police Department obtains possession of any unclaimed property arising out of a court proceeding in connection with which such property was seized, then, upon such property remaining unclaimed for the 30-day period, the custodian shall publish or cause to be published, in the official newspaper of the Village, a description of such property, together with the date of seizure or the taking of possession thereof, and shall give notice that, if such property be not claimed by the rightful owner or owners thereof within 10 days from the date of such publication, such property will be sold at public auction at such places as the Chief of Police may direct and in such manner as to expose to the inspection of bidders all property so offered for sale, provided that if such unclaimed property is deemed by the Chief of Police to be of use to the Police Department, the property may be taken for the use of the Department. 
(3)  In addition to the publication of notice provided for in this subsection, the custodian of lost and stolen property shall post or cause to be posted, in at least 3 public places in the Village, a copy of the notice published in the official newspaper, and shall make a record of the date when such publication and the posting of notices are made. If, within 10 days from the date of such publication and posting, no claim for such property described in such notices shall have been made by the rightful owner thereof, the custodian shall proceed to sell such property at public auction. 
(c)  Weapons. None of provisions of this section shall apply to pistols, revolvers, knives, slingshots, metallic knuckles or other deadly weapons of like character, but all such weapons shall be either destroyed or retained for use by the Police Department. 
(d)  Disposition of proceeds of sale. The proceeds of any sale or sales so made after ownership shall have vested in the Police Department as provided for by the statute, and after deducting the cost of storage, advertising, selling, and other expenses incident to the handling or selling of such property, shall be paid to the Village Treasurer for the general fund. 
(Code 1979, § 6.08)  
Sec. 2-360. - Mandatory retirement age for police officers. 
The age of 65 shall be the maximum age for the employment of any sworn member of the Police Department, with the exception of the positions of Chief, Deputy Chief, and Commander, and for those affected employees at the time of adoption of Village Ordinance Number 07-7-C-3521, who at the time of their appointment to the department were over 35 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 07-7-C-3521, § 3, 7-2-2007)  
Secs. 2-361—2-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— State Gift Ban Act, 5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.; pecuniary interest in contracts, 65 ILCS 5/4-8-6. 
 
Sec. 2-381. - Declaration of policy. 
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public office not be used for personal gain. In recognition of this goal there is hereby established the code of ethics set out in this article, for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The provisions and purpose of this article and such rules and regulations as may be established pursuant to this article are hereby declared to be in the best interest of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.161)  
Sec. 2-382. - Conflict of interest generally. 
(a)  No elected official or other official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of such person's official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair such person's independence of judgment or action in the performance of such person's official duties. Personal as distinguished from financial interest includes an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business association. 
(b)  The following are hereby designated as constituting conflicts of interest: 
(1)  Engaging in or accepting private employment or rendering services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in performance of official duties. 
(2)  Appearing on behalf of private interests before any agency of the Village except without compensation and only in the course of duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. 
(3)  Failing to disclose the full nature and extent of a substantial or controlling financial interest in or any substantial dealings as a debtor, creditor or otherwise in connection with any business entity contracting with the Village for the sale of real estate, materials, supplies or services. Such official, with or without such disclosure, shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in any such transaction, contract or sale. 
(Code 1979, § 3.162)  
Sec. 2-383. - Disclosure of income. 
An official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, who has a direct or indirect financial or other interest in any transaction, the disposition of which may be influenced by such person's official position or action, shall disclose all sources of income and the nature and extent of any personal interest in such transaction as an officer, agent, member, or owner of any business entity or other association which is subject to regulation by the Village. Such disclosure shall remove any presumption of conflict of interest for any transaction where the information disclosed is pertinent. 
(Code 1979, § 3.163)  
Sec. 2-384. - Appearing before agency in which formerly employed. 
It shall be improper for any administrative member of the staff or any appointive employee serving on the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals to appear within a period of 2 years after the termination of such person's employment from the Village, or the termination of the appointive official's term of office, before the agency in which such official or employee was formerly employed in connection with any case or other matter with which such official or employee was directly connected while an official or employee, or as a member of the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 1979, § 3.164)  
Sec. 2-385. - Enforcement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall create or detract from the civil or criminal liability of any public official or employee, or any other laws or ordinances or procedures, rules and contracts. Violations of any provisions of this article shall constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action by the appropriate authority. In the case of elected officials, a violation shall result in the issuance of a public proclamation calling upon the affected official to resign the official's office in the best interests of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.165)  
Sec. 2-386. - Applicability of State Officials and Employees Ethic Act. 
(a)  Adoption of Act. 
(1)  The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the Village to the extent required by Section 70-5 of the Act. 
(2)  The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under Article 10 of the Act, by any officer or any employee of the Village, is hereby prohibited. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the Village under Article 10 of the Act, is hereby prohibited. 
(3)  The participation in political activities prohibited by Section 5-15 of the Act by any officer or employee of the Village is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  For purposes of this Section 2-386, the term: (i) "employee" shall be defined as set forth in Section 70-5(c) of the Act; and (ii) "officer" shall mean each person holding the office of Mayor, Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Trustee, Corporation Counsel, Assistant Corporation Counsel, Village Manager and each person serving on a Board or Commission pursuant to Chapter 2, Article VII, of the Village Code. 
(2)  Terms and words used in this Section 2-386, other than "employee" and "officer" shall be defined as set forth in Section 1-5 of the Act, unless a different definition is clearly indicated in this section. For construction and interpretation purposes; (i) where ever the word "State" or term "State agency" is utilized in Sections 1-5 and 5-15, the word "Village" shall be substituted, except for the definition of "Governmental entity" in Section 1-5; (ii) prohibitions applicable to an "executive branch constitutional officer" and a "legislative branch constitutional officer" as referenced in Sections 1-5 and 5-15, are applicable to officers of the Village.; and (iii) certain definitions in Section 1-5 by their nature are inapplicable, including but not limited to, "Ultimate jurisdictional authority", subpart (5) of "Prohibited source," "Legislative leader". 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Violations of this Section 2-386 may, in accordance with law, subject the employee or officer to: (i) a fine in amount not exceeding $750.00 or any penalty authorized by the Skokie Village Code; (ii) penalties stated in Section 50-5 of the Act; (iii) the appropriate discipline or discharge; or (iv) any combination of the foregoing. 
(2)  In the case of a violation of this Section 2-386 by an officer, the Mayor and the Board of Trustees shall make the decision in relation to any imposition of a penalty or the appropriate discipline or discharge. The Mayor and Board of Trustees have the authority to suspend without pay, or discharge, an officer appointed by them found to have violated this Section 2-386. In the case of a violation of this Section 2-386 by an employee, the Village Manager shall make the decision in relation to any imposition of a penalty or the appropriate discipline or discharge. 
(3)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees or the Village Manager, depending on the nature of the violation, may authorize or direct the Corporation Counsel to file the appropriate civil or criminal action in the Circuit Court if it is determined that penalties requiring a judicial order are appropriate for the violation at issue. 
(d)  Existing Ordinances and Policies. This Section 2-386 does not repeal any provision of the Skokie Village Code that regulates the conduct of Village officers and employees. This Section 2-386 does not repeal any policy in the Village of Skokie Personnel Manual that regulates the conduct of Village employees. To the extent that any provision of the Skokie Village Code or the Personnel Manual is more restrictive than the provisions of Section 5-15 or Article 10 of the Act, then the Code or Manual shall be applicable. 
(e)  Amendments to the Act. Any amendment to Section 5-15 or Article 10 of the Act that becomes effective after the effective date of this Section 2-386, shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall be applicable to the employees and officers of the Village. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Section 2-386 by reference without formal action by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. 
(f)  Constitutionality. In the event the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section 2-386 shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final without further action by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of Section 5-15 or Article 10 of the Act unconstitutional, but does not declare the remainder of Section 5-15 or Article 10 as unconstitutional, then the remainder of Section 5-15 or Article 10 adopted by this Section 2-386 shall remain in full force and effect. That part of this Section 2-386 relating to the parts of Section 5-15 or Article 10 of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(g)  Ethics Advisor. 
(1)  The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall designate an individual to serve as Ethics Advisor to provide ethical advice and guidance to all officers. 
(2)  The Village Manager shall appoint an individual to serve as an Ethics Advisor to provide ethical advice and guidance to all employees. The Village Manager may designate the duties of the Ethics Advisor, including but not limited to, investigating ethics complaints against employees and advising the Manager on appropriate action to be taken in relation to ethics complaints against employees. 
(3)  An Ethics Advisor may be an officer or an employee of the Village. A Temporary Ethics Advisor may be appointed in the event an ethical question or complaint arises in relation to an Ethics Advisor, and such Temporary Ethical Advisor shall perform the duties as performed by the Ethics Advisor. 
(h)  Ethics Governance. 
(1)  There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Officers Ethics Commission of the Village of Skokie. The Commission is charged with the responsibility of hearing ethical complaints made against officers of the Village and making recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
a.  The Commission shall be comprised of three members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. No person shall be appointed as a member of the Commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the Village. The Mayor shall designate one of the appointees to act as Chairperson. 
b.  All commissioners shall be appointed to 3-year terms and shall serve until their successors are duly appointed. Commissioners may be re-appointed to serve subsequent terms. 
c.  Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any 2 commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two commissioners and official action by the commission shall require the affirmative vote of two members. 
d.  The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetence, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. 
e.  The Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers; 
2.  To investigate, conduct hearings, deliberations and issue recommendations for the imposition of penalties or disciplinary actions. The Commission shall act only upon the receipt of a written complaint, signed and notarized, alleging a violation of this Ordinance and not upon its own prerogative; 
3.  To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional information and documents from officers who may have violated the provisions of this Section 2-386; and 
4.  To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the Village to cooperate with the Commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal of an officer to cooperate with requests by the Commission shall constitute grounds for a recommendation of penalty or discipline. The Commission shall notify the Village Manager of any request by it for a Village employee to appear before it, to be interviewed by an agent of the Commission or to provide any documents. 
f.  The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this Section 2-386. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall take action on any recommendation made by the Commission. The Mayor and Board of Trustees are not bound by the recommendation of the Commission and may impose any penalty or discipline, including but not limited to discharge, as they deem appropriate in accordance with law. Any action taken by the Mayor and Board of Trustees in relation to a recommendation by the Commission is a final decision for purposes of judicial review. 
g.  The Commission shall comply with the following procedures: 
1.  Within 7 business days after the receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the Respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within 7 business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the Respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed; 
2.  The Commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this Section 2-386, to determine whether there is probable cause to proceed, based on the evidence presented by the complainant. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. The Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the Respondent within 7 business days of the Commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed; 
If there is a determination of probable cause, then the Commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within 3 weeks. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public; 
3.  On the scheduled date, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings Act; 
4.  Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the Commission shall either (i) dismiss the complaint or (ii) issue a recommendation to the Mayor and Board of Trustees for the imposition of a penalty or discipline, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for a penalty or discipline shall be a matter of public information; 
5.  If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of any election at which the Respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (h)(1)g.2. within 7 calendar days after the complaint is filed, and during the 7 days preceding that election, the Commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible; and 
6.  A complaint alleging the violation of this Act must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. 
(2)  The Village Manager is charged with the responsibility of receiving and investigating ethical complaints made against employees of the Village and for imposing penalties or discipline, including but not limited to discharge. The Village Manager may utilize existing policies and procedures for conducting any investigation and imposing the appropriate penalty or discipline. The Village Manager may designate individuals to assist in the investigation of complaints made against employees. 
(i)  No person that is the subject of an ethical complaint, whether officer or employee, shall participate in any way whatsoever in the review, investigation, recommendations or decisions in regard to the ethical complaint. 
(Code 1979, § 3.166; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3275, § 1, 6-7-2004)  
Secs. 2-387—2-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Employees and employment, 65 ILCS 5/10-1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-411. - General policy; title of article. 
It is the policy of the United States government to ensure the maximum participation of all available workers in production, regardless of race, creed, color or national origin, religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, or disability, in the firm belief that the democratic way of life within the nation can be defended successfully only with the help and support of all groups within its borders, including the Village, by eliminating discrimination in public and private employment, the Village, in furtherance of this democratic objective, hereby enacts the regulations of this article, to be known as the "Fair Employment Practices Ordinance." 
(Code 1979, § 3.171)  
Sec. 2-412. - Penalties; additional remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(b)  In addition to all other remedies for the violation of this article, any person having engaged in discrimination in violation of this article shall be barred from doing business or contracting with the Village for such period of time as the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall determine, to a maximum of 2 years. 
(Code 1979, § 3.179)  
Sec. 2-413. - Discrimination by Village departments or officials. 
It shall be unlawful for any department of the Village, or any Village official, or such official's agent or employee, for or on behalf of the Village, to refuse to employ or discharge any person, otherwise qualified, on account of religion, age, disability, race, sex, color, creed, or national origin; to discriminate for the same reasons in regard to tenure, terms or conditions of employment; to deny promotion or increase in compensation solely for these reasons; to publish an offer of employment based on such discrimination; or to adopt or enforce any rule or employment policy which discriminates between employees on account of race, sex, color, religion, creed, national origin, disability, or age, consistent with the pension, retirement and other laws of the State. 
(Code 1979, § 3.172)  
Sec. 2-414. - Discrimination by contractors and suppliers. 
Every contract which the Village or any of its departments is a party to or solicits for shall be conditioned upon the requirement that all suppliers of materials and services and all contractors and their subcontractors and all labor unions or labor organizations that furnish skilled, unskilled or craft union skilled labor, or that perform any such labor or services, and all financial institutions that maintain any financial relationship under such contract, do not discriminate against any other person by reason of race, creed, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or disability with respect to the hiring, application for employment, tenure, terms or conditions of employment of any person. 
(Code 1979, § 3.173)  
Sec. 2-415. - Duty of contractors and suppliers regarding employment policy. 
Every supplier of materials and services and all contractors doing business with the Village shall be an equal opportunity employer. 
(Code 1979, § 3.174)  
Sec. 2-416. - Inspection of records of contractors and suppliers. 
The Village shall have the right to inspect records of prospective contractors, bidders or suppliers to ensure that they are equal opportunity employers as provided for by federal law and federal executive order, and to ensure their compliance with the requirements and obligations of the Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., which act is incorporated in this article by reference. 
(Code 1979, § 3.175)  
Sec. 2-417. - Compliance by contractors and suppliers. 
(a)  Certification of employment policy. Every supplier of materials and services and every contractor who shall be a party to a contract with the Village shall by affidavit certify that it is the supplier's or contractor's policy to recruit, hire, train, upgrade, promote and discipline the supplier's or contractor's employees without regard to race, creed, color, religion, age, sex or national origin or disability. 
(b)  Regulations to be incorporated in contracts. The provisions of Section 2-414 shall be incorporated as material parts of all contracts to which the Village is a party. 
(Code 1979, § 3.176)  
Sec. 2-418. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the Village Manager, except for the authority of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Manager shall have the power to receive, investigate, and seek to adjust complaints of discriminatory practices prohibited by this article, initiate and hold hearings, and make findings of fact and recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees concerning any practices or allegations of such practices. 
(Code 1979, § 3.177)  
Sec. 2-419. - Complaints; hearings. 
(a)  Any person claiming to be personally aggrieved by discriminatory practices prohibited by this article, or to have personal knowledge of such practices, may make a complaint in writing to the Village Manager. Such complaints shall be signed and notorized. All complaints shall be investigated by the Manager before a hearing is ordered. 
(b)  Hearings shall be conducted by the Manager or person designated by the Manager. Hearings shall be held only after 10 days' written notice to the Respondent, which shall include copies of the complaint or allegations. All Respondents shall be provided full opportunity to present evidence and to cross examine witnesses, and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  After a hearing, where the Manager, or person designated by the Mayor, finds by a preponderance of the evidence that discrimination has been practiced by the Respondent, and after reasonable attempts to adjust the complaint have failed, the Manager shall transmit a written copy of the findings and recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, which shall act on the recommendation within 30 days. 
(Code 1979, § 3.178)  
Secs. 2-420—2-439. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, adopted May 20, 2019, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 2-441—2-444, 2-461—2-475, 2-491—2-494, 2-511—2-514, 2-531—2-542, 2-561—2-573, 2-591—2-602, 2-621—2-633, 2-651—2-662, 2-681—2-692, 2-711—2-722, 2-741—2-752, 2-771—2-785, 2-801—2-812, 2-831—2-842, 2-891—2-902, 2-910—2-921, 2-930—2-941, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 4.02.1—4.02.14, 4.04.1—4.04.11, 4.05.1—4.05.11, 4.06.1—4.06.12, 4.07.1—4.07.11, 4.09.1—4.09.11, 4.10.1—4.10.11, 4.11.1—4.11.11, 4.15.1—4.15.14, 4.16.1—4.16.11, 4.17.1—4.17.11, 4.19.1—4.19.11, 5.121—5.123, 6.091—6.094; Ord. No. 03-11-C-3229, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2003; Ord. No. 04-2-C-3251, § 2, adopted Feb. 17, 2004; Ord. No. 09-9-C-3709, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 21, 2009; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3830, § 1, adopted April 20, 2011; Ord. No. 13-1-C-3961, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2013; Ord. No. 16-12-C-4260, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2016. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
The following provisions apply to all Boards and Commissions unless otherwise stated below: 
 
Sec. 2-440. - Membership. 
(a)  The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint all members of all the Boards and Commissions. The persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions shall be residents of the Village or persons employed within the Village or persons whose business, occupational or professional activities are carried on to a substantial degree within the Village. When such residence, employment or substantial activity within the Village no longer exists, such members shall be deemed to have resigned from the Board or Commission. However, the Mayor may, in the Mayor's discretion, refrain from nominating a replacement for such resigned member for a period of ninety (90) days and may submit such resigned member's name for reappointment within this 90-day period. 
(b)  Each member of the Boards and Commissions shall possess knowledge or qualifications required by applicable state statute, the Mayor and local ordinances. 
(c)  No appointment shall be made by the Mayor within thirty (30) days before the expiration of the Mayor's term of office. 
(d)  The Mayor may remove a member of a Board or Commission at the Mayor's discretion for such reasons as, but not limited to bringing discredit to the Board or Commission or failing to comply with the rules or discretion of the Chair. 
(e)  The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, is authorized to fill any vacancy on a Board or Commission which may arise for any unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-441. - Disturbing meetings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, interrupt, disrupt or otherwise impede the process or work of any meeting of any board or commission represented in this Code. Any person violating the provisions of this section, upon being found guilty of disturbing a meeting, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-442. - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order may be used by a Board or Commission Chair to govern the proceedings of the Board or Commission. The use of a simplified or abridged Robert's Rules of Order is permitted so long as the terms are available to members and visitors in advance of a meeting. A Board or Commission may establish its own rules of practice and procedure, subject to the approval of the Corporation Counsel. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-443. - "Emeritus" appointees for certain boards and commissions. 
The Mayor, may, in the Mayor's discretion, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, appoint a "Member Emeritus" or "Commissioner Emeritus" to any existing Board or Commission. As an honorary position an Emeritus may attend meetings but is not a voting member. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-444. - Chair and Vice-Chair. 
The Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint one of the members of each Board and Commission to serve as chair and one to serve as vice-chair, each for a term of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-445. - Applicability of Open Meetings Act. 
All meetings of all Boards and Commissions shall be held in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 
(a)  Any meeting of a Board or Commission in which policies or recommendations are not voted on but are limited to general discussion, does not require a quorum to meet nor requires written minutes or verbatim records. 
(b)  Written minutes of all meetings in which policy is voted on or of executive sessions shall be kept and maintained by all Boards and Commissions. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-446. - Term of members. 
The term of office of each member of a Board or Commission shall be four (4) years or until the member's successor shall be appointed. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-447. - Attendance at meetings. 
Any member of any Board or Commission who during any twelve (12) month period is not present throughout fifty (50) percent or more of the regularly scheduled meetings shall be presumed to have resigned from the Board or Commission. This presumption shall be absolute, although the Mayor may reconsider for the reason of lack of attendance, and refrain from nominating a replacement for a period of ninety (90) days and may submit such member's name for reappointment during such period. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-248. - Quorum. 
A quorum is required when a meeting of the Board will vote on policies or recommendations. A quorum shall consist of a simple majority of the members of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-249. - Report. 
At the request of the Mayor a report shall be provided by any of the Boards or Commissions by its chair or designee. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-450. - Conflicts and Ethics. 
All State of Illinois and Village rules and guidelines concerning conflicts of interest and ethics shall apply to all Boards and Commissions chairs, vice-chairs and members. Any conflicts of interest must be disclosed to the appropriate chair and the Corporation Counsel. No member of any Board or Commission shall participate in discussions or vote on issues or cases from any individual whom they have a business or personal relationship. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-451. - Frequency of Meetings. 
All meetings of the Boards and Commissions shall be held at the call of the chair and at such time as such Board or Commission may determine. All hearings conducted by the Boards and Commissions shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-452—2-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Fire Department, § 2-321 et seq.; Police Department, § 2-351 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of fire and police commissioners, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-461. - Creation and Purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commission. The word "Board" used in this Division shall mean the Board of Fire and Police Commission. The Board shall consist of five (5) members. The members' terms shall be staggered. The purpose of the Board shall be the appointment of all sworn personnel of the Fire Department and Police Department, except the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police, Deputy Chiefs, Fire Captains and Police Commanders, each of whom shall be appointed by the Village Manager. The Board shall also conduct and hold entrance and promotion examinations for both the Police Department and Fire Department in accordance with applicable statutes and collective bargaining agreements. 
(b)  Each member shall take an oath or affirmation of office. 
(c)  The chair and members of the Board shall receive compensation as established in the Village's annual budget. In no instance shall the chair, vice-chair or members of the Board be paid for more than two (2) meetings per month without the prior approval of the Mayor. A meeting, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a public meeting duly called according to law, at which a quorum is present. The chair, vice-chair and members of the Board shall receive no additional compensation or expense allowance for their services. 
(d)  Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Board shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(e)  The Board, through its chair, vice-chair or other designated member, shall report in writing, during the Village's annual budget process, to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The report shall cover the activities of the Board for the preceding year. 
(f)  All meetings of the Boards and Commissions shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such time as such Board or Commission may determine. All hearings conducted by the Boards and Commissions shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-462. - Departmental regulations; disciplinary actions. 
(a)  The Board shall make such rules and regulations in accordance with applicable State statutes and collective bargaining agreements as may be necessary to efficiently operate both the Police Department and Fire Department to provide for the appointment, promotion, suspension and removal of the members of each Department, and from time to time may make such changes in the rules and regulations as may be required. However, removal, suspensions and discharges shall be governed by the following provisions, all of which shall be incorporated in the rules and regulations of the Board: 
(1)  Removal, suspension, demotions and discharges. 
a.  Authorized disciplinary actions; fines. Subject to the limitations contained in this section, the infraction of any of the rules and regulations of the Fire and Police Commissioners, or any other misconduct, shall subject the Department member to reprimands, fines, forfeitures of leave time, suspension, demotion or discharge. Fines shall be assessed on the basis of an amount not to exceed the member's regular 8 hours' pay per day and shall be collected by withholding from the member's paycheck. 
b.  "Day" defined. For the purposes of this section, the word "day" shall mean a regular tour of duty. 
c.  Wages during suspension. Wages shall not be credited during any period of suspension. 
d.  Suspension pending investigation. The Chief, with the concurrence of the Commission, may suspend a member for a period of thirty (30) days pending investigation and without a hearing when the charges under investigation, if ultimately established, would constitute a felony. Any suspension beyond this period for charges being processed through the Commission shall be only by further order of the Commission, which shall have the right to continue such suspension pending investigation or order its termination and set the matter for hearing. 
e.  Authority of department heads. Reprimands, fines, forfeitures or suspensions totaling not more than five (5) days for a single act or omission may be imposed for cause by the department head, subject to the right of the member to appeal this action within forty-eight (48) hours after being notified thereof or as may be provided by a collective bargaining agreement. An appeal to the Commission shall be heard in as expeditious manner as possible. When appealed to the Commission, it may impose any sanction warranted without regard to the sanction from which the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Hearings. 
a.  Generally. The discharge of any member, or the imposition of fines, forfeitures or suspensions, or any combination thereof, for a period of more than five (5) days for a single act or omission shall be only by the Commission unless modified under a collective bargaining agreement, and shall be for cause upon written charges, and after the member has been afforded an opportunity to be heard in the member's own defense. The Commission shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing of the charges, which must be commenced within thirty (30) days of the filing thereof or the date of the election by the member for the matter to be heard by the Commission under a collective bargaining agreement or as expeditiously as possible for appeals of a department head's action, and may be continued from time to time. 
b.  Charges. All charges for which an appeal has been made by the member to the Commission shall be in writing and shall set forth the charges with sufficient details to permit the member to prepare the member's defense. The written charges shall include the names of all witnesses. The member shall have the right to request the Commission to issue subpoenas to any persons whom the member may wish to call as witnesses. 
c.  Findings. In case any member is found guilty, the Commission may demote, may discharge, may fine, may impose forfeitures of leave time, or may suspend such member, or any combination thereof. If the charges are not sustained, the member shall be reimbursed for all sanctions imposed. 
d.  Powers of Commission. In the conduct of any hearing, each member of the Commission shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations, and the Commission shall have power to secure by its subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and evidence relevant to the hearing. 
(3)  Department records. The Department shall provide the Commission with copies of all disciplinary actions taken against any of the members of the Department with respect to which records have been kept by the Department. 
(4)  Conflicting regulations. The personnel of the Fire Department and Police Department shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the Fire Department and Police Department as adopted by the Commission. In case of conflict, the rules and regulations of the Commission shall govern. 
(5)  Violation of laws. Any violation of the laws of the Village or State or federal law by any member of the Fire Department or Police Department of the Village shall be cause for the filing of charges against such member. 
(b)  All rules and regulations and any changes therein shall be printed for distribution, as soon as practicable. Notice shall be posted at the Village Hall specifying where printed copies of the rules may be obtained and when the rules or charges therein shall go into effect. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-463. - Applicability of State law. 
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such other and further powers and duties as are contained in Illinois statutes. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-464. - Secretary. 
(a)  The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may, with the consent and approval of the Village Manager, employ with compensation a secretary as may be approved by the Mayor in accordance with the Village's budget process, or the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may designate one of its own members to act as secretary, without compensation, and if such secretary is to be compensated, the amount thereof shall be fixed by the Village Board of Trustees in accordance with the Village's budget process. 
(b)  The secretary shall keep the minutes of the Board's proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all examinations held and shall perform such other duties as the Board may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-465—2-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Fire Department, § 2-321 et seq. 
State Law reference— Firefighters' pension fund, 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-491. - Creation; membership and terms. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund. The word "Board," when used in this Division, shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Firefighter's Pension Fund for the Village. The "Board" shall become effective April 17, 2006, pursuant to Section 5/4-121 of the Illinois Pension Code. As this Board takes effect, any previous Board shall dissolve simultaneously. 
(b)  The Board shall be comprised of five (5) members. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, two (2) members shall be elected from active Village Firefighters participating in the pension fund and one (1) member shall be elected from Village Firefighters that have retired, pursuant the terms of 5/4-121 of the Illinois Pension Code. One of the Mayor's appointees whose term commences on April 17, 2006, shall serve on the Board for two (2) years in order to stagger the terms. All other initial and subsequent members shall have terms of three (3) years. 
(c)  The elections of the Firefighter members of the Board shall take place in the time and manner provided by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-492. - Powers and duties. 
The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall have exclusive control and management of all funds constituting the Firefighters' Pension Fund, the power to make assessments upon each firefighter according to statute, and the power to make all needful rules and regulations for its government in the discharge of its duties, and shall hear and decide all applications for relief or pensions under the statutes, together with such other powers, privileges and duties enumerated or hereafter given under the appropriate statutes of the State to such Board. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-493. - Deposits to Pension Fund. 
There shall be deposited in the Firefighters' Pension Fund the sums required by law, which shall include the proceeds of such tax as may be levied pursuant to statute for the Firefighters' Pension Fund. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-494. - Adoption of State law. 
The provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes pertaining to a Firefighters' Pension Fund, 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq., in municipalities having a population of not less than 5,000 and not more than 500,000 inhabitants are by reference hereby adopted as part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-495—2-510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE POLICE PENSION FUND[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference— Police Department, § 2-351 et seq. 
State Law reference— Police pension fund, 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-511. - Creation; membership. 
There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund, consisting of 5 members, all of whom shall be residents of the Village. Two of the board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of two (2) years each, the 3rd and 4th members shall be elected from the regular police force by the active members thereof, and the 5th member shall be elected by the beneficiaries of the Pension Fund from among those who are beneficiaries of the fund. The elected members shall serve for a term of two (2) years, and their term of election shall be at the time and in the manner provided by statute. The word "Board", when used in this Division, shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-512. - Meetings; organization; powers and duties. 
The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall elect such officers, hold such meetings, keep such records and submit such reports as shall be required by statute, and in addition shall make all necessary rules and regulations and perform such duties and have such powers as are conferred upon it by statute. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-513. - Deposits to Pension Fund. 
The Police Pension Fund shall consist of such taxes, accumulations, assessments and deductions as are provided for by statute, and shall include an assessment or deduction as established by State statute from the salary of each police officer. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-514. - Adoption of State law. 
The provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes pertaining to a Police Pension Fund, 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., in municipalities having a population of not less than 50,000 and not more than 200,000 inhabitants are by reference hereby adopted as part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-515—2-530. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-531. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Sustainable Environmental Advisory Commission. The word "Commission", when used in this division, shall mean the Sustainable Advisory Environmental Commission. The Commission shall consist of not more than twelve (12) members. The purpose of the Commission is to (i) promote ideas and actions that encourage the preservation and sustainability of the environment, and (ii) make recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees on policies that would reduce negative environmental impacts. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-532. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-533—2-560. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Zoning, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.; authority to appoint zoning board of appeals, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3; appeal procedure, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12. 
 
Sec. 2-561. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals for the Village. The Board shall consist of nine (9) members. The purpose of the Board shall be to administer and fulfill the rules and regulations contained in the Village Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-562. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
(a)  The chair, vice-chair and members of the Board shall receive compensation as established in the Village's annual budget. In no instance shall the chair, vice-chair or members of the Board be paid for more than two (2) meetings per month without the prior approval of the Mayor. A meeting, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a public meeting duly called. The chair, vice-chair and members of the Board shall receive no additional compensation or expense allowance for their services. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Board shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-563. - Findings of Fact. 
Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested variation and exception, and the reason for recommending or denying such variation shall be specified. Every rule, regulation, amendment or repeal and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall be filed in the Community Development Department by the Board and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-564—2-590. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PLAN COMMISSION[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to create a plan commission, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4. 
 
Sec. 2-591. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Plan Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of 9 members. The purpose and responsibility of the Plan Commission is to administer and fulfill the rules and regulations contained in the Zoning Code. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Plan Commission for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-592. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The chair and members of the Commission shall receive compensation as established in the Village's annual budget. In no instance shall the Chair, Vice-Chair or members of the Commission be paid for more than two (2) meetings per month without the prior approval of the Mayor. A meeting, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a public meeting duly held. The chair, vice-chair and members of the Commission shall receive no additional compensation or expense allowance for their services. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-593—2-620. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference— Human relations, ch. 58; powers of Human Relations Commission, § 58-34; rules of Human Relations Commission, § 58-35. 
State Law reference— Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.; human rights commissions, 775 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-621. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division shall mean the Human Relations Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of 21 members. The purpose and responsibility of the Human Relations Commission is to: 
(a)  Encourage understanding and respect between residents of the Village and celebrate the diversity of the Village including its various racial, religious and ethnic backgrounds. 
(b)  Safeguard the rights of all citizens as defined by our ordinances, state and federal statutes and Constitution. 
(c)  Promote the amicable settlement of disputes between neighbors. 
(d)  Target diversity education in the Village including community-wide programs of education to encourage intergroup understanding. 
(e)  Consult and cooperate with other public agencies in furthering the purposes of the Commission. 
(f)  Enlist the aid of schools, religious institutions, service organizations and civic groups to promote understanding and good will among the people of the community. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
[Sec. 2-622. - Reserved.]  
Sec. 2-623. - Ex-officio members. 
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint two (2) members to the Commission who shall serve in an ex-officio capacity. Ex-officio members shall be residents of the Village, under the age of 18 years and full time students enrolled in a school located within the Village. Ex-officio members shall not have voting rights. The term of office of each ex-officio member of the Commission shall be for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-624. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-625—2-650. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-651. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Public Safety Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Public Safety Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of twenty (20) members. 
It shall be the purpose of the Public Safety Commission, to engage in educational activities relating to crime prevention, to create and encourage programs to assist the residents of Skokie in ensuring a safer environment in the home and in public, and to recommend, to the Mayor and Board of Trustees and to the Village Manager, ways and means for improving conditions in the Village in order to promote a climate conducive to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-652. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-653—2-680. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - FINE ARTS COMMISSION[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference— State fine arts review committee, 20 ILCS 3105/14. 
 
Sec. 2-681. - Creation and Purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Fine Arts Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division shall mean the Fine Arts Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of twenty (20) members. 
(b)  The purposes of the Fine Arts Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Promote and further the work of voluntary organizations and individuals within the Village active in the fine arts. 
(2)  Invite, enlist and encourage the cooperation of public and private agencies and the general public in support of cultural programs and activities within the Village. 
(3)  Promote to the public activities of such organizations whose efforts are in the cause of cultural achievement. 
(4)  Recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees such actions, activities or programs as will aid the function and purposes of this Commission. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-682. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-683—2-710. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - BOARD OF HEALTH[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference— State board of health, 20 ILCS 5/6.06. 
 
Sec. 2-711. - Creation and Purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Board of Health for the Village. The word "Board", when used in this Division, shall mean the Board of Health for the Village. The Board shall consist of not more than twenty (20) members. 
(b)  The Board of Health shall have the following purposes: 
(1)  Recommend from time to time to the Mayor and Board of Trustees amendments or additions to those portions of this Code dealing with public and community health matters. 
(2)  Conduct every 5 years a community health needs assessment and develop a community health plan. 
(3)  Implement the community health plan and address other health related matters. 
(4)  Assist municipal officials charged with the development of projects relating to public health. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-712. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Board shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-713—2-740. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - BEAUTIFICATION AND IMPROVEMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-741. - Creation; Purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Beautification and Improvement Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Beautification and Improvement Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of twenty (20) members. 
(b)  The purpose of the Commission shall be to develop and promote the beautification of the Village by engaging in the following: 
(1)  Develop and promote programs of community beautification and conversation and recommend such programs to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Study and recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees programs for community-wide improvements to the appearance of streets, alleys, parkways and other rights-of-way within the Village. 
(3)  Study and recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees programs to beautify and improve historic and other public building sites. 
(4)  Develop programs and projects to encourage the community to participate in beautification programs. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-742. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-743—2-770. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - APPEARANCE COMMISSION[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 82. 
 
Sec. 2-771. - Creation. 
There is hereby created an Appearance Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Appearance Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-772—2-777. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-778. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The chair, vice-chair and members of the Commission shall receive compensation as established in the Village's annual budget. In no instance shall the chair or members of the Commission be paid for more than two (2) meetings per month without the prior approval of the Mayor. A meeting, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a public meeting duly called according to law, at which a quorum is present. The chair and members of the Commission shall receive no additional compensation for expense allowance for their services. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-779—2-781. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-782. - General powers and duties. 
The Appearance Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Study drawings of exterior elevations, awning/canopy designs, sign drawings, landscape and site plans and materials, as appropriate, for any proposed improvements, including public works or public improvements, in the Village. 
(2)  Consult with and mutually cooperate with the Plan Commission, other Village departments, and any other municipal or governmental bodies on aesthetic issues affecting the Village. 
(3)  Hold hearings, when required, on the issuance of certificates of appropriateness as provided in this division, in connection with questions pertaining to applications for building permits, and issue or deny such certificates pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-783. - Appearance plan. 
(a)  Preparation. The Appearance Commission shall prepare an appearance plan. The appearance plan shall be intended as the standards or guidelines for future physical developments and should consider, among other features: 
(1)  The external architectural features (as defined in this division) as proposed for buildings, structures, signage, awnings/canopies and landscaping and site planning thereof; 
(2)  Existing Village zoning ordinances and provisions as amended, as to, but not limited to, zoning, building, subdivisions, trees and shrubs; provided, however, nothing in the appearance plan shall conflict with, modify or alter any provisions of the zoning or subdivision ordinance. 
(b)  Public hearing. After agreeing on a proposed appearance plan, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Within thirty (30) days, a copy of the proposed plan shall be on file during regular business hours at the office of the Planning Department in the Village Hall for public inspection pending the conclusion of a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village not more than thirty (30) and not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. Within thirty (30) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the Commission shall recommend a final appearance plan to the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  Adoption by Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall thereafter at a public meeting consider the proposed plan and if it so desires may adopt the plan in whole or in part, with or without change. The appearance plan, as adopted, shall be by ordinance. 
(d)  Amendments. The appearance plan may be amended, from time to time, by the Board of Trustees after receiving a recommendation from the Commission regarding a proposed amendment. The Commission can make a recommendation only after holding a public hearing after notice as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-784. - Powers over external architectural features of structures. 
(a)  Certificate of appropriateness required. No building or other permit, otherwise required under the ordinances of the Village, for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure or installation or alteration of a sign or awning or canopy in any zoning district or landscaping for commercial properties, industrial properties, planned unit developments or multifamily developments shall be issued by the Village Manager or designee until a certificate of appropriateness is granted by the Appearance Commission. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to waive the certificate of appropriateness requirement if a determination is made that no external architectural feature is involved or the work is minor in nature for which the building permit is sought. 
(b)  Preliminary consideration of certificate of appropriateness. A petitioner may receive a preliminary design critique from the Commission by presenting an abbreviated submission. This submission must adequately portray the design concept and its relationship to adjacent properties, but it need not include all of the items required for complete certificate of appropriateness consideration. However, a certificate of appropriateness will not be issued based upon a preliminary submission. All hearings on preliminary plans are to be public and are to be held in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this division. 
(c)  Hearing on certificate of appropriateness. Upon the filing of an application for a building permit for which a certificate of Appropriateness is required, the Village Manager or designee shall immediately transmit the application to the Appearance Commission. The fact that an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed shall not be cause for the Director of Community Development to delay the review of plans relating to the building and zoning aspects of the project, while application is pending. The Commission shall hold hearings at least once a month on a fixed, predetermined day or date. Upon such hearing the Commission shall consider the application and if necessary receive additional evidence (such as exterior elevation renderings) from the applicant or the applicant's agent or attorney. 
(d)  Action by Commission. The Commission shall make its decision at the meeting which the case is heard, unless the case is continued to another date, at which time a decision shall be rendered. The Commission shall issue to the Director of Community Development a certificate of appropriateness, unless the Commission finds that the plan does not conform to the appearance plan and that the proposed building, structure, sign, awning/canopy or landscaping will be inappropriate to or incompatible with the character of the immediate neighborhood or cause substantial depreciation in property values or does not comply with other Village codes or ordinances. 
(e)  Approval by Commission. The Commission shall approve a certificate of appropriateness upon the concurring vote of the majority of the Commission members present. 
(f)  Appeal from decisions of Commission. All final decisions of the Appearance Commission under this section shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., except that cases under site plan approval or involving a planned development, as provided for in the Village Zoning Ordinance, may be reviewed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(g)  Follow-up by Director of Community Development. Upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness, the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon which the certificate was granted shall be turned over to the Director of Community Development, whose responsibility it shall be to determine, from time to time, that the project is in progress and, finally, upon its completion, that there have been no unauthorized deviations from the evidence upon which the granting of the certificate of appropriateness was originally based. The Director of Community Development and Appearance Commission chair may, after the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, approve minor changes in a project. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-785. - Authority to grant relief. 
The Appearance Commission may grant relief upon a finding that such relief is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the appearance code and where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in complying with the provisions of this division and all applicable codes, ordinances and rules and regulations, limited to the following: 
(1)  From the residential fifty-one (51) percent masonry requirement, provided that one (1) or more of the following criteria are met: 
a.  The subject building is frame, and hence an addition may be frame; 
b.  A masonry addition to a frame building is not structurally practical; 
c.  Masonry materials cannot be matched to the original structure; or 
d.  The building, structure, etc. meets the State or National Register criteria for landmark designation. The petitioner shall be responsible for presenting the justification that the subject building meets the established historical or architectural criteria. 
(2)  From specific sign regulations as set forth in Chapter 82. Upon a denial from the Appearance Commission for relief, the petitioner may appeal the decision to the Mayor and Board of Trustees in cases involving site plan approval or a planned development in accordance with the Village Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  From the requirement for a garbage corral and rooftop screening of mechanical equipment. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-786—2-800. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - CONSUMER AFFAIRS COMMISSION[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Cross reference— Consumer protection, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Deceptive practices, 720 ILCS 5/17-1 et seq.; consumer fraud and deceptive business practices act, 815 ILCS 505/1 et seq.; uniform deceptive trade practices act, 815 ILCS 510/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-801. - Creation and Purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Consumer Affairs Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Consumer Affairs Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members. 
(b)  The Purpose of the Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Coordinate consumer affairs activities, educational activities in consumer matters; 
(2)  Recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees ordinances, rules and regulations in relation to consumer affair activities. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-802. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-803—2-830. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - COMMISSION ON FAMILY SERVICES[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
State Law reference— State department of human services, 20 ILCS 1305/1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-831. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Commission on Family Services for the Village for the purpose of promoting the emotional, social and physical well-being of all Skokie residents. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Commission on Family Services for the Village. The Commission shall consist of not more than twenty-four (24) members. 
The Purpose of the Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Provide a forum for the discussion of social service needs; 
(2)  Make recommendations for the maintenance and quality of life; 
(3)  Initiate programs to foster healthy development of all residents throughout their lifespan. 
(4)  Recommend to the Mayor and Board of Trustees policies, programs, and procedures designed to promote the emotional, physical and financial security and well-being of the entire population within the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-832. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-833—2-860. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-861—2-890. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Cross reference— Telecommunications, cable and video services, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Community antenna television systems, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11. 
 
Sec. 2-891. - Creation and Purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Telecommunications Advisory Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Telecommunications Advisory Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of ten (10) members 
(b)  The Purpose of the Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Advise the Mayor and Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to telecommunications and broader technology issues affecting the Village residents. 
(2)  Offer technology education for the benefit of Village residents. 
(3)  Review telecommunications and technology issues that impact the Village residents and call attention to such matters. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-892. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-893—2-909. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-910. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created an Economic Development Commission for the Village. The word "Commission", when used in this Division, shall mean the Economic Development Commission for the Village. The Commission shall consist of twelve (12) members. 
The Purpose of the Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Make recommendations on matters for the improvement of sound economic growth and business development. 
(2)  Examine opportunities for fostering an attractive climate for business within the Village with respect to both existing and potential new business establishments. 
(3)  Recommend additional steps and measures to promote economic growth by retaining businesses and attracting new commerce and industry. 
(4)  Cooperate with Village elected officials and staff to realize appropriate goals and objectives relating to sound business practices and better employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-911. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Commission shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-912—2-929. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 19. - PERFORMING ARTS CENTER BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-930. - Creation and Purpose. 
There is hereby created a Performing Arts Center Board The word "Board", when used in this Division, shall mean the Performing Arts Center Board for the Village. The Board shall consist of nine (9) members. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Sec. 2-931. - Compensation of members; Expenses. 
The chair, vice chair and members of the Board shall receive compensation as established in the Village's annual budget. In no instance shall the chair, vice-chair or members of the Board be paid for more than one (1) meeting per month without the prior approval of the Mayor and shall only be paid for meetings they attend. A meeting, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a public meeting duly called according to law, at which a quorum is present. The chair, vice-chair and members of the Board shall receive no additional compensation or expense allowance for their services. 
Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Board shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4454, § 1, 5-20-2019)  
Secs. 2-932—2-950. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY 
 
Sec. 2-951. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the Village which shall be known as the Skokie Emergency Services and Disaster Agency. The word "Agency," when used in this article, shall mean the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency for the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.1)  
Sec. 2-952. - Membership. 
All members of the Agency shall be appointed by the Village Manager. The Agency shall consist of a Coordinator, Deputy Coordinator, and such other persons as the functions of the Agency shall require. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.2)  
Sec. 2-953. - Vacancies. 
The Village Manager is authorized to fill any vacancy which may arise in the Agency. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.3)  
Sec. 2-954. - Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator. 
(a)  The Coordinator shall be the coordinating head of the Agency and shall be charged with and have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the Agency, subject to the direction and control of the Village Manager. 
(b)  In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability of the Coordinator to serve, the Deputy Coordinator shall act as and perform the duties of the Coordinator until another Coordinator is appointed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.4)  
Sec. 2-955. - Term of members. 
The term of office of each member of the Agency shall be for an undetermined term, and members shall be subject to discharge with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.5)  
Sec. 2-956. - Oath of members. 
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Agency shall, before entering upon such person's duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the Director: 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Skokie Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.6)  
Sec. 2-957. - Office space. 
The Village Manager is authorized to designate office space in the Village Hall and/or elsewhere as may be provided by the Mayor and Board of Trustees for use by the Agency. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.7)  
Sec. 2-958. - Levy of tax for emergency preparedness purposes. 
The Mayor and Board of Trustees may make an appropriation for emergency preparedness purposes, and may levy therefor a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100.00 of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.8)  
Sec. 2-959. - Compensation of members. 
All members of the Agency shall receive such compensation as may be authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.9)  
Sec. 2-960. - Payment of expenses. 
Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Agency shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation ordinance and budget for the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.9)  
Sec. 2-961. - Adoption of rules of order and procedures. 
The Agency may adopt rules of order and procedures for the conduct of its business. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.10)  
Sec. 2-962. - Annual report. 
The Agency, through its chair or other designated member, shall report in writing, during the Village's annual budget process, to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The report shall cover the activities of the Agency for the preceding year. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.11)  
Sec. 2-963. - Functions; duties. 
(a)  The functions of the Agency shall be to protect the public health and safety of persons within the Village and to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood, or natural causes generally. 
(b)  The Agency shall perform the duties within the Village as shall be prescribed in and by the Village emergency preparedness plan as directed by the Village Manager and the State Emergency Services Management Agency programs prepared under the direction of the Governor, and the orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties as may be required pursuant to any reciprocal mutual aid arrangements entered into with any other municipality pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.12)  
Sec. 2-964. - Mobile support team. 
(a)  The Coordinator of the Agency, with the advice and consent of the Village Manager, shall create a mobile support team composed of an indeterminate number of qualified persons, whose functions shall be to aid and reinforce local Agency organizations in areas stricken by such disaster as enumerated in this article, and such team shall be subject to serve at the call of the Governor or the Director of the State Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as provided by statute. 
(b)  The Coordinator, with the approval of the Village Manager, shall designate from among the membership of such mobile support team 1 person to act as the leader thereof. 
(c)  The leader, under the direction and control of the Coordinator, shall be responsible for the organization, administration, training and operation of the mobile support team. 
(d)  Any member of the mobile support team who is a paid employee or officer of the Village while serving on a call to duty or for training exercises by the Governor or State Director shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities incidental to such member's employment or office. Any member who is not a paid employee or officer of the Village while serving on a call to duty or for training exercises by the Governor or State Director shall be entitled to receive the compensation and benefits which are provided by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.13)  
Sec. 2-965. - Shelter managers. 
(a)  In case of national, State or locally declared emergencies, public shelter managers appointed by the Coordinator shall open public shelters, take charge of all stocks of food, water and other supplies stored in such shelters, admit the public according to the Village's shelter use plan and take whatever control measures are necessary for the protection and safety of the occupants. 
(b)  Shelter managers are authorized to use or cause to be used reasonable restraint against those who refuse to cooperate with the routine of shelter living under emergency conditions. Any person who refuses to carry out the orders of the shelter manager and the shelter manager's appointed staff shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.14)  
Sec. 2-966. - Agreements with other municipalities. 
The Coordinator may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.15)  
Sec. 2-967. - Emergency action. 
(a)  If the Governor declares an emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or natural causes, it shall be the duty of the Village Emergency Services and Disaster Agency to cooperate fully with the State Emergency Management Agency and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. 
(b)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to declare the existence of an emergency. If it is deemed necessary to declare the existence of an emergency without delay, the Village Manager, and, in the Manager's absence, the Coordinator, may do so, but such action shall be subject to ratification by the Board of Trustees at its next meeting. 
(c)  Declarations of emergency initiated by the Village Manager or Coordinator shall be valid for a 7-day period. The Village Manager or Coordinator shall have the authority to execute extensions of the initial declaration, in increments of 7 days each, until the emergency precipitating the declaration has been brought under control. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.16)  
Sec. 2-968. - Reimbursement by State. 
The Village Department of Finance may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement made by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training members of the Agency as prescribed by the State Emergency Management Agency Director, compensation for services and expenses of a mobile support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the State Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to Agency activities as provided by law. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.17)  
Sec. 2-969. - Purchases and expenditures. 
(a)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the Agency Coordinator with the concurrence of the Village Manager, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any disaster, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster. 
(b)  In the event of any disaster, the Agency Coordinator is authorized on behalf of the Village, subject to the approval of the Village Manager, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or materials as may be necessary, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, in accordance with the authority granted by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq., except, however, if the Board of Trustees meets at such time the Coordinator shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.18)  
Sec. 2-970. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder or delay or attempt to obstruct, directly or indirectly, any member of the Agency in the performance of the member's duties or in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act prohibited by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, exhibit or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the Agency unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by an authorized Village officer. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.19)  
Sec. 2-971. - Disaster Preparedness Team. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Disaster Preparedness Team as designated by the Village Manager. A representative of the American Red Cross shall be a member of the team. The Village Manager and Mayor shall be ex officio members of the team. 
(b)  The team shall meet at the call of the chair and advise the Coordinator on all matters pertaining to emergency preparedness. 
(c)  The members of the team shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such reasonable and necessary expenses as they actually incur in the performance of their duties in accordance with the Village's budget process. 
(Code 1979, § 4.01.20)  
Secs. 2-972—2-990. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCIAL MATTERS[29] 
Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issuance of municipal notes or bonds saved from repeal, § 1-3(1); ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments or establishing special taxing districts saved from repeal, § 1-3(2); Department of Finance, § 2-211 et seq.; taxation, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Finance, 65 ILCS 5/8-1-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-991. - Exchange of real property. 
(a)  The corporate authorities of the Village shall have the express power to dispose of property through an exchange of properties by negotiation, without public bidding, whenever the corporate authorities, by a ¾ vote thereon, determine the property owned by the Village is no longer necessary, appropriate, required for the use of, profitable to, or for the best interests of the Village, and property can be conveyed to the Village in exchange for the property owned by the Village when ownership of the newly acquired property would be more appropriate and profitable to the Village and in the best interests of the Village, and further when the newly acquired property and other consideration, if any, received in exchange for property owned by the Village is of substantially equal or greater value to the Village as property owned by the Village. 
(b)  The power and authority to dispose of property through an exchange of properties, under certain specified conditions as set forth in this section, by negotiation, without public bidding, shall be in addition to the power and authority specified by 65 ILCS 5/11-76.2-1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 3.27)  
Secs. 2-992—2-1010. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES AND SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
State Law reference— Purchasing and public works contracts, 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-1011. - Purchases generally. 
Subject to the provisions of Section 2-133(9), the Village Manager may authorize and designate the Purchasing Agent to make all purchases, by contract or otherwise, for all departments, commissions and agencies of the Village, except as otherwise provided, of supplies, materials, fuel and equipment for use in all departments of the Village. The Purchasing Agent may solicit bids and award term contracts for contractual services which are required by more than 1 office, department, agency or other unit of the Village government. 
(Code 1979, § 3.081)  
Sec. 2-1012. - Authorization of purchases by Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
No obligation shall be incurred without authority from the Mayor and Board of Trustees as provided by statute, except in the event of an emergency as provided in this division. 
(Code 1979, § 3.082)  
Sec. 2-1013. - Advertising and receipt of bids. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by statute, no purchase shall be made or contracts awarded unless there be equal opportunity for competition, except as otherwise provided in this division. Unless waived by action of the Board of Trustees, all purchases shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Advertising for sealed bids shall be required for all purchases in an amount equal to or greater than the amount specified in 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1 et seq. 
(2)  For all purchases between $5,000.00 and the sealed bid requirement amount the prospective vendor shall submit written price quotations incorporating therein a complete description of the proposed product or service and all data pertaining thereto. 
(3)  For all purchases in which sealed bids are required, the Purchasing Agent shall publish notice of bid requests in a newspaper published or generally circulated within the Village, as well as posting notice in the Village Hall as provided in this division. 
(4)  Purchases of more than $1,000.00 but less than $5,000.00 may be made on the basis of either sealed bids or informal bids secured by telephone or other appropriate means, but, in all purchases, confirmation shall be in writing. 
(5)  Purchases of less than $1,000.00 may be made without bids if, in the judgment of the Village Manager or designee, the circumstances so warrant. 
(b)  Where an emergency occurs which affects the health, safety or general welfare of the public, purchases may be made or contracts awarded by the Village Manager only, without competition, posting, or published notice, subject to the provisions of Section 2-1018. 
(Code 1979, § 3.083)  
Sec. 2-1014. - Award of bid. 
All awards of contracts for purchases shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder as provided by statute, except for purchases of proprietary articles not available in a competitive market and except for procurement of personal services. 
(Code 1979, § 3.084)  
Sec. 2-1015. - Purchases from governmental bodies. 
The Village Manager or designee, may contract with the United States of America or any agency thereof, the State or any political subdivision thereof, the Northwest Municipal Conference or an association of governmental bodies, for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or surplus goods, when such goods cannot be purchased at such time from any other vendor at equal or lower prices, without conforming to the competitive bidding requirement of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 3.085)  
Sec. 2-1016. - Term-supply contracts. 
The Village Manager or designee may advertise for bids for term-supply contracts covering all or any part of the requirements of the Village for such supplies, materials or equipment as the Village may need during the term therein specified. 
(Code 1979, § 3.086)  
Sec. 2-1017. - Bulk purchases. 
Whenever the Village Manager or designee deems it to be in the interest of the Village, the Village Manager or designee may purchase goods, supplies, materials and equipment at wholesale and in bulk, but such purchases shall be paid for only out of funds appropriated for this purpose. 
(Code 1979, § 3.087)  
Sec. 2-1018. - Reporting of emergency purchases. 
The Village Manager shall report any emergency purchase provided for in this division to the Mayor and Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting following the emergency purchase, giving the name of the vendor, the date, a description of the item or items purchased and amount of the purchase, and the nature of the emergency, furnishing all the particulars of the circumstances which endangered the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Code 1979, § 3.088)  
Sec. 2-1019. - Disposal of surplus property. 
Whenever in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee there exists on the official municipal inventory obsolete, excess or uneconomically repairable items of personal property, the following shall occur: 
(1)  Using departments wishing to dispose of personal property shall notify the Village Manager or designee, on such forms that may be prescribed, of all excess supplies. In so doing, the using department may suggest a dollar value per item or per lot of items, however, such suggestion shall not constitute the minimum sale amount. 
(2)  The Village Manager or designee shall be responsible for the sale or disposal of surplus supplies by a method or methods deemed to be most advantageous, convenient and economical to the Village. The Village Manager or designee shall be authorized to sell all surplus with a fair market value of less than $10,000.00, whether by competitive sealed bids, public auction, established markets, sales at posted prices, or trade-in as may be prescribed for the individual situation. In the event of the use of competitive sealed bidding or public auction, the sale shall be made to the highest bidder. In all other instances, the sale shall be made at a fair market price. 
(3)  Surplus items with a fair market value of $10,000.00 or greater per item, or any vehicle, shall be disposed of in the same manner as prescribed in subsection (2) of this section; however, disposal of such items must be specifically authorized by the Mayor and Board or Trustees. 
(4)  Regardless of the fair market value, all vehicular equipment, vehicular apparatus, and over-the-road construction or public safety equipment shall be disposed of in the same manner as prescribed in subsection (2) of this section; however, disposal of such equipment must be specifically authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(5)  If it is determined that surplus supplies have no resale value, or that certain supplies may potentially constitute a liability to the Village, the Village Manager or designee may dispose of such surplus supplies in a safe and economical manner. 
(Code 1979, § 3.089)  
Secs. 2-1020—2-1040. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISQUALIFICATION OF CERTAIN BIDDERS[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
State Law reference— Purchasing and public works contracts, 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1 et seq.; local government professional services selection act, 50 ILCS 510/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-1041. - Persons subject to disqualification. 
No person or business entity shall be awarded a contract or subcontract, for a period of 5 years from the date of conviction or entry of a plea or admission of guilt, if that person or business entity: 
(1)  Has been convicted of an act committed, within the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America, of bribery or attempting to bribe an officer or employee of a unit of State or local government or school district in the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America in that officer's or employee's official capacity. 
(2)  Has been convicted of an act committed, within the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America, of bid-rigging or attempting to rig bids as defined in the Sherman Anti-Trust Act and Clayton Act (15 U.S.C.A. § 1 et seq.). 
(3)  Has been convicted of bid-rigging or attempting to rig bids under the laws of the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America. 
(4)  Has been convicted of an act committed, within the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America, of price-fixing or attempting to fix prices as defined by the Sherman Anti-Trust Act and Clayton Act (15 U.S.C.A. § 1 et seq.). 
(5)  Has been convicted of price-fixing or attempting to fix prices under the laws of the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America. 
(6)  Has been convicted of defrauding or attempting to defraud any unit of State or local government or school district within the State of Illinois, any state in the United States, or the United States of America. 
(7)  Has made an admission of guilt of such conduct as set forth in subsections (1) through (6) of this section, which admission is a matter of record, whether or not such person or business entity was subject to prosecution for the offense or offenses admitted to. 
(8)  Has entered a plea of nolo contendere to charges of bribery, price-fixing, bid-rigging, or fraud, as set forth in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 3.251)  
Sec. 2-1042. - Applicability to business entities; voiding of contracts. 
(a)  "Business entity" defined. The term "business entity," as used in this division, means a corporation, partnership, trust, association, unincorporated business or individually owned business. 
(b)  Disqualification of business entities. Such business entities shall be disqualified as set forth within this division if any owner, partner, or shareholder controls, directly or indirectly, 20 percent or more of the business, or is an officer of the business entity and falls within any subsection of Section 2-1041. 
(c)  Voiding of contracts. Any contract or subcontract found to have been awarded in violation of this division shall be voidable at the discretion of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. Payment for work completed at the time of any such voiding shall be at a quantum meruit rate less a 25 percent penalty. 
(Code 1979, § 3.252)  
Sec. 2-1043. - Disqualification procedure. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. When information shall come to the attention of the Village that a person or business entity has been convicted, made an admission of guilt or plea of nolo contendere or otherwise falls within Section 2-1041(1) through (8), the Village Manager or designee shall send a notice of a hearing to the person or business entity by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall advise the person or business entity that an administrative hearing will be held at a specified time and place for the purpose of determining whether or not that person or business entity should be disqualified pursuant to this division. The hearing officer shall be designated by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. Evidence shall be limited to the factual issue(s) raised by the notice. Persons with relevant information shall testify under oath before a certified reporter. The hearing officer may refuse to hear cumulative evidence, and the hearing officer shall moderate the hearing. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply to the proceedings, but the hearing officer shall strive to elicit the facts, fully and in credible form. The affected person or business entity may be represented by an attorney. 
(c)  Decision; order of disqualification. At the conclusion of the testimony, the hearing officer shall make a finding of whether or not the person or business entity falls within this division based upon a greater weight of the evidence. Disqualification shall be ordered upon a finding that the person or business entity falls within any subsection of Section 2-1041. The hearing officer shall mail a written copy of the finding to the person or business entity affected by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Appeal procedure. A person or business entity disqualified by the hearing officer may appeal such finding to a review board nominated by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. A notice of appeal must be filed with the Village Clerk within 14 days from the date the finding was mailed to the person or business entity. Enforcement of the order of disqualification shall be stayed pending a review by the review board. The person or business entity affected by the disqualification order may file with the Village Clerk written exceptions to the hearing officer's findings. Exceptions must be filed within 10 days of the notice of appeal. No oral presentation shall be made to the review board. 
(e)  Recommendation by review board. The review board shall review the written record, tangible evidence, the hearing officer's finding and the written exceptions and shall expeditiously vote to recommend affirmance or reversal of the hearing officer's finding to the Mayor and Board of Trustees at a regularly scheduled Village Board meeting. The decision of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be mailed to the affected person or business entity by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1979, § 3.253)  
Sec. 2-1044. - Information to be included in bid specifications; certification of compliance. 
Specifications for all bids shall contain the information contained in Sections 2-1041 and 2-1042, and bidders shall certify that they have read such information, and that they are not in violation of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 3.254)  
Secs. 2-1045—2-1070. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[32] 

Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
State Law reference— Code hearing departments, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-1071. - Code Hearing Department. 
There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department, which shall be authorized to conduct administrative adjudication hearings for departments and agencies of the Village for the enforcement of provisions of the ordinances of the Village and this Code, except for violations referenced in Article XII, Section 2-1090 of this Chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 37.01; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 2-1072. - Administrative Law Officer. 
(a)  Generally. The position of Administrative Law Officer is hereby created. The Administrative Law Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The term of the Administrative Law Officer shall be 1 year. The number of Administrative Law Officer positions and compensation shall be approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Administrative Law Officer shall be an attorney admitted to the practice of law in the State. 
(b)  Powers. The Administrative Law Officer shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings, including, but not limited to the power to: 
(1)  Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues. 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations. 
(3)  Hear testimony. 
(4)  Issue subpoenas. 
(5)  Rule upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence. 
(6)  At the request of any party or on the Administrative Law Officer's own motion, subpoena the attendance of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant books, records, or other information. 
(7)  Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing. 
(8)  Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this article or other applicable law. 
(9)  Issue an order or a judgment which includes findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(10)  Impose penalties and fines, issue orders or judgments that are consistent with applicable Code provisions and assess costs upon finding a Respondent liable for the charged violation. An order may include the suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a business license. In no event shall an Administrative Law Officer have the authority to impose a penalty of imprisonment. 
(11)  Enter a judgment requiring a Respondent to: (A) comply with the Code, or other ordinances; (B) bring property owned by, or under the control of, the Respondent into compliance with the Code, or other ordinances; (C) correct a violation of the Code or an ordinance; (D) maintain measures directed to control an animal to ensure the public safety; or (E) humanely euthanize Respondent's animal pursuant to the criteria set forth in Section 18-66 or removal of the animal from the municipal limits of the Village of Skokie. The judgment will include a provision indicating that the Respondent's failure to comply with the judgment may result in the Administrative Law Officer authorizing the Village to take necessary action to bring the property into compliance, correct all violations, bill the Respondent for the Village's expenses and record a lien against all of Respondent's real estate and personal estate, or both, to secure repayment of the Village's expenses. 
(12)  Enter an order authorizing the Village to enforce a judgment and take such actions as are necessary to cause the property owned by, or controlled by a Respondent, to come into compliance with the Code or other ordinance. Such authorization will only take place after the Administrative Law Officer has issued the judgment referenced in clause (11) and the Respondent has failed to comply. The Administrative Law Officer may authorize the Village to send an invoice to the Respondent for all costs or expenses incurred by the Village in causing the property to come into compliance. 
(13)  Conduct a supplemental proceeding to determine and fix the amount of: (A) expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment that remain unpaid; and (B) any unpaid fines or penalties. Respondent shall be provided notice, at least seven days in advance of the supplemental proceeding, by personal service, first class mail or posting on the property where the violation occurred. The Village may, at its option, send notice by certified mail. Upon determining and fixing the amount of money owed to the Village, whether it be unpaid expenses or fines and penalties, the Administrative Law Officer shall authorize the Village to record a lien against all real estate or the personal estate, or both, of the Respondent in the amount of the debt due the Village. 
(c)  Consideration of defenses and extenuating circumstances. Section 11-31.1-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code is not applicable to the administrative hearings referred to in this article. In determining the findings of fact and/or conclusions of law that will constitute an order or judgment issued by the administrative law officer, he or she may, but need not consider any of the defenses listed in section 11-31.1-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code. The administrative law officer may consider any such defense, as well as any extenuating circumstances, including, but not limited to, the nature of the violation, the length of time its existence, the number of warnings or notices given, the failure to comply, and whether the party has been previously charged with the same violation. 
(Code 1979, § 37.02; Ord. No. 03-7-C-3190, § 1, 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 09-6-C-3680, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 2-1073. - Publication and availability of rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of administrative adjudication hearings shall be published and kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, where they shall be available to the public for inspection and copying at nominal rates during normal business hours. 
(Code 1979, § 37.03)  
Sec. 2-1074. - Initiation of hearing process; hearing date. 
(a)  Any authorized department of the Village may institute an administrative adjudication hearing with the Code Hearing Department by forwarding a copy of a notice of violation or a notice of hearing, which names the person alleged to be in violation of the Code or other ordinance, referred to as the "Respondent," to the Code Hearing Department. The Code Hearing Department shall coordinate hearing dates from the various departments. Notice of the violation shall be served in a manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice, including as appropriate, by: (1) personal service upon the Respondent, or employees or agents of Respondent; (2) service by first class mail at a Respondent's address; or (3) posting a notice upon the property. The Village may, at its option, serve the notice of violation by certified mail. 
(b)  The Code Hearing Department shall provide for the prompt disposition of alleged infractions of the ordinances of the Village or this Code and afford such other adjudications as provided by law. When a hearing is set by the Code Hearing Department, it must be set no sooner than 2 weeks from the date of the issuance of the notice of violation, unless an emergency involving public health and safety or the general welfare of the community is involved, in which instance a hearing could be set immediately. 
(Code 1979, § 37.04; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 2-1075. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  Issuance. An Administrative Law Officer may issue a subpoena only if the Administrative Law Officer determines that the testimony of the witnesses or the documents or items sought by the subpoena are necessary to present evidence that is relevant to the case and relates to a contested issue in the case. 
(b)  Contents. A subpoena issued under this article shall identify: 
(1)  The person to whom it is directed; 
(2)  The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any; 
(3)  The date for the appearance of the witness and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena; 
(4)  The time for the appearance of the witness and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena; and 
(5)  The place for the appearance of the witness and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena. 
(c)  Appearance date. In no event shall the date identified for the appearance of a witness or the production of documents or other items be less than 7 days after service of the subpoena. 
(d)  Contesting subpoena. Within 3 business days of being served with a subpoena issued in accordance with this article, the recipient of the subpoena may contest the order authorizing the issuance of the subpoena to the Administrative Law Officer, setting forth in detail the recipient's objections to the subpoena. Upon receipt of the contest to the subpoena, the Administrative Law Officer shall review the objections and, upon review, enter the appropriate order. 
(Code 1979, § 37.05)  
Sec. 2-1076. - Representation at hearings. 
(a)  Village representation. The case for the Village may be presented by any Village employee or by an attorney designated by the Corporation Counsel for the Village. 
(b)  Respondent representation. The case for the Respondent may be presented by the Respondent or an agent or attorney of the Respondent. An agent or attorney shall present a written appearance form indicating that such agent or attorney is authorized to act and to bind the Respondent to any orders entered by the Administrative Law Officer. 
(Code 1979, § 37.06)  
Sec. 2-1077. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  Generally. The Administrative Law Officer shall conduct the hearings in an orderly manner and insist upon proper decorum by all persons present at the hearings. The intent of the hearings is to provide the Village and the Respondent a full and fair presentation of the issues. 
(b)  Testimony and evidence. The strict laws of evidence shall not apply. 
(1)  Testimony. Hearsay testimony may be admitted and relied upon by the Administrative Law Officer in making a determination. 
(2)  Evidence. Relevant documents may be received into evidence without formal proof of authenticity. The Administrative Law Officer shall determine the weight, if any, to be afforded documents received into evidence. 
(c)  Record of proceedings. The Village shall determine the manner in which the record of proceedings shall occur. Either party may request that the proceedings be taken and transcribed by a certified court reporter. The cost of the reporter shall be borne by the party requesting the court reporter. If a recording is made, a Respondent may obtain a copy of the record at the Respondent's cost. 
(d)  Continuances. All administrative law hearings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. For good cause shown, a postponement may be granted in the discretion of the Administrative Law Officer. The purpose of administrative law hearings is to provide a prompt resolution of alleged Code or ordinance violations and, accordingly, the request for and the grant of continuances shall be curtailed to the extent fairness permits. 
(Code 1979, § 37.07; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 2-1078. - Orders. 
(a)  Generally. The Administrative Law Officer shall issue orders or judgments in accordance with Section 2-1072(b). 
(b)  Respondent's failure to comply with the Code or other ordinance. Upon determining a Respondent liable for violation of the Code or other ordinance, the Administrative Law Officer may order the Respondent to comply with the Code or other ordinance within a specified period of time. If the Respondent fails to do so, the Administrative Law Officer, upon the request of the Village, may then authorize the Village to take the necessary actions to cause the property owned, or controlled, by Respondent, to come into compliance with the Code or other ordinance. In such case, the Respondent shall be liable for any and all costs incurred by the Village. The provisions of Section 2-1072(11), (12) and (13) shall be applicable. 
(c)  Compliance bond. In order to ensure that Code or ordinance violations are remedied or fines are paid in a timely manner, an Administrative Law Officer, upon issuing a final determination of liability, may require a Respondent to post with the Village a compliance bond. Whenever it is necessary for the Village to make repairs or otherwise expend funds relating to a Code or ordinance violation for which a bond was posted after a Respondent has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial review procedures, the Administrative Law Officer may, after giving the parties notice and opportunity to be heard, issue an order permitting the Village to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount. The Administrative Law Officer shall order the bond, less the costs incurred by the Village, returned to the Respondent upon proof of compliance with the applicable Code provisions and the payment of applicable fines or costs. 
(d)  Supplemental hearing. In the event a Respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering a Respondent to: (1) comply with the Code or other ordinance; (2) pay any costs incurred by the Village in enforcing the judgment; or (3) pay a fine or penalty, then the Village may, upon proper notice to Respondent, request the Administrative Law Officer to enter an order enforcing the prior judgment. Once determined and fixed by the Administrative Law Officer, the unpaid amount shall be considered a debt due and owing the Village. This debt may be collected in accordance with all applicable law. 
Subsequent to the Administrative Law Officer determining and fixing the amount owed the Village, the Village may cause a lien to be recorded on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the Respondent in the amount of the debt due and owing the Village. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Violations of orders. Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this article, who knowingly fails to comply with an order or judgment issued by an Administrative Law Officer under this article, including the issuance of a subpoena, shall, if the order or judgment is not stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction prior to its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-6 for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution under this section, it shall not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order or judgment, sought judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with an order or judgment, subsequent to its effective date. 
(Code 1979, § 37.08; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 2-1079. - Disposition of fines. 
All fines and other monies paid to the Village in accordance with this article shall be remitted to the Village and deposited in the appropriate Village account as designated by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 37.09)  
Sec. 2-1080. - Punishment of violations by imprisonment. 
In no case may the Code Hearing Department conduct an administrative adjudication hearing for an alleged violation of the ordinances of the Village or this Code where the requested remedy is a punishment of imprisonment. Nothing in this article, however, shall preclude the Village from seeking the remedy of imprisonment in a court of law, including imprisonment for failure to comply with the order of an Administrative Law Officer, pursuant to Section 2-1078(c). 
(Code 1979, § 37.10)  
Sec. 2-1081. - Administrative adjudication procedures not exclusive. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the authority of the Code Hearing Department to conduct administrative hearings in accordance with this article shall not preclude the Village from seeking any remedies for Code or ordinance violations through the use of any other administrative procedure or court proceeding. 
(Code 1979, § 37.11)  
Sec. 2-1082. - Applicability of administrative adjudication procedures. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the ordinances of the Village or this Code, all provisions of this Code or ordinances, except for those specified in subsection (c) of this section, may be enforced by instituting an administrative adjudication hearing with the Code Hearing Department as provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the ordinances of the Village or this Code, any enforcement action, including but not limited to license or permit suspension or revocation, which may be exercised by another department of the Village may also be exercised by the Code Hearing Department as provided in this article. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall affect the jurisdiction of the Liquor Commissioner, the Human Relations Commission, the Firefighters' Pension Fund, the Police Pension Fund, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 37.12)  
Sec. 2-1083. - Appeals. 
Any party to an administrative adjudication hearing may appeal from an adverse ruling to the Circuit Court of Cook County in accordance with the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure and applicable Cook County Circuit Court rules. 
(Code 1979, § 37.13; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC ARTS PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-1084. - Creation of a Public Arts Program. 
(a)  Public Arts Program established. A Public Arts Program is hereby established. The purpose of the Program is the acquisition and ownership of art by the Village for public display, and shall be under the supervision and direction of the Village Manager. 
(1)  Funding of the program. The Public Arts Program (hereinafter "Program") shall be funded through the collection of an Appearance and Arts Fee as stated in Section 46-44. The proceeds from the Appearance and Arts Fees shall be used to purchase, erect, construct, maintain and repair sculptures, art, landscapes, art features, murals, and other physical artistic features or structures for public display (hereinafter referred to as "public art"). 
(2)  Promulgation of rules and regulations. The Village Manager or designee shall develop rules and regulations for the maintenance, structural stability, insurance, and other logistical matters in relation to the public art selected for the program. 
(b)  Public Arts Advisory Committee. There is hereby established a Public Arts Advisory Committee (hereinafter "Committee"). 
(1)  Selection of art. The Committee shall develop policies and goals for the selection and placement of public art and shall approve the public art by a majority vote. 
(2)  Appointment of the Committee. The Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Village Board, and shall be comprised of five individuals, all of whom shall be residents of, or own or operate businesses in, or be employed in, the Village of Skokie. The Mayor may appoint no more than one employee of the Village. The Mayor shall appoint one of the individuals as the chairperson and he or she shall establish a schedule of meetings that will be open to the public. 
(3)  Compensation. Members of the Public Arts Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation, but will be entitled to reasonable reimbursement for expenses incurred in the accomplishment of its mission. 
(4)  Conflict of interest. No committee member or family member of a committee member, shall be eligible to sell or lease their art to the Village, as this is deemed a conflict of interest. 
(c)  Rights and duties of the Village Manager. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee shall determine, with the consultation of the Public Arts Advisory Committee Chairperson, the amount to be proposed in the Village's annual budget for the program, to be approved the mayor and board of trustees. 
(2)  The Village Manager or designee may review the selection decision of the Committee in the event of a three vote majority. 
In the event of approval for the selection of public art by four or more votes, the Village Manager may review the decision solely for purpose of determining whether its cost can be achieved, the feasibility of location and its conformity with the Village Code and all other applicable statutes. 
(Ord. No. 07-4-C-3502, § 1, 4-16-2007)  
Secs. 2-1085—2-1089. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-1090. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the administrative adjudication of violations of those sections, also referred to as regulations, of the Skokie Village Code and the Illinois Compiled Statutes, referenced in Section 2-1093. The violations of (i) standing and parking regulations, and (ii) vehicle compliance regulations, including the (a) condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or (b) display of a municipal wheel tax license, shall be subjected to the administrative adjudication system. The intent is to provide a fair, equitable and efficient system for the enforcement of certain traffic violations. The administrative adjudication system set forth in this Article is established pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 (2006) and Section 1-2.1-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq. (2006). 
The administrative adjudication system shall be applicable to automated traffic law violations upon the written notification by the Village Manager to the Chief of Police and the Traffic Compliance Administrator, informing them that that administrative adjudication of such violations shall begin on a date so specified. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-1091. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases used in this article shall have the following definitions: 
Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System means a system that utilizes a device as defined in Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. Specifically, it means the utilization of a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red signal indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar provision of the Skokie Village Code. 
Automated Traffic Law Violation means a violation of the Section 11-306 of Illinois Vehicle Code, or similar provision of the Skokie Village Code, which is recorded and documented by an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System. 
Business day means any day in which the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Skokie is open to the public for a minimum of seven hours. 
IVC means the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters, and shall include every vehicle defined by section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
Owner means: (1) a person who holds legal title of a vehicle; or (2) in the event (i) a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or (ii) a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. For the purposes of determining the identity of an owner, the records of the Illinois Secretary of State, or such similar office of another state, shall be presumed to be true and correct. Any person may, with the owner's written permission, perform any act that the owner is authorized to perform. 
Wheel tax license means the Village of Skokie vehicle license required by section 106-152 of the Skokie Village Code. The wheel tax license may be referred to at times as a Village vehicle sticker or Village vehicle license and such references shall not have any legal affect on a violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-1092. - Traffic Compliance Administrator. 
The Village Manager shall appoint a Traffic Compliance Administrator (hereinafter the "Administrator"). The Administrator shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance violation notices, Automated Traffic Law Violation notices and other notices required by law or Village ordinances; 
(b)  Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of standing, parking, and compliance regulations and Automated Traffic Law Violations; 
(c)  Establish rules, regulations and procedures for the operation of an administrative adjudication system, with the concurrence of the Village Manager; 
(d)  Operate an administrative adjudication system, including the scheduling of administrative hearings; 
(e)  Compile and revise a vehicle immobilization eligibility list pursuant to Chapter 106, Division 5, and authorize immobilization of a vehicle for the failure to pay five or more final determinations; and 
(f)  Implement procedures for the suspension of driver's licenses, provide notices of impending driver's license suspension and make reports to the Illinois Secretary of State, pursuant to Section 6-306.5 of the IVC, for the failure to pay ten or more final determinations of violation liability. 
The Administrator may delegate duties and assign functions that he or she may otherwise be required or authorized to perform. The Administrator may rely on the address of any Respondent or owner provided by the Illinois Secretary of State, or similar office in another state, on the date of the violation notice and shall not have a duty to inquire further for an updated or new address for a Respondent or owner. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-1093. - Violations and fines. 
Violation of the below listed parking, standing and vehicle compliance regulations shall be punishable by applicable fines and penalties in the dollar amounts provided below. Determination of liability for such violations shall be made pursuant to the Village's administrative adjudication system. 
Violation 	FINE 	FINE PLUS LATE PENALTY 	MAXIMUM PENALTY 
106-39 Violation of provisions of Illinois Vehicle Code, Child Passenger Protection Act or Skokie Park District Ordinances 	$50.00 	$65.00 	$250.00 
106-102 Obstructing traffic 	$50.00 	$65.00 	$250.00 
106-103 Stopping, standing, parking in prohibited locations 	$50.00 	$65.00 	$250.00 
106-103(a)(7) Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant 	$100.00 	$150.00 	$250.00 
106-103(a)(20) Parking in a Fire Lane 	$100.00 	$150.00 	$250.00 
106-105 Prohibited commercial vehicle parking 	$50.00 	$65.00 	$250.00 
106-106 Prohibited parking of boats, boat trailers and recreational vehicles 	$50.00 	$65.00 	$250.00 
106-107 Parking restrictions after snowfall 	$60.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-108 Parking restrictions for loading or unloading a vehicle 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-109 Metered parking violation 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-110 Permit parking in residential areas 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-111 Reserved parking for persons with disabilities 	$250.00 	$300.00 	$350.00 
106-111(c) Permit parking for persons with disabilities in residential areas 	$35.00 	$50.00 	$250.00 
106-112 Parking for prohibited purposes 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-114 Municipal Parking lot restrictions 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-152 Village Wheel tax license required 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
106-157 Village Wheel tax license display 	$50.00 	$75.00 	$250.00 
 
The administrative hearing officer may impose a fine including penalties for late payment up to $250.00; provided, however, the maximum fine and late penalties that may imposed for improper use of a parking space reserved for a disabled person is $350.00. 
A violation notice may be written subjecting any owner of a vehicle to the administrative adjudication process contemplated by this Article for violations of any parking, standing and vehicle compliance regulations in the Code or IVC, regardless of whether it is listed in the above chart. In such case, the owner would be subject to a $35.00 fine, a $50.00 fine plus late payment penalty and a maximum penalty of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3718, § 1, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 1, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 2-1094. - Violation notice. 
A violation notice shall be issued for a violation of a regulation referred to in Section 2-1093. A violation notice may be commonly referred to as a ticket or citation and such reference shall not affect the enforcement of the violation notice. 
(a)  A violation notice shall, at a minimum, state the following information: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the violation; 
(2)  The specific regulation violated; 
(3)  The fine that is assessed; 
(4)  The vehicle make; 
(5)  The state registration number of the vehicle, or if no registration number is available, then the vehicle identification number; 
(6)  The maximum amount that can be imposed including late penalties; and 
(7)  The Village identification number of the person issuing the notice. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is in violation of the standing, parking or compliance regulations listed in Section 2-1093, except for seat belt or child passenger protection statutes, each and every owner of the vehicle shall be prima facie liable and responsible for the violation and subject to the applicable fine and penalties for late payments. An owner shall be known as a "Respondent." Any police officer, parking enforcement officer or other person so designated by the Village Manager, who observes a violation may issue a violation notice. The violation notice shall be served on the owner of the vehicle by affixing it to the vehicle, or by handing the violation notice to the operator of the vehicle, if an operator is present. 
(c)  Whenever any operator or passenger is in violation of section 2-1093 for violation of seat belt requirements stated in Section 12-603.1 of the IVC or the Child Passenger Protection Act, the violation notice shall be served on the person in violation of the regulations by handing the notice to that person. The person identified in the violation notice for violating said statutes shall be known as the "Respondent." 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is determined to have committed an Automated Traffic Law Violation, each and every owner of the vehicle shall be prima facie liable and responsible for the violation and subject to the applicable fine and penalties for late payments. An owner shall be known as a "Respondent." The Village, or its approved contractor, operating the Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System shall serve a violation notice on each owner of the vehicle by first class mail to the address of the owner as recorded by the Secretary of State or such similar office in another state. 
(e)  Whenever any vehicle or trailer is observed in violation of the regulation requiring the purchase or proper display of a Village wheel tax license, issuance and service of the violation notice shall be accomplished in the same manner and method specified in paragraph (b) of this Section. 
(f)  The Village's Director of Finance, or designee, is authorized to make a comparison of the list of vehicles or trailers registered to owners having an address in the Village, as provided by the records of the Secretary of State, to the list of vehicles or trailers that have purchased a Village wheel tax license. In the event the Director, or designee, determines that there is a vehicle or trailer registered to an owner having an address in the Village, but a valid or current Village wheel tax license for the vehicle or trailer has not been purchased in compliance with this Code, then the Director or designee shall issue a violation notice on each and every owner of the vehicle or trailer. This notice shall be served by first class mail or in person. 
(g)  The failure to name a specific owner on a violation notice does not relieve an unnamed owner from being liable or responsible for the violation, nor does it affect enforceability of the violation notice against any owner. The Village may seek to collect all fines and late penalties from any owner whether or not that owner was named on the violation notice, provided, however, that should an owner pay a fine and late penalties, the Village may not collect the same fine or late penalties from another owner. 
(h)  The person issuing and serving a violation notice shall certify as to the correctness of the facts entered on the violation notice by signing his or her name to the notice at the time of service, or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, by signing a single certificate to be kept by the Administrator attesting to the correctness of all violation notices produced by the device while it was under the person's control. In the case of an Automated Traffic Law Violation, a determination must be made by a technician, based on an inspection of recorded images, that the vehicle was being operated in violation of Section 11-208.6 of the IVC. The technician shall execute the appropriate form certifying that a determination of violation was made. 
(i)  The original or a copy of the violation notice, or a printed record of the notice generated by a computer device, showing the facts entered on the notice, shall be retained by the Administrator. A violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance with this Section, a copy of the notice, or the computer generated record, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The notice, copy, or computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding without the need to provide foundation. The person issuing or certifying the violation notice is not required to appear at an administrative or legal proceeding in order to have the violation notice admitted. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-1095. - Administrative adjudication. 
Each person to whom a violation notice is issued against (a "Respondent"), shall have an opportunity for a hearing before an Administrative Hearing Officer (the "Hearing Officer"). The hearing will be conducted at the request of the Respondent on a scheduled date, at which the Respondent may contest the merits of the alleged violation. 
A Respondent may be represented by counsel at their own expense but need not secure such representation. The formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at the administrative hearing, however, all evidence offered must be relevant to the issues raised. 
The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The Hearing Officer shall not be an employee of the Village. The Hearing Officer's compensation will be set by ordinance. The Hearing Officer shall serve until such person is removed by the Mayor or replaced by a subsequent appointment of a new Hearing Officer by the Mayor with the consent of the Board. The Hearing Officer shall be an attorney, in good standing, that has been licensed to practice law in Illinois for more than five years prior to the appointment and must demonstrate sufficient training and experience to serve in the capacity as a Hearing Officer. In the event the Hearing Officer is unable to attend a scheduled hearing, the Corporation Counsel may appoint an attorney to serve as a temporary Hearing Officer. 
The Hearing Officer shall have the authority and powers that are necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings, including, but not limited to, the powers granted to an Administrative Law Officer in Section 2-1072 (b) of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 2-1096. - Rights and duties of respondents. 
Each Respondent shall have the rights and duties stated herein. 
(a)  A Respondent shall, upon issuance and service of the violation notice pursuant to this Division, have 21 days from the date of issuance of the notice to do one of the following: 
(1)  Pay the amount of the fine indicated on the notice; 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing either in person at Village Hall or by mail; or 
(3)  Contest the merits of the alleged violation in writing. The proper information, as specified on the instructions attached to the violation notice, and all supporting documentation on behalf of the Respondent's position, must be submitted to the Administrator. The submittal may be mailed or delivered to Village Hall. 
In order to comply with the 21 day deadline referenced above, the Respondent must either appear at Village Hall to make the appropriate payment, request or written contest no later than the 21st day after the issuance of the violation notice, or if mailed, the submittals must be postmarked with a date that is no later than the 21st day after the issuance of the violation notice. 
(b)  In the event the Respondent pays the full amount of the fine within 21 days of the date of issuance of the violation notice, then such payment shall be a final disposition of the violation. 
(c)  In the event a Respondent makes a request for an administrative hearing within 21 days of the date of issuance of the violation notice, whether made in person or by mail, then the Administrator shall schedule the violation to be heard at the next available hearing date. The Administrator shall provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the Respondent by first class mail or in person. 
(d)  In the event a Respondent submits a written contest of the violation notice within 21 days of the issuance of the violation notice, the Administrator shall submit the written contest, together with all documentation provided by Respondent, and other relevant information, to the Hearing Officer. In the event a Respondent does not submit a written contest within 21 days of the date the violation notice is issued, the Respondent is deemed to have waived the right to submit a contest by mail. 
(e)  In the event a Respondent does not take any of the actions specified in paragraph (a) above, then the Administrator shall cause an additional notice (hereinafter the "Late Notice") to be sent by first class mail to the Respondent. For violations other than seat belt or child passenger protection regulations, the Late Notice shall be sent to at least one owner, but may be sent to each and every owner of the vehicle, if there are multiple owners, naming them as additional Respondents. The Late Notice shall inform the Respondent(s): 
(1)  that payment is late and a penalty for late payment is imposed; 
(2)  Respondent must pay the fine and penalty for late payment, schedule a hearing date to contest the violation, or contest the violation in writing pursuant to the procedures stated in paragraph (a)(3), above, within 14 days of the date of the Late Notice, otherwise a determination of liability will be issued by the Hearing Officer and a fine and penalty imposed up to $350; 
(3)  the ability to contest by mail has been waived; 
(4)  of all of the same information regarding the violation as required on the initial violation notice (or attach a copy of the violation notice); and 
(5)  that the failure to pay amounts owed or appear at a requested hearing shall result in a determination of violation liability and after the appropriate period for judicial review, the amount of the fine and penalty for late payment shall become a debt due and owing the Village. 
(f)  All hearing dates scheduled by the Respondent are firm. A Respondent is entitled to reschedule a hearing date one time. The request to reschedule must be made by a Respondent, or someone authorized in writing to act on the Respondent's behalf, in person or in writing to the Administrator prior to the hearing date. All other requests to continue a hearing must be made before the Hearing Officer. 
(g)  Unless an owner provides written notice of a new or different address, the Administrator may rely upon the address of each owner as indicated on the records kept by the Secretary of State, or similar office in another state, as of the date of the issuance of the violation notice. Subsequent to the issuance of a violation notice, it is the duty of each Respondent and owner to keep his or her address of record current with the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 2-1097. - Defenses. 
(a)  The only defenses available to a Respondent to contest a violation notice regarding standing or parking of a vehicle, or the condition or use of vehicle equipment compliance (other than for seat belt or child passenger protection regulations), or an Automated Traffic Law Violation, are as follows: 
(1)  The cited vehicle or license plate was stolen at the time the violation notice was issued; 
(2)  The facts alleged in the violation notice contain inaccurate information to the extent that the facts fail to establish that the violation occurred; 
(3)  The Respondent was not the registered owner of the referenced vehicle on the date of the violation notice, provided, however, a determination in favor of one Respondent shall not have any affect on the liability of any other owner of the vehicle; or 
(4)  Other verifiable information exists which proves that the violation did not occur. 
(b)  The only defenses available to a Respondent upon the issuance of a violation notice for failure to purchase or display a wheel tax license are as follows: 
(1)  The Respondent did not own or lease the vehicle or trailer at the time the violation notice was issued, or had not exceeded the period of time allowed for the purchase or display of the license pursuant to this Code; or 
(2)  All owners of the vehicle or trailer are not required by State law to display or purchase a wheel tax license. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-1098. - Determinations by the hearing officer. 
The Hearing Officer shall preside over all proceedings at the administrative hearing. The Hearing Officer shall make a determination of violation liability or no liability based upon the facts presented at the hearing. Such determination shall be included in an order entitled, "Hearing Officer's Determination." The standard of proof is a preponderance of the evidence. 
(a)  In the event a Respondent makes a timely request for administrative hearing, however, Respondent does not appear at the hearing or does not pay the fine prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer shall make a determination of violation liability and enter the appropriate findings or orders imposing the fine. 
(b)  In the event the Administrator has issued a Late Notice, however, Respondent does not request a hearing, contest the violation in writing, or does not pay the fine and late penalty within 14 days of the Late Notice, the Hearing Officer shall make a determination of violation liability and enter the appropriate findings or orders imposing the fine and penalties up to the maximums allowed by law. 
(c)  In the event a Respondent has timely filed a written contest to the violation notice, then the Hearing Officer shall review all information submitted by Respondent and other relevant information presented by the Administrator. The Hearing Officer shall make a determination of liability or no liability, solely based upon the documents and information presented, and enter the appropriate findings or orders. 
(d)  In the event a Respondent appears at an administrative hearing to contest, or present a defense to, the merits of the violation notice, the Hearing Officer shall allow the Respondent to present relevant testimony and documents, or other evidence, in support of Respondent's position. The person issuing and serving the violation notice is not required to appear at the administrative hearing due to the properly prepared violation notice being deemed to be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. The Hearing Officer shall make a determination of violation liability or no liability and enter the appropriate findings or orders. 
In the event the Hearing Officer makes a determination of violation liability, the appropriate order shall be mailed by the Village via first class mail to Respondent, and to other owners if the other owners were given notice of the pending violation. The order shall bear the date of mailing on its face and specify the amount owed for a fine and penalty for late payment incurred, if any. In the event the Hearing Officer determines that a Respondent is not liable for the violation, then the appropriate order shall be entered and made a part of the file. If the finding of no liability was the result of a contest by mail, then a copy of the order shall be mailed via first class mail to the Respondent. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 2-1099. - Petition to set aside a determination. 
Whenever an administrative hearing is held for the purpose of determining the question of violation liability, and the Respondent does not appear, the Respondent may file a written petition with the Administrator to set aside a Hearing Officer's Determination of violation liability. 
(a)  In order to have such petition considered by the Administrator, the Respondent must file the petition with the Administrator in person or by mail no later than 14 days after the date that the Hearing Officer's Determination of violation liability is mailed to Respondent. The date on the Hearing Officer's Determination informing the Respondent of violation liability shall be presumed to be the date that the order was mailed unless another mailing date is indicated. 
(b)  The only grounds for setting aside the Hearing Officer's Determination are limited to: (i) the Respondent was not the owner of the vehicle referenced on the date of the alleged violation, provided, however, such defense is not available for a seat belt or child passenger protection regulations; (ii) the fine and penalty, if any is applicable, was paid prior to the hearing; or (iii) an excusable reason for the failure to appear at the hearing or request a new date for a hearing, supported by documents or other credible information, upon which a new hearing date will be assigned by the Administrator and notice of such date will be mailed to Respondent. 
(c)  Upon the Administrator's denial of a petition to set aside the Hearing Officer's Determination of liability, or upon the expiration of the 14 day period for filing such petition without a filing being made, the Hearing Officer's determination is a "final decision" for purposes of judicial review. The Administrator shall notify the Respondent of the decision on the petition via first class mail. Should the Administrator assign a new hearing date pursuant to paragraph (b)(iii), above, then the determination is not considered a final decision. Should the Respondent fail to appear at the newly assigned hearing date, then the Respondent shall not have the right to petition the Administrator to set aside a subsequent determination of violation liability and the Hearing Officer's Determination of violation liability shall be a "final decision" for purposes of judicial review. 
(d)  A Respondent that appears at the administrative hearing does not have the right to petition the Administrator to set aside the Hearing Officer's Determination. In such case, the Hearing Officer's Determination is a "final decision" for purposes of judicial review. 
(e)  A Respondent does not have the right to file a petition to set aside a Hearing Officer's Determination which is based upon the Respondent's failure to request a hearing, or pay the fine and late penalty, within 14 days of the Late Notice. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 2-1100. - Judicial review; notice of final determination of violation liability. 
All Respondents have the right to seek judicial review of any Hearing Officer's Determination that is or becomes a "final decision". Any petition seeking judicial review must be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County in accordance with the Administrative Review Act. 
Upon the conclusion of any judicial review procedures wherein the Hearing Officer's Determination is upheld by the Circuit Court, or after the expiration of the time for which a petition for judicial review is allowed to be filed without the petition being filed, then the Administrator will send a "Notice of Final Determination of Violation Liability" to the Respondent, and to other owners if the other owners had received prior notice of the violation. Upon the issuance of a Notice of Final Determination of Violation liability the amount owed the Village shall be collectable by the Village pursuant to all procedures allowed by law or this Code, including, but not limited to, seeking a judgment in the Circuit Court or referral to a debt collection agency. 
The Notice of Final Determination of Violation Liability shall: 
(a)  advise the Respondent that the Hearing Officer's Determination of violation liability is final and has resulted in a debt due and owing the Village for the amounts of any unpaid fine and penalties, if any; 
(b)  contain a warning that the failure to pay any fine and penalties due and owing the Village, may result in the Village taking actions to collect the amounts owed, including, but not limited to, the filing of a petition with the Circuit Court to have the unpaid amounts rendered a judgment or referring said debt to a debt collection person; 
(c)  state that the failure to pay any fine and penalties may result in suspension of the person's driver's license for (i) 10 or more Final Determinations of Violation Liability, pursuant to Section 6-306.5 of the IVC, or (ii) 5 or more Automated Traffic Law Violations, pursuant to Section 11-208.6 of the IVC; or 
(d)  state that the failure to pay any fine and penalties may result in the vehicle being eligible for the vehicle immobilization program for 5 or more Final Determinations of Violation Liability. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 3, 3-17-2008)  
Secs. 2-1101—2-1199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY 
 
Sec. 2-1200. - [Purpose.] 
It is the policy of the Village of Skokie to work towards becoming a "Sustainable Community." 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3652, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-1201. - [Strategy development.] 
A strategy, that includes an action plan, shall be developed to ensure steady progress towards becoming a Sustainable Community. A successful strategy and action plan must be comprehensive across the Village governmental activities, and eventually embrace the conduct and behaviors of residents, property owners and businesses. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3652, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-1202. - [Environmental Officer designated.] 
The Village Manager shall designate an employee to perform the functions of an "Environmental Officer," whose duties shall include coordinating compliance with the Environmental Best Practices Policy, as stated in Section 2-1204 of this Article, and assist with environmental analysis or provision of information in the decision-making process. The Environmental Officer may utilize the service of assistants and shall have such other duties as assigned by the Village Manager. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3652, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-1203. - [Examination by Decision Makers.] 
All decisions made by the corporate authorities and executive staff (the "Decision Makers") shall examine the outcome in relation to the sustainable and environmental policies, goals and objectives (the "Environmental Best Practices Policy"). This examination shall consider the economical feasibility of such outcome utilizing alternative approaches before committing resources. The Environmental Best Practices Policy shall apply to decisions relating to: (i) Village government operations and expenditures; and (ii) efforts or actions to encourage residents, property owners and businesses, including developers and contractors, to adhere to the goals and objectives stated. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3652, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-1204. - [Environment Best Practices Policy.] 
The Environmental Best Practices Policy shall develop over time. Initially, the Policy requires that Decision Makers take into consideration the following goals and objectives: 
a.  Limit the amount of water, fuels, energy, minerals, wood fiber, paper products, plastics, pesticides, and chemicals used by the Village to the minimum amount necessary to adequately deliver products and services to residents, property owners and businesses. This may be achieved by various techniques including, but not limited to, maximizing efficiencies or use of alternative resources. 
b.  Reduce the production and release of pollution through a combination of technology and product or process substitution. 
c.  Avoid adverse environmental consequences by protecting air and water quality, water table, natural conditions, wildlife habitat and physical environment. 
d.  Evaluate the true cost of goods or products by factoring the useful life, operation and maintenance costs, and ultimate disposal costs for comparison purposes. When cost considerations are nearly equal, preference to contractors or vendors that use energy efficient or reused or recycled products should be a priority. 
e.  Recycle and reuse as much of the Village's waste stream as is economically and technically feasible. 
f.  Explore and encourage water treatment methods that treat storm water as an asset for reuse and to recharge the ground water supply. 
g.  Associate with coalitions of governments and other organizations and entities to achieve the goals and objective. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3652, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 2-1205. - [Environmental Education and Outreach Program.] 
The Village shall undertake an on-going Environmental Education and Outreach Program designed to inform residents, property owners and businesses that everyday individual actions do matter. The Program shall, amongst other things: 
(a)  Provide useful and actionable information; 
(b)  Explore sustainable opportunities and assist residents in living a more sustainable lifestyle; 
(c)  Improve the public's understanding of recycling opportunities; 
(d)  Encourage residents, and others, to present their ideas and suggestions to the Sustainable Environmental Advisory Commission or the Village; and 
(e)  Establish a series of awards to be presented to residents, property owners or businesses for actions consistent with the goals and objectives stated in Section 2-1204 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3652, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Secs. 2-1206—2-1230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - SIDEWALK INSTALLATION AND REPAIR 
 
Sec. 2-1231. - Creation of a Sidewalk Installation and Repair Program. 
A Sidewalk Installation and Repair Program is hereby established. The purpose of the program is to install public sidewalks where they do not exist, repair existing public sidewalks, and repair parkways, and shall be under the supervision and direction of the Village Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 12-5-C-3905, § 1, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 2-1232. - Funding of the program. 
The Sidewalk Installation and Repair Program shall be funded through the collection of a Sidewalk Installation and Repair Fee as stated in Section 46-45. The proceeds from the Sidewalk Installation and Repair Fees shall be used to install public sidewalks where they do not exist, repair existing public sidewalks, and repair parkways. 
(Ord. No. 12-5-C-3905, § 1, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 2-1233. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The Village Manager or designee shall develop administrative rules and regulations for the Sidewalk Installation and Repair Program. 
(Ord. No. 12-5-C-3905, § 1, 5-21-2012)  
ARTICLE XV. - UTILITY RELOCATION AND UNDERGROUNDING 
 
Sec. 2-1234. - Creation of a Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Program. 
A Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Program is hereby established. The purpose of the program is to relocate or place utilities underground that are located in a public right-of-way for safety, to allow the redevelopment of sites, or for area redevelopment programs, and shall be under the supervision and direction of the Village Manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 2, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 2-1235. - Funding of the program. 
The Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Program shall be funded through the collection of a Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Fee as stated in Section 46-45. The proceeds from the Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Fees shall be used to relocate or place utilities underground that are located in a public right-of-way underground for safety, to allow the redevelopment of sites, or for area reinvestment programs. 
(Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 2, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 2-1236. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The Village Manager or designee shall develop administrative rules and regulations for the Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Program. 
(Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 2, 2-19-2019)  
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; consumer protection, ch. 34; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; advertisement of gambling place, § 70-276; signs, ch. 82; advertising on public passenger vehicles, § 114-46. 
State Law reference— Deceptive advertising act, 720 ILCS 295/1a et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BILLPOSTING AND DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Charitable solicitations, § 78-91 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Dropping handbills from aircraft, 620 ILCS 5/43b. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billposter means any person engaging in the business for hire of posting, fastening, nailing, or otherwise affixing any written, painted or printed matter of any kind, or other form of reproduction thereof (referred to in this article as a "sign"), containing a message or information of any kind, to any outdoor billboard, or to or upon any bridge, fence, pole, post, sidewalk, or tree, or to or upon the exterior of any other structure except that the terms of this definition shall not apply to or include any such sign mounted on, fastened to, or suspended from the outside of any building or other structure, in accordance with and authorized by any provisions of an ordinance or statute, either for any public convenience or use, or regulating the construction or use of so-called outdoor display signs, whether such display signs are illuminated or not. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, or booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or things; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sale; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind when the performance, exhibition or event is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; or 
(5)  Which is not covered by the definition of a sign. 
Handbill distributor means any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. Postal Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than 4 issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, or booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the definition of a sign, or a commercial handbill, or a newspaper. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Code 1979, § 44.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-32. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for.  
Sec. 6-33. - Violations declared nuisance. 
Engaging in business as a billposter or handbill distributor in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 6-34. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, or of newspapers. 
(Code 1979, § 44.10) 
Cross reference— Newsracks, § 26-1001 et seq.  
Sec. 6-35. - Special permit for community projects. 
(a)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees may issue a special permit for any of the activities mentioned in this article pursuant to a petition filed with the Board of Trustees for such special permit, provided the petitioner files with the petition satisfactory proof of the following: 
(1)  The purpose of the special permit is for a worthwhile community eleemosynary project. 
(2)  The permit shall not be available to any political organization. 
(3)  The material so posted will not block traffic signs. 
(b)  The petitioner shall deposit a cash bond with the Village Manager or designee, the amount of which will be determined upon the hearing on the petition, to ensure the removing of such material posted within 2 days after the time limit of the permit granted by the Board of Trustees. The Village shall be entitled to a fee as provided in Section 46-41 per item of material so posted which the Village has to remove upon the expiration of the time limit granted by the Board of Trustees. Such compensation may be taken from the cash bond deposited. 
(Code 1979, § 44.13)  
Sec. 6-36. - Posting handbills on public property or fixtures. 
No person shall post, paint or otherwise fix any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, or any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph or telephone pole, or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon any part of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States or the State, or the ordinances of the Village. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, and shall also pay the cost of removal of the sign and repair or replacement of public property or fixtures. 
(Code 1979, § 44.02)  
Sec. 6-37. - Distributing handbills in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cast any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within the Village and it shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. It shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such noncommercial handbill. 
(Code 1979, § 44.03) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 6-38. - Placing handbills on or in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any noncommercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the handbill. 
(Code 1979, § 44.04) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 106.  
Sec. 6-39. - Depositing handbills on vacant private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1979, § 44.05)  
Sec. 6-40. - Depositing handbills on posted premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any commercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1979, § 44.06)  
Sec. 6-41. - Depositing handbills on inhabited private premises. 
No person shall deposit any commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited except by handing or transmitting directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this article, a person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used. 
(Code 1979, § 44.07)  
Sec. 6-42. - Name and address of printer and distributor to be printed on handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof the name and address of the following: 
(1)  The person who printed, wrote, compiled or manufactured the handbill. 
(2)  The person who caused the handbill to be distributed; provided, however, that in the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers or agents of the person sponsoring the handbill shall also appear thereon. 
(Code 1979, § 44.08)  
Sec. 6-43. - Certain subject matter prohibited on handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit any sign, or any commercial or noncommercial handbill: 
(1)  Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or which urges any unlawful conduct, or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public peace or good order of the community; or 
(2)  Which contains obscene, libelous or other language which is made unlawful by any law of the Village, the State, or the United States. 
(Code 1979, § 44.12)  
Sec. 6-44. - Allowing use of premises for posting prohibited handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of premises to permit any person to post, affix or otherwise attach to any building, structure or fixture located upon such premises, whether such fixture to be natural or artificial, any poster or handbill containing any matter prohibited by the terms of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 44.11)  
Secs. 6-45—6-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a billposter for hire or as a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person to distribute commercial handbills, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. This shall not apply to any person advertising such person's business or activity upon the person's own premises, if such business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 44.09(1))  
Sec. 6-72. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 44.09(2))  
Sec. 6-73. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 6-74. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 6-75. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 6-76. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 6-77. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 6-78. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 6-77. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 6-79. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 44.09(3))  
Sec. 6-80. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Sec. 6-81. - Applicability of requirements to licensee's employees. 
Persons acting for licensees under this article, as agents or employees, in the posting or distributing of any such signs or handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a fee, but each such person shall comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 44.09(4))  
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety, in effect deleting Ch. 10 and enacting a new Ch. 10 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former Ch. 10, see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Liquor license fees, § 46-80; consumption of alcoholic beverage in or on public way or place prohibited, § 70-122(16). 
Federal law reference— Intoxicating liquor, 27 U.S.C.A. § 121 et seq. 
State Law reference— Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Scope. 
This chapter shall apply to the service, distribution, sale, and any transaction of the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, within the Village of Skokie. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-2. - Interpretation of chapter. 
This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Skokie shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be fostered and promoted. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-3. - Definitions. 
Unless the context shall otherwise require, terms used in this chapter shall have the definitions given in the Liquor Control Act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., as amended from time to time. Where not otherwise qualified, the term license or licensee wherever used in this chapter means a license or licensee of the Village of Skokie under this chapter. Any term in this chapter that is not defined in the Liquor Control Act or the Alcoholism and Other Drug Abuse and Dependency Act shall then have the following meanings: 
BASSET shall mean and refer to Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education Training Program, or a comparable program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission. 
Brew Pub means an entity that manufactures beer only at a designated premises to make sales to importing distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use and consumption only, that stores beer at the designated premises, and that is allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises, provided that a brew pub licensee shall not sell for off-premises consumption more than 50,000 gallons per year. 
Liquor Control Act refers to Illinois State Law, cited as 235 ILCS 5/1.1 et seq. 
Liquor Control Commissioner refers to the duly elected or appointed Mayor of the Village of Skokie, who shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of the Liquor Control Act as it relates to the Village of Skokie and of such Ordinances and Resolutions relating to liquor. 
Operation Plan means an addendum to the Skokie Liquor License Application which shall include, but not be limited to the following information and as requested by and approved by the Local Liquor Commissioner as part of the application process: 
a)  A floor plan including where the sale of alcoholic liquor shall take place in the establishment and where the designated area for consumption of alcohol liquor shall be, 
b)  The types of alcoholic liquor that will be served and the hours of service and consumption. 
Underage person means any person under 21 years of age. 
Veterans' organization means any association or corporation organized not for profit, members of which must have been members of the armed forces or military department of the United States government (a requirement of membership), and which receive their authority for such organization from a national kindred organization. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4152, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 10-4. - Penalties. 
Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance, or in any rule or regulation of the Village of Skokie, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code, any ordinance, or any rule or regulation, the performance of any act is required or the failure to perform any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person upon the violation of any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed that which is allowed, according to Illinois Municipal Code and the Illinois Liquor Control Act, for each such offense. The Corporation Counsel may file a civil action to recover any penalty or fine against any such person, provided, however, that the filing of such civil action shall preclude incarceration or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-5. - Underage person. 
(a)  Prohibited. No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to an underage person, or to any intoxicated person. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to an underage person, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service in compliance with Section 10-7(b). 
(b)  Underage person not allowed. No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall permit an underage person to be or remain on or in any portion of a licensed premises unless the Underage Person is: (i) accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, (ii) on the premises for the purchase or consumption of food or for the establishment's primary use if other than the sale of alcoholic liquor, or (iii) employed by the licensee. 
(c)  Unlawful consumption, purchase or possession. No underage person shall consume, purchase, or have in his or her possession, alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit an underage person, of which he or she may be the parent or guardian, to violate any of the provisions of this Article. 
(d)  Unlawful for underage person to draw, pour or mix. It shall be unlawful for an underage person to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises, however, any person 18 years or older may serve alcoholic liquor in such premises. No underage person may sell or serve alcoholic liquor for consumption off of the premises of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-6. - Purchase or acceptance of gift of alcoholic liquor by underage person; identification cards; warnings. 
(a)  Prohibited gift or delivery. No underage person shall accept a gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  Photo identification. If a licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the insufficient age of the prospective purchaser, he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of adequate written evidence of identity, including, but not limited to, a photograph, and of the fact that the purchaser or recipient is over the age of 21 years (hereinafter "identification card"), issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operations license or identification card issued to a member of the Armed Services. 
(c)  No sale. If a licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, believes or has reason to believe that the ultimate recipient of alcoholic liquor to be purchased is of insufficient age or is using a forged or false identification card, he or she shall not make the sale. 
(d)  Forged or false identification. No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept the delivery, or have the possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. 
(e)  Warnings displayed. In every tavern or other place in the Village of Skokie where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village and which shall read substantially as follows: 
WARNING TO ALL PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A CRIMINAL ARREST AND FINE IF YOU PURCHASE, OR ACCEPT A GIFT OF, ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR HAVE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN YOUR POSSESSION, OR IF YOU HAVE IN YOUR POSSESSION A FALSE, FORGED, ALTERED OR DEFACED IDENTIFICATION CARD WHICH MISREPRESENTS YOUR AGE. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-7. - Liability for permitting minors to possess or consume alcoholic liquor. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises in the Village of Skokie to permit an underage person to possess or consume alcoholic liquor on the premises, except as stated in subsection (b). 
(b)  This section does not prohibit the possession, dispensing or consumption of a fluid ounce or less of alcoholic liquor to an underage person while in the performance of a religious ceremony or service supervised by an individual 21 years of age or over. 
(c)  No person shall permit a gathering at their residence, or on property owned by the person or under the person's control, where any one or more underage persons are in possession of or are consuming any alcoholic beverages. No person that believes an underage person has consumed alcoholic liquor shall allow that underage person to leave a residence, or property owned by the person, or under the person's control, except when the underage person is accompanied by the underage person's parent or legal guardian. For the purpose of this section where the residence, or a property, has a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence, or property, is occupied or controlled by the tenant or lessee. There is a rebuttable presumption that the owner or occupant of said residence, or property, permitted such conduct, unless the contrary is established by a preponderance of the evidence, even if said owner or occupant is not on the premises at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2014, changed the title of § 10-7 from "Liability for permitting minors to possess or consume alcohol" to "Liability for permitting minors to possess or consume alcoholic liquor."  
Sec. 10-8. - Consumption at a gathering. 
It shall be unlawful for an underage person to be present where alcoholic liquor is being consumed by another underage person, unless done in accordance with an exception set out in Sections 10-5 or 10-7. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-9. - Possession in a motor vehicle. 
No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in, upon or about any motor vehicle, except in the original package with the seal unbroken or as allowed by Illinois law. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-10. - Possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor on Village property or public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall possess an open container of alcoholic liquor or consume alcoholic liquor on (i) property owned by, or leased to, the Village, or (ii) public rights-of-way, except for an area or location that the Village has approved such possession or consumption, as specified in paragraphs (b) or (c) of this section. 
(b)  Possession of an open container, and consumption, of alcoholic liquor, may be allowed on property owned by, or leased to, the Village, or in public rights-of-way, if approved by an ordinance specifying the location where such possession or consumption may take place. 
(c)  Possession of an open container, and consumption, of alcoholic liquor may occur in a public right-of-way, if the possession and consumption is: (i) in an outdoor dining area approved by the Village; (ii) in conjunction with the service of food; and (iii) the food service business operating the outdoor dining area allows alcoholic liquor to be consumed within its inside business operations. If the food service business is a liquor licensee, then it may serve alcoholic liquor to patrons in the approved outdoor dining area. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 11-9-C-3853, § 1, 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 10-11. - Consumption in parking lot adjacent to licensed establishment. 
(a)  In parking lots. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages in any parking lot or open area adjacent to any establishment operating with a liquor license. For the purposes of this section, "open area" shall not include those areas wherein outdoor dining, or special event, is operating under a valid permit from the Village. 
(b)  Responsibility of owner and/or manager. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in violation of this Section 10-11. 
(c)  Posting of signs. Any licensee operating an establishment with a liquor license must post the following sign on the property where the establishment is located. 
PURSUANT TO SECTION 10-11 OF THE SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE, IT IS UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN ANY PARKING LOT OR OPEN AREA ADJACENT TO AN ESTABLISHMENT OPERATING WITH A LIQUOR LICENSE. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Secs. 10-12—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL SALES AND CONSUMPTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2014, changed the title of Art. II from "Retail Sales" and "Retail Sales and Consumption." 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Sanitary condition of premises. 
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be governed by the Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended, other applicable State and Federal laws, the Village Code, ordinances of the Village of Skokie, rules and regulations of the Local Liquor Control Commission, and rules and regulations of the State Liquor Control Commission. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-32. - Employee health standards. 
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of, any contagious, or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-33. - Serving and sale hours. 
(a)  All classification of licensees except Class G, M and T licensees, or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall not permit alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the premises, sell or give away any alcoholic liquor, after the following hours: 
Monday through Friday: 	2:00 a.m. 
Saturday: 	3:00 a.m. 
Sunday: 	3:00 a.m. 
 
No licensee shall sell or serve before the following hours: 
Monday through Friday: 	7:00 a.m. 
Saturday: 	7:00 a.m. 
Sunday: 	8:00 a.m. 
 
(b)  A Class M licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall not sell or give away any alcoholic liquor for off premises consumption after 11:00 p.m.: 
(c)  A Class M licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall not sell or give away any alcoholic liquor before the following hours: 
Monday through Friday: 	7:00 a.m. 
Saturday: 	7:00 a.m. 
Sunday: 	8:00 a.m. 
 
(d)  On January 1st of each year, any licensee, except those with Class G, M and T licenses, may permit to be consumed on the premises, sell or give away any alcoholic liquor to any patron within the establishment until 5:00 a.m., provided, however, that no new patrons shall be admitted to the licensed premises after 3:00 a.m. If January 1st occurs on a Sunday, all selling or giving away of alcoholic liquor shall cease at 3:00 a.m. 
(e)  Every licensee under this chapter shall cause all lights of all outside advertising display or illuminating signs to be turned off at the time upon which the consumption of alcoholic liquor must cease. 
(f)  Class G and T licensees are required to submit an Operation Plan to the Local Liquor Commissioner for approval and shall be restricted to the hours outlined in that plan. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 12-1-C-3869, § 1, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 12-10-C-3942, § 3, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4152, § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 10-34. - Access to dwelling quarters from premises. 
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquors shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prohibit any connection between such premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family and personal guests. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-35. - View from street. 
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed, other than as a restaurant, hotel, club, bowling alley, or service organization there shall be no obstruction of any type in the windows or upon the doors of the ground floor of such licensed premises nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times. No obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and said premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provision shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or by him willfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section the Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-36. - Sale of kegs. 
Any licensee in the Village of Skokie, who sells kegs as part of their business shall be required to do the following: 
(a)  Affix to each keg sold, a tag furnished by the Liquor Control Commissioner, containing an identification number enabling the purchaser to be identified in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Keep a logbook of all kegs sold, showing the identification number on the tag affixed to each keg, and the purchaser's name, address, telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, date of birth, and signature. The logbook shall be available for inspection by the Skokie Police Department during normal business hours, upon request. 
(c)  Require the purchaser to deposit, at the time of the sale of a keg, at least $125.00 for sale of a keg with tap, and at least $75.00 for sale of a keg without a tap. The deposit shall be refunded only upon the return of the keg with the tag properly affixed. 
(d)  Require the purchaser, at the time of the sale, to sign a form to be provided by the Liquor Control Commissioner, setting forth provisions of Section 10-36 and informing the purchaser the deposit will be forfeited if the keg is not returned with the tag properly affixed. The licensee shall retain this form for 90 days after the sale. 
(e)  Any keg not returned with the tag property affixed within 60 days following the date of sale shall be considered lost, and the deposit shall be forfeited. The licensee shall notify the Skokie Police Department on a monthly basis of all deposits that are forfeited. 
(f)  A licensee may retain the forfeited deposit. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to possess a keg within the Village of Skokie which does not have a proper tag affixed, or if the keg was purchased outside the Village of Skokie, without proof of purchase for the keg, including the name and address of the seller. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-37. - Sale of single servings. 
(a)  Prohibited sales. No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give or deliver, for consumption off premises, any of the following: 
(1)  A chilled single container of beer unless the container is greater than 749 milliliters. 
(2)  A single container of wine unless the container is greater than 749 milliliters. 
(3)  A single container of packaged mixtures of alcohol with fruit juice and/or carbonated soda drink unless the container is greater than 749 milliliters. 
(4)  A single container of "wine cooler" unless the container is greater than 32 fluid ounces or .946 liters. 
(5)  A single container of alcoholic liquor, except those which are regulated above, unless the container is greater than 8 fluid ounces or .237 liters. 
(6)  Any materials which would facilitate the consumption of single servings of alcoholic liquor. Such materials shall include, but shall not be limited to single cups, glasses, straws or individual portions of ice. 
(b)  Exception. The prohibition contained in paragraph (a) is not applicable to a licensee that sells alcoholic liquor only for consumption off of the licensee's premises. Such licensee shall be permitted to sell the items listed in subsection (a). Subsequent to May 1, 2010, this exception shall only apply to a Class O licensee. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-38. - Preservation of peace on premises. 
(a)  A licensee, or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall not knowingly permit or allow fighting amongst individuals or, physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature. 
(b)  A licensee, or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, who is present and observes any type of criminal activity or fighting or physical contact, as described above in (a), is required to immediately notify the Skokie Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-39. - Restrictions on veterans organizations. 
(a)  Only members of the veterans organizations shall be served alcoholic liquor on or within the premises of said organizations, provided, however, that a person or persons invited by a member of, or by the veterans organization, to be a guest, may be served alcoholic liquor when accompanied by said member and at the member's request, or at the organization's invitation. 
(b)  A veterans organization may lease its facilities for use by persons, not members of said organization, but not for more than 100 separate days or parts of days in any year, and said organization shall be held responsible by the Village for compliance with all the ordinances of the Village by said lessee while on the premises, and during the period of such lease. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-40. - Temporary permit. 
(a)  A temporary permit to sell alcoholic liquors within the Village may be issued by the Local Liquor Commissioner, as follows: 
(i)  If an applicant is an entity that is tax exempt pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, it may receive temporary permits for up to 10 days at the standard fee, and it may receive permits in excess of 10 days at the escalated fee. 
(ii)  If an applicant is not tax exempt, it may receive temporary permits for up to 3 days at the standard fee, and it may receive permits in excess of 3 days at the escalated fee. Any permit issued to a non-tax-exempt applicant for an outdoor event, shall be at the escalated fee. 
(iii)  Both the standard fee and the escalated fee are set forth in Section 46-80(b) of this Code. 
Any temporary permit shall not be issued for more than 4 consecutive days. 
(b)  An application must be submitted to the Liquor Control Commissioner then, if approved, to the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission. The application shall be in the form provided by the Liquor Control Commissioner. If said applications are approved by both the State of Illinois and the Liquor Control Commissioner, a letter from the Liquor Control Commissioner to that effect will be transmitted to the applicant and will serve as evidence of a permit to sell alcoholic liquor. 
(c)  A temporary permit to serve complimentary alcoholic liquor for non-commercial purposes in an area with public access may be issued for a period not to exceed four (4) days in succession. Temporary service permits shall not be issued to one applicant for more than twenty-five (25) days in a calendar year. An application must be submitted to the Liquor Control Commissioner. The application shall be in the form provided by the Liquor Control Commissioner. If said application is approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner, a letter from the Liquor Control Commissioner to that effect will be transmitted to the applicant and will serve as evidence of a permit to serve alcoholic liquor. 
(d)  Before a temporary permit for either the sale of alcoholic liquor or the service of alcoholic liquor as described on the application tendered to the Liquor Control Commissioner is issued as provided herein, it shall be reviewed for recommendation by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, who shall determine whether or not there shall be supervision, by the Skokie Police Department of the sale or service of alcoholic liquors for such period of time as provided therein. If the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines that such supervision is required, then there shall be an hourly charge for the compensation of a regular police officer or officers who shall be stationed where the alcoholic liquor is being dispensed for such number of hours as the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4152, § 2, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 10-41. - Sampling. 
Licensees are permitted to conduct alcoholic liquor product sampling, provided that such sampling does not violate 235 ILCS 5/6-31. 
(Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-42. - Giving away of alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  No licensee, individual, partnership or corporation shall give away any alcoholic liquor for commercial purposes or in connection with the sale of non-alcoholic products or to promote the sale of non-alcoholic products. This shall not apply to test marketing or tasting. 
(b)  No licensee, individual, partnership or corporation shall advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this Section. This includes, but is not limited to, advertisements using the words "free" or "complimentary" with alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Secs. 10-43—10-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-61. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale or possess with intention to sell at retail in the Village of Skokie any alcoholic liquor without a license from the Village in addition to a license issued by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission. No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any alcoholic liquor in violation of the terms and conditions of the license or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of the Illinois Liquor Control Act. No person shall serve any complimentary alcoholic liquor in an area with public access without a license or temporary permit from the Village. No caterer shall serve alcoholic liquor without a license or temporary permit from the Village. No establishment in the Village shall allow patrons to bring alcoholic liquor onto retail premises for consumption without a Class BY Liquor License from the Village, as described in Section 10-64(c). 
(b)  The requirement that a Village license be procured shall not apply to physicians, dentists, pharmacists, hospitals, or churches when these persons or institutions possess or dispense alcoholic liquor in accordance with the provisions of 235 ILCS 5/2-1, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-62. - Term. 
Each license, except temporary permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be an annual license and shall expire on April 30th next, following its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-63. - Number of licenses. 
It is hereby determined that the number of licenses permitting the sale or consumption at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be as follows: 
License Class 	Number of Licenses Not to Exceed 
A 	23 
B 	1 
BY 	15 
C 	2 
E as follows: 	[30] by district as follows: 
 E1 	6 
 E2 	8 
 E3 	6 
 E4 	4 
 E5 	2 
 E6 	4 
F 	n/a 
G 	1 
I 	n/a 
M as follows: 	
 M 	1 by existing location 
	6 by district as follows: 
 M1 	1 
 M2 	2 
 M3 	0 
 M4 	2 
 M5 	1 
 M6 	0 
O as follows: 	13 by district as follows: 
 O1 	8 
 O1L 	4 
 O2 	1 
P-Right/P 	11 
T 	4 
W 	1 
 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 11-1-C-3814, § 1, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 11-7-C-3847, § 1, 7-18-2011; Ord. No. 12-3-C-3890, § 1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 12-10-C-3942, § 1, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-12-C-3958, § 1, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4025, § 1, 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4084, § 1, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4152, § 2, 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 16-10-C-4249, § 1, 10-6-2016; Ord. No. 17-3-C-4280, § 1, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 17-9-C-4328, § 1, 9-18-2017)  
Sec. 10-64. - Classification. 
Liquor licenses are divided into 13 classes as described in paragraphs (a) through (m). Any applicant for a license may request that the license be designated for, and limited to, the sale or service of beer and wine only. A licensee that holds a license for beer and wine only shall not sell or serve any alcoholic liquor other than beer and wine. The fees for a license limited to beer and wine only shall be the fees stated for "B/W" in Section 46-80. Any licensee may request that its license be converted to a beer and wine only designation. A conversion from an existing license to a beer and wine only designation will not entitle the licensee to a refund of any fees previously paid. A licensee that has a beer and wine designation may convert to a full service license, provided that the difference in the higher fees must be paid unless the higher fee was previously paid. 
(a)  Class A license, which authorizes the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor to the public generally as distinguished from members of any particular organization which may have a license to sell alcoholic liquor. 
(1)  Subsequent to May 1, 2010, a Class A license shall not be used for the operation of a business that sells alcoholic liquor only for the consumption off of the licensee's premises. 
(2)  A Class A license at any location in the Village, if the establishment encompasses at least 10,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square feet of total retail space, may be converted to a Class M license, but shall only be utilized at the existing location. 
(b)  Class B license, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises of a special district established in accordance with the Illinois Civic Center Act contained in Chapter 70, Act 270, Article 5, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. Class B license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquors only for consumption on the premises. 
(c)  Class BY license which shall authorize an establishment to allow patrons to bring alcoholic liquor into the establishment for their on-premises consumption. 
(d)  Class C license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor: (i) to members of a veterans organization that does not sell alcoholic liquor to the public or invite the public to its premises to purchase alcoholic liquor; and (ii) a not for profit entity that has received a tax exempt designation by the Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, that is organized primarily for museum and educational purposes and is located on property leased from the Village. The license can be held by the entity or by a company that has the food and beverage management contract with the entity. Class C license shall permit only the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises. 
(e)  Class E license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the following areas of the Village: (i) E1 designations for the North Commercial Liquor District; (ii) E2 designations for the Central Commercial Liquor District which is bounded by and coextensive with the areas of the CX (Core Mixed Use) Zoning District; (iii) E3 designations for the South Commercial Liquor District; (iv) E4 designations for the East Midtown Commercial Liquor District on Dempster Street east of Kildare Avenue; (v) E5 designations for the West Midtown Commercial Liquor District on Dempster Street west of Kildare Avenue; and (vi) E6 designations for the Southeast Commercial Liquor District which is bounded by Hamlin Avenue, Touhy Avenue, McCormick Boulevard, and Howard Street. The full description of the E1, E3, E4 and E5 Liquor Districts are detailed in Exhibit A, attached to and incorporated into Village Ordinance Number 05-5-C-3358 and depicted on Exhibit A, attached to and incorporated into Village Ordinance Number 09-4-C-3672. 
The sale of alcoholic liquor by a Class E licensee is limited to on-premises consumption. The sale of packaged liquor by a Class E licensee is prohibited. A Class E licensee shall not deliver any alcoholic liquor off-premises and shall not allow alcoholic liquor to be removed from its premises except the unused portion of an opened bottle of wine sealed in an approved container as permitted by State law. A Class E license shall only be issued to a limited service or full service restaurant as defined in the Skokie Village Code. The issuance of a Class E license to a specific address is subject to the zoning classification and requirements within the various districts as outlined in Chapter 118 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(1)  Each Class E license shall only be valid at the address where the licensee's business is located. 
(2)  The existence of the five Commercial Liquor Districts, and the corresponding Class E license, does not preclude the use of any other license or the operation of any other business by a liquor licensee holding a license of another class in such districts. 
(3)  The Liquor Control Commissioner shall promulgate a set of rules detailing the timetable and procedures for initial issuance of the Class E licenses. Should the number of qualified applicants exceed the number of available licenses, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall conduct a lottery to determine the recipients. 
(f)  Class F license which shall authorize the sale or service of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises as part of a catering service, and limited to invited guests at private catered functions. Caterers holding class F licenses must be primarily in the business of the preparation and service of food, and must have food service available when alcoholic liquor is being served. 
(g)  Class G license which shall authorize the sale of beer, manufactured on the premises, by a Brew Pub, subject to an Operation Plan approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(h)  Class I license which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor as part of an inclusive package for on-premises consumption. This license is not available to bars or restaurants. 
(i)  Class M license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off-premises in establishments in which the sale of alcoholic liquor is a secondary function of the establishments and that encompass more than 10,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square feet of total retail space in the following areas of the Village: (i) the North Commercial Liquor District,(ii) the Central Commercial District, (iii) the South Commercial Liquor District, (iv) the East Midtown Commercial Liquor District, (v) the West Midtown Commercial District, and (vi) the Southeast Commercial Liquor District. A maximum of 300 linear feet of shelf space, including viewing coolers and all displays, may be designated for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor; notwithstanding the area restrictions stated in this paragraph. For purposes of this section, linear shelf space shall mean any single shelf, which may or may not be included in a shelving unit that is utilized for the promotion, display or retail sale of alcoholic liquor. An existing Class A license may be converted to a Class M license as provided in subparagraph 10-64(a)(5). 
(j)  Class O license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off of the premises of the licensee. No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the premises of a Class O licensee unless such alcoholic liquor is being offered as a promotional event or taste testing without the payment of anything of value by the consuming patron. 
There will be two subclasses of Class O licenses as follows: 
(1)  A Subclass O1 shall be effective anywhere in the Village except those properties contained in the zoning district "Office Research district". A category of O1 shall be designated O1L, and will be limited to retail establishments that encompass more than 40,000 square feet of total retail space. There is no minimum percentage of floor space which is to be designated for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor. Upon adoption of Ordinance 11-1-C-3814, any licensee with over 40,000 square feet of total retail space shall be automatically converted to an O1L; and 
(2)  A Subclass O2 shall be effective solely in the zoning district "Office Research zoning district." 
(k)  Class P license which authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at a limited service or full service restaurant at a specific location. Any person or entity holding a Class A license and owning the real property on which a limited or full service restaurant, serving alcoholic liquor, is or will be operated, may convert the Class A license to a P-Right, having such rights as defined in subparagraph (2) below. 
(1)  Any Class A licensee, owning the real property (the "property owner") on which a tenant, or management entity, does or will operate a limited service or full service restaurant must obtain a P-Right from the Liquor Control Commissioner. The acquisition of a P-Right will render the Class A license null and void as if it were automatically repealed. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall not have the authority to reissue the Class A license. 
(2)  A P-Right entitles the property owner to designate to the Liquor Control Commissioner the identity of a tenant, or a successor tenant, to which a Class P license shall be issued. The tenant must submit an application, qualify for the license and comply with all sections of this Chapter. In the event the tenant's lease terminates, then the Class P license will be surrendered to the Village. The surrender, revocation or non-renewal of the Class P license will not affect the P-Right held by the property owner. 
(3)  The Liquor Control Commissioner may adopt rules and regulations regarding the exercise of P-Rights and issuance of Class P licenses. A P-Right shall continue in existence, and will not be subject to automatic termination or loss for non-use or inactivity, as long as the property owner does not violate this Chapter or the rules and regulations governing P-Rights or Class P licenses. The P-Right is transferable if the real property for which it applies, is transferred to a new property owner. A Class P license must be renewed annually. In the event no Class P license is in effect at the renewal time, the property owner must renew the P-Right, and the failure to so renew will cause the P-Right to become null and void. 
(4)  A P-Right shall only be in effect at the real property for which it was initially issued, however, it may be in effect for any location within the real property, or any adjacent real property, owned by the property owner. A Class P license shall only be in effect at the location for which it is issued. 
(5)  A property owner has the right to designate itself for the issuance of a Class P license. 
(l)  Class T license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor as part of the operation of live theaters and movie theaters, subject to an Operation Plan approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(m)  Class W license which shall authorize the retail sale of wine for consumption off of the premises. No wine shall be consumed on the premises of a Class W licensee unless it is being offered as part of a sampling or taste testing without the payment of anything of value by the consuming patron. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 11-1-C-3814, § 1, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 11-7-C-3847, § 1, 7-18-2011; Ord. No. 12-3-C-3890, § 1, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 12-10-C-3942, § 2, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 12-12-C-3958, § 2, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4152, § 2, 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 17-3-C-4280, § 1, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 10-65. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Liquor Control Commissioner, on a form provided by the Liquor Control Commissioner. Each such application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if another entity, verified by oath or affidavit. In addition to the provided form, the licensee shall be responsible for submitting any additional information that may be required by the Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(b)  In addition to the application, each individual applicant or managing partner in a co-partnership must undergo photographing, fingerprinting, and a criminal background check under the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
(c)  In such case where the applicant is an entity, the following information is required: 
(1)  Identification of the Manager, if any, his or her date of birth, residence, citizenship status and a statement that said individual has never been convicted of a felony. In addition, the Manager shall undergo photographing, fingerprinting, and a criminal background check under the direction of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
(2)  A statement attested to by a duly registered Notary Public, that the entity and the officers and directors and manager will not violate any of the laws of the State of Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village of Skokie in the conduct of normal course of business. 
(3)  An affidavit, executed by a duly authorized officer, stating that all members, officers, managers, general partners or directors thereof, or stockholders or limited partners owning 5 percent or more of such entity, would be eligible to receive a license under this Article. 
(4)  Each licensee shall complete and file any and all renewal application forms as provided by and in the time specified by the Liquor Control Commissioner, as set for in Section 10-73 of this Code with the annual fee as provided in Chapter 46 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-66. - Restrictions on issuance. 
No license shall be issued: 
(a)  To an individual or entity declared ineligible for a license under 235 ILCS 5/6-2, as amended from time to time, or to a person, partnership or corporation not eligible for an Illinois retail liquor dealer's license. 
(b)  For use on premises adjacent to churches, schools, hospitals, or other institutions, or places of business if issuance of such license would be contrary to 235 ILCS 5/6-11, 5/6-15, as amended form time to time. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-67. - Distance between licensed premises. 
(a)  A Class O license shall not be issued for any business or premises which is within 600 feet of a location operating under an existing Class O license. Said distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the building of the existing licensed location to the nearest point of the building of the proposed location. 
(b)  An existing establishment or premises used solely for package goods sale of alcoholic liquor, whether the business is conducted as a Class A license or subsequently as a Class O license, under an existing liquor license on the effective date of Village Ordinance Number 09-4-C-3672, and made non-conforming as a result of the provisions hereof, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. The restrictions in paragraph (a) are applicable to any Class A licensee that operates a business that does not sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on its premises. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the issuance of a Class O license within a planned development as provided in the zoning ordinance of the Village, and as from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-68. - Fees. 
The license fees for licenses shall be as set forth in Section 46-80. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-69. - Disposition of fees. 
Upon the collection of all license fees as provided hereunder by the Liquor Control Commissioner, the same shall be forthwith turned over to the Director or Finance or his or her designee. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fees shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund, or in such other fund as shall have been or may be designated by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, by proper action. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-70. - Changes in ownership of licensee for fee purposes. 
(a)  Upon the death of an individual that is the holder of a license, an immediate family member shall not be considered a new owner for the purposes of paying a first and initial license fee if that family member inherited the business conducted by the deceased licensee. For the purposes of this section, "immediate family member" shall be: a father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, son or daughter. Said family member must file an application with the Liquor Control Commissioner and be qualified to hold the license prior to the issuance of the license to the family member. 
(b)  Any sale, transfer, or assignment of more than 50 percent of the ownership of an entity holding a license shall terminate said license, and the initial license issued to the same named corporation shall be subject to a payment of fee for a first and initial license. 
(c)  Any sale, transfer or assignment of any partner or partner's interest in partnership holding a license, where said partner or partner's interest being so transferred exceeds 50 percent of the total partnership, shall terminate said license, and the initial license issued to the new partnership shall be subject to a payment of a fee for a first and initial license. In the event the partnership interest exceeding 50 percent of the partnership holding a license is inherited by an immediate family member, due to the death of the individual holding the partnership interest, then such new ownership of the partnership interest shall not be deemed to be a sale, transfer or assignment for the purposes of paying a first and initial license. The partnership must file an application with the Liquor Control Commissioner and be qualified to hold the license prior to the issuance of the license to the partnership. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-71. - Notification of change of ownership. 
Every licensee must notify the Liquor Control Commissioner in writing of each and every change of ownership or management of the business holding a license. Changes in ownership include, but are not limited to, the changes referenced in Section 10-70. Notice required under this section shall be given within 48 hours of such change. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall direct any new owner and/or manager to submit to photographing, fingerprinting and a criminal background check, to be done by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-72. - Nature of license; transfer; expiration. 
(a)  A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for a period not to exceed 1 year after issuance unless revoked according to law, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated, but shall cease upon the death, or insolvency of the licensee or the licensee files for bankruptcy protection. Executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, or the trustee or receiver of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but not longer than 6 months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. 
(b)  A licensee shall not enter into any agreement with a person or entity, whether it be a lease, management or other agreement, that would allow the person or entity to utilize the license in the operation of the person's or entity's business wherein the licensee maintains an interest of any kind whatsoever in the license. 
(c)  If a licensee's business is inactive for a period of three consecutive months, the license shall become null and void. For the purposes of this Section, the word "inactive" shall mean that the business has ceased operating or is not open to the public. Should a license become inactive for three consecutive months, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the authority to reinstate the license. 
(d)  For the purposes of this Section 10-72, a license shall not be deemed to have expired if: (A) the licensee shall have ceased operations for the purposes of remodeling or relocating and, at least 30 days prior to the cessation of operations, has filed a remodeling or a relocation plan with the Liquor Control Commissioner. Based upon the extent of time necessary for remodeling or relocating, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall establish a deadline for the completion of the planned remodeling or relocation; or (B) the licensee's business is closed due to an act of God. Based upon such circumstances, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall establish a reasonable time for the opening of the business. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-73. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Any licensee may renew the license at the expiration thereof, provided the licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes; and further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prohibit the Mayor and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the jurisdiction of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  The renewal application shall be on a form prescribed by the Liquor Control Commissioner. Additionally, all licensees or an authorized representative thereof, are required to attend an annual meeting convened by the Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-74. - Change of location of business. 
A license shall permit the sale and/or on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed, subject to the restrictions on change of location for certain classes of licenses as provided in this Chapter, only when a written petition is presented to the Liquor Control Commissioner for the Village of Skokie and permission is granted in writing by the Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is an actual physical site of real estate proper for the retail sale and/or on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor, under the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village of Skokie, including but not limited to the Skokie Village Code and the Skokie Zoning Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014)  
Sec. 10-75. - Display. 
Each licensee shall cause his license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-76. - Records of licenses. 
The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete record of all such licenses issued. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-77. - BASSET training. 
(a)  Required. All licensees, or a designated employee thereof, shall successfully complete BASSET Training or a comparable program which is certified by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. Any employee designated by the licensee to complete the program shall be a manager of the business and shall be on the premises on a regular basis. 
(b)  Time for completion. If a Licensee is approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner for a liquor license, the new licensee or a designated employee thereof, shall have 30 days, from the date of receipt of the license, to complete a program as specified in Section 10-77. The licensee shall maintain verification of completion on file and a copy shall be submitted to the Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(c)  Termination of employment. If a designated employee is no longer employed by a licensee, the licensee shall have 30 days to designate a new employee to complete a program as specified in Section 10-77. 
(d)  Remedy. Should the Liquor Control Commissioner have occasion to convene a hearing in accordance with the Liquor Control Act, and there is a finding of a violation, the Liquor Control Commissioner may order the licensee and/or any employee to complete the BASSET program or any comparable program as specified in Section 10-77. Any such training ordered in that capacity does not exclude any other remedies or relief in the purview of the Liquor Control Commissioner in accordance with the Liquor Control Act and the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-78. - Hearing fees. 
In the event the Liquor Control Commissioner does issue a Notice to the licensee to convene a hearing regarding an alleged violation or violations, any and all fees and costs associated with said hearing or in the preparation thereof, shall be paid by the licensee, including but not limited to attorney's fees for a legal advisor to the Liquor Control Commissioner and for a prosecutor and the cost of the court reporter and the creation of a record of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-79. - Suspension or revocation; appeals. 
(a)  The Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued, if it is determined by the Liquor Control Commissioner, subsequent to a hearing in accordance with the Liquor Control Act, that the licensee has violated any ordinance of the Village of Skokie, Illinois statute or federal law pertaining to the operation of the licensee's business or the premises where it is located, or any regulation or rule that has been established by the Liquor Control Commissioner, which is not inconsistent with state statute. In addition to suspension or revocation, the Liquor Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000.00 for a first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation within a 12-month period and $2,500.00 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period. Each and every day which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than $15,000.00 in fines under this Section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of the license. Additionally, if the Liquor Control Commissioner deems it necessary, he or she may order the Licensee to undergo alcohol awareness training in a program approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance or in any rule or regulation of the Village of Skokie any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code, any ordinance or any rule or regulation the performance of any act is required or the failure to perform any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person upon the violation of any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed that which is allowed, according to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, for each such offense. The Corporation Counsel may file a civil action to recover any penalty or fine against any such person, provided, however, that the filing of such civil action shall preclude incarceration or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 10-80. - Lottery. 
(a)  Authorization. In the event the Liquor Control Commissioner revokes a liquor license or a liquor licensee surrenders a license and more than one application has been received for the available license, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall conduct a lottery to determine which application shall be considered for issuance of a liquor license. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  When a liquor license becomes available either through revocation or surrender, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause notice to be published in a local newspaper. Such notice shall specify the number of licenses available, the date, time and location the lottery will be held and the dates applications will be accepted. 
(2)  Notice under this Section shall be published within 21 days after a liquor license has been surrendered. In the case of a revoked license, notice under this Section shall be published within 21 days after the period for appealing the Liquor Control Commissioner's revocation order has expired. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  Any individual, corporation or partnership eligible to be a liquor licensee pursuant to Village Code, shall be eligible to submit an application for the lottery. Applications shall be available in the Mayor's office. When submitting an application, all applicants shall be required to submit a cashier or certified check to cover the issuance fee as provided for in Sections 10-68 and 46-80 of this Code. Upon receipt of a liquor license application and check, the application shall be stamped the date it is received. 
(2)  Applications shall be accepted for a 14-day period, which shall commence on the day notice is published in accordance with Section 10-80(b). 
(3)  The Liquor Control Commissioner shall notify all applicants of the date, time and location of the lottery. Such notification shall be in writing and mailed by regular first class mail to the applicant specified on the application. 
(d)  Procedure. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall conduct the lottery. Only completed and submitted applications shall be considered for the lottery. The lottery shall be conducted within 14 days from the last date for accepting applications, pursuant to Section 10-80(c). 
(e)  Compliance with codes and ordinances. 
(1)  The applicant or applicants whose applications are chosen in the lottery shall have 120 days from the date of the lottery to obtain all required permits and to comply with all applicable codes and ordinances. The Liquor Control Commissioner, for good cause may extend this 120 days, for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(2)  In the event an applicant does not comply with all applicable codes and ordinances within the allotted 120 day period and no extension of time is granted by the Liquor Control Commissioner or the Liquor Commissioner does not approve the application, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause another lottery to be held. Only those applications that were considered in the original lottery shall be considered in the subsequent lottery. Notice shall be given as provided for in Section 10-80(c) 
(f)  Cessation of license. In the event, where an establishment that received its license as a result of a lottery conducted in accordance with 10-80, ceases to operate or its license has been revoked in accordance with section 10-79 or the license is voluntarily given up, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall conduct a lottery, following the procedure in 10-80. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Chapter 11 - CANNABIS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax, § 98-390 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Scope. 
This chapter shall apply to the service, distribution, sale, including but not limited to any transaction of retail sale of cannabis, within the Village of Skokie. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-2. - Interpretation of chapter. 
This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Skokie shall be protected and temperance in the use and consumption of cannabis shall be fostered and promoted. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
Unless the context shall otherwise require, or unless defined in the Skokie Code, including this chapter, terms used in this chapter shall have the definitions given in the Act, as amended from time to time. Where not otherwise qualified, the term license or licensee wherever used in this chapter means a license or licensee of Skokie under this chapter. 
Cannabis means any form or variety of cannabis as defined by the Act and for purposes of this chapter shall include all forms of cannabis, including contained within edible products. 
Cannabis Commissioner means the individual with the authority to oversee and implement the provisions of this Chapter, including the awarding of licenses. The Cannabis Commissioner shall be the Mayor of Skokie, or designee. 
Cannabis Dispensary means a facility offering retail sales of cannabis or cannabis products for medical or recreational use as authorized by the Act. 
Operation Plan means an addendum to the Skokie Cannabis Dispensary Application which shall include, but not be limited to the following information and as requested by and approved by the Cannabis Commissioner as part of the application process: 
(a)  A floor plan including where the sale of cannabis shall take place in the establishment and where the designated area for storage and delivery shall be; 
(b)  The types of cannabis that will be offered for sale and the hours of service and method of packaging and delivery to customers; 
(c)  The location for the checking of identification to determine the customers' age; 
(d)  Security methods and systems; and the location of medical purchases. 
Underage Person as used in this Chapter, shall mean any person less than 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-4. - Penalties. 
Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance, or in any rule or regulation of the Village of Skokie, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code, any ordinance, or any rule or regulation, the performance of any act is required or the failure to perform any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person upon the violation of any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed that which is allowed, according to Illinois Municipal Code and the Illinois state law, for each such offense. The Corporation Counsel may file a civil action to recover any penalty or fine against any such person, or entity. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-5. - Underage person; prohibition. 
(a)  Prohibited. No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give or deliver cannabis to an underage person. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining cannabis, shall sell, give or deliver the cannabis product to an underage person. 
(b)  Underage Person not allowed. No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall permit an Underage Person to be or remain on or in any portion of a licensed premises unless the Underage Person is: (i) accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or (ii) on the premises for the purchase of authorized medicinal cannabis for the personal use of the underaged person. 
(c)  Unlawful consumption, purchase or possession. No Underage Person shall consume, purchase, smoke or have in his or her possession, cannabis, except for prescribed medical use, with proper documentation. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit an underage person, of which he or she may be the parent or guardian, to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter and shall not provide cannabis to their children or in loco parentis except for prescribed medicinal use. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-6. - Purchase or acceptance of cannabis by underage person; identification cards; warnings. 
(a)  Prohibited gift or delivery. No underage person shall accept a gift or delivery of cannabis. 
(b)  Photo identification. If a licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of cannabis is prohibited because of the insufficient age of the prospective purchaser, he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of adequate written evidence of identity, including, but not limited to, a photograph, and of the fact that the purchaser or recipient is over the age of 21 years (hereinafter "identification card"), issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operations license or identification card issued to a member of the Armed Services. 
(c)  No sale. If a licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, believes or has reason to believe that the ultimate recipient of cannabis to be purchased is of insufficient age or is using a forged or false identification card, he or she shall not make the sale. 
(d)  Forged or false identification. No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept the delivery, or have the possession of cannabis in violation of this section. 
(e)  Warnings displayed. In every cannabis dispensary there shall always be displayed in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be supplied by Skokie and which shall read substantially as follows: 
WARNING TO ALL PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A CRIMINAL ARREST AND FINE IF YOU PURCHASE, OR ACCEPT A GIFT OF, CANNABIS OR HAVE CANNABIS IN YOUR POSSESSION, OR IF YOU HAVE IN YOUR POSSESSION A FALSE, FORGED, ALTERED OR DEFACED IDENTIFICATION CARD WHICH MISREPRESENTS YOUR AGE. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-7. - Liability for permitting underage persons to possess or consume cannabis. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises in Skokie to permit an underage person to possess or consume cannabis on the premises, except for prescribed medical use with proper documentation. 
(b)  No person shall permit a gathering at their residence, or on property owned by the person or under the person's control, where any one or more Underage Persons are in possession of or are consuming any cannabis. No person that believes an Underage Person has consumed cannabis shall allow that Underage Person to leave a residence, or property owned by the person, or under the person's control, except when the Underage Person is accompanied by the Underage Person's parent or legal guardian. For the purpose of this section where the residence, or a property, has a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence, or property, is occupied or controlled by the tenant or lessee. There is a rebuttable presumption that the owner or occupant of said residence, or property, permitted such conduct, unless the contrary is established by a preponderance of the evidence, even if said owner or occupant is not on the premises at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Secs. 11-8—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL SALES AND CONSUMPTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-21. - Consumption at or in a cannabis dispensary. 
Cannabis may not be consumed within a cannabis dispensary for any purpose and in any form, including but not limited to samples, tastings, edible products or byproducts or by smoking. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-22. - Consumption in parking lot adjacent to cannabis dispensary. 
(a)  In parking lots. Cannabis may not be consumed in any parking lot or open area adjacent to any cannabis dispensary for any purpose and in any form, including but not limited to samples, tastings, edible products or byproducts or by smoking. 
(b)  Responsibility of owner and/or manager. No licensee, or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall permit the consumption of cannabis in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Posting of signs. All cannabis dispensaries must post the following sign on the property where the establishment is located. 
PURSUANT TO THE SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE, IT IS UNLAWFUL TO CONSUME ANY CANNABIS IN ANY PARKING LOT OR OPEN AREA ADJACENT TO THIS CANNABIS DISPENSARY. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-23. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of operation for a dispensary shall be within 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-24. - Dispensary premises. 
A cannabis dispensary shall only be located in a stand-alone building. Cannabis shall not be sold upon any premise which has any access that leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building used for dwelling or lodging purposes or which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for the public, unless owned and operated by the cannabis dispensary in conjunction with its cannabis dispensary business for purposes other than a dwelling or lodging. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-25. - Giving away of cannabis. 
(a)  No licensee, individual, partnership or corporation shall give away or provide samples or tastings of any cannabis for retail sales or other purposes or in connection with the promotion of the cannabis dispensary. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Secs. 11-26—11-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale or possess with intention to sell at retail Skokie any cannabis without a cannabis retail sales license issued by the Skokie pursuant to this Chapter, in addition to a license issued by the State of Illinois. No person shall sell at retail or offer for sale at retail in Skokie cannabis in any form, in violation of the terms and conditions of the license or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-62. - Term. 
Each cannabis dispensary shall have a license issued by the State of Illinois to sell retail cannabis prior to applying for a Skokie cannabis dispensary license. Each cannabis dispensary shall have a Skokie cannabis retail sales license pursuant to this chapter and the license shall be an annual license and shall expire on April 30th next following its issuance and every year thereafter requiring an application for renewal and approval. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-63. - Number of licenses. 
There shall be a maximum of two (2) cannabis retail sales licenses available at any one time in Skokie. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-64. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for a cannabis retail sales license shall be made to the Cannabis Commissioner, on a form provided by the Cannabis Commissioner. Each such application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by a duly authorized officer of an entity, verified by oath or affidavit. In addition to the provided form, the licensee applicant shall be responsible for submitting any additional information that may be required by the Cannabis Commissioner. 
(b)  In addition to the application, the applicant or the managing partners or officers of the owning entity of the applicant and the on-site managers of the applicant must undergo a criminal background check, including but not limited to finger printing under the direction of the Skokie Chief of Police or designee. 
(c)  An affidavit, executed by a duly authorized officer or managing partner, stating that all members, officers, managers, general partners, directors, stockholders or limited partners of the applicant owning 5 percent or more of the applicant have no criminal convictions in any jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-65. - Restrictions on issuance. 
No license shall be issued: 
(a)  To an individual or entity declared ineligible for a license under the Act, as amended from time to time, or to a person, partnership or corporation not eligible for an Illinois cannabis dispensary license. 
(b)  For a cannabis dispensary in proximity to a school, hospital, park or other institution if issuance of the cannabis retail sales license would violate Skokie zoning ordinances, regarding cannabis dispensaries distance from such institutions. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-66. - Distance between licensed premises. 
(a)  A cannabis retail sales license shall not be issued for a cannabis dispensary that is on property or in premises in proximity to another cannabis dispensary if issuance of the cannabis dispensary license would violate Skokie zoning regarding cannabis dispensaries distance from one another, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-67. - Fees. 
The license fees for licenses shall be as set forth in Section 46-82 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-68. - Nature of license; transfer; expiration. 
(a)  A cannabis retail sales license shall be purely a privilege, good for a period not to exceed 1 year after issuance unless revoked according to law, and shall not constitute property, or be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, or be alienable, assignable, transferable or subject to encumberment, and shall cease upon the death, or insolvency or cessation of operation of the licensee or the filing for bankruptcy protection. 
(b)  A licensee shall not enter into any agreement with a person or entity, whether it be a lease, management or other agreement, that would allow the person or entity to utilize the license in the operation of the person's or entity's business wherein the licensee maintains an interest of any kind whatsoever in the license. 
(c)  If a licensee's business is inactive for a period of three consecutive months, the license shall become null and void. For the purposes of this Section, the word "inactive" shall mean that the business has ceased operating or is not open to the public. Should a license become inactive for three consecutive months, the Cannabis Commissioner shall have the authority to reinstate the license. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-69. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Any cannabis retail sales licensee may be renewed at the expiration of its term, provided the applicant is qualified to receive a new cannabis retail sales license under the then current requirements and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes; and further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prohibit the Mayor and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the jurisdiction of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. 
(b)  The renewal application shall be on a form prescribed by the Cannabis Commissioner. Additionally, all licensees or an authorized representative thereof, are required to attend an annual meeting convened by the Cannabis Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-70. - Change of location of business. 
A cannabis retail sales license shall permit the sale of cannabis only in the premises described in the application and license. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-71. - Display. 
Each licensee shall display the cannabis retail sales license in plain view in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-72. - Hearing fees. 
In the event the Cannabis Commissioner issues a Notice to the licensee to convene a hearing regarding an alleged violation or violation of Local, State of Federal Law; any and all fees and costs associated with said hearing or in the preparation thereof, shall be paid by the licensee, including but not limited to attorney's fees for a legal advisor to the Cannabis Commissioner and for a prosecutor and for related costs including but not limited to the cost of the court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-73. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Cannabis Commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued, if it is determined by the Cannabis Commissioner, subsequent to a hearing in accordance with the Act, that the licensee has violated any ordinance of the Village of Skokie, Illinois statute or federal law pertaining to the operation of the licensee's business or the premises where it is located, or any regulation or rule that has been established by the Cannabis Commissioner, which is not inconsistent with state statute. In addition to suspension or revocation, the Cannabis Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000.00 for a first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation within a 12-month period and $2,500.00 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period. Each and every day which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than $15,000.00 in fines under this Section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of the license. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 11-74. - Subsequent awarding of licenses. 
In the event the Cannabis Commissioner revokes a cannabis retail sales license or a cannabis dispensary license is surrendered, the Cannabis Commissioner may decide to award the license to another applicant whose application is on a wait list maintained by the Cannabis Commissioner for consideration of awarding a cannabis retail sales license or may not award the license and hold it. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4486, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of amusements, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Licensing. 
The provisions of Chapter 26, Article II, shall govern the amusement businesses, occupations and uses licensed under this chapter where no provision to the contrary is made. The applicable license and permit fees for the amusements, businesses, occupations, and uses licensed under this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 46. 
(Code 1979, § 43.01)  
Secs. 14-2—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENTS, EXHIBITIONS AND SHOWS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusements includes but is not limited to any exhibitions, festivals, shows, concerts or musical entertainments, fireworks displays, horse or dog shows, carnivals, circuses, fairs and the like. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-32. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to operate any amusement which is open to the public, and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 43.021)  
Sec. 14-33. - Use of public places. 
No permit shall be granted or given for any exhibition, show, or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk, or in such place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be a public place, except on order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 43.022)  
Sec. 14-34. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the Village Manager or designee to see that every amusement place, exhibition, theater, or other public show or amusement is inspected by the Village Manager or designee, and to ensure conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements. 
(Code 1979, § 43.023)  
Sec. 14-35. - Conduct of patrons; overcrowding. 
Patrons of any amusement, show, or theatrical endeavor must be orderly and peaceable at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show, or theatrical endeavor to create a disturbance. It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any such amusement or show as to create a dangerous. 
(Code 1979, § 43.024)  
Sec. 14-36. - Indecent shows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct, or take part in any indecent show, theatrical play, motion picture, exhibition or other form of public amusement or show. 
(Code 1979, § 43.025)  
Sec. 14-37. - Shows causing riot or disturbance. 
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. 
(Code 1979, § 43.026)  
Sec. 14-38. - Exit lights. 
Exit lights shall be provided as required in the latest adopted edition of NFPA101. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, deleted the former § 14-38 and enacted a new § 14-38 as set out herein. The former § 14-38 pertained to smoking and derived from the Code of 1979, § 43.027.  
Sec. 14-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, repealed § 14-39, which pertained to right of entry of village employees and derived from Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011.  
Sec. 14-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, deleted § 14-40, which pertained to right of entry of Village employees and derived from the Code of 1979, § 43.029.  
Secs. 14-41—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT MACHINES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Coin-operated amusement device and redemption machine tag act, 35 ILCS 510/1 et seq.; municipal tax on coin-operated devices, 65 ILCS 5/11-55-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automatic amusement machine means any mechanical or electronic amusement machine or device, including but not limited to pool and billiard tables, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of currency, money, credit, electronic currency, tokens or a similar equivalent or other item of value, not including jukeboxes. 
Electronic machine or device means a mechanically, electrically or electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes sponsor's or promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. 
Enter or entry means the act or process by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes. 
Entertainment display means visual information capable of being seen by a sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated game play of games, including, but not limited to, a poker game or any other kind of playing card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the random or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols not dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game; and any other video game the outcome of which is not in whole or in part dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that is played in the course of revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes. 
Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, goods, service, credit or anything else of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize. 
Sweepstakes means any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion, which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon an element of chance. 
(Code 1979, § 43.031; Ord. No. 18-5-C-4377, § 1, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 19-5-C-4452, § 1, 5-6-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-62. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of any automatic amusement machine in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-63. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State. 
(b)  The wagering of moneys, goods or merchandise for gambling upon the outcome of a test of skill or a game of chance in the operation of an automatic amusement machine for which a license or permit is required is prohibited. 
(c)  No automatic amusement machine involving the use or depiction of roulette, slot machine style games, keno, bingo, playing cards or dice, including but not limited to those commonly called "Poker," "Blackjack," "Twenty-One," "Little Casino," or "Craps" machines, shall be licensed or permitted in the Village. All such machines described in this subsection are hereby declared to be gambling devices under this Code and are prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 43.035) 
Cross reference— Gambling, § 70-271 et seq.  
Sec. 14-64. - Operation by persons under 16 years of age restricted on school days. 
No person holding a permit under this article shall permit persons under 16 years of age to play or operate any automatic amusement machine when school is in session. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the person under 16 years of age is accompanied by such person's parent or legal guardian. In every establishment where there are amusement machines, signs shall be posted in a prominent place specifying these regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 43.036(1))  
Sec. 14-65. - Conduct of patrons; condition of premises. 
No person holding a permit shall allow or permit any rowdy or disorderly conduct by the patrons of the premises, or knowingly allow any gambling between patrons while on the premises. All premises where automatic amusement machines are located shall be kept in a clean, neat and orderly condition and the machines shall be positioned so that their operation is open to clear public view. 
(Code 1979, § 43.036(2))  
Sec. 14-66. - Number of machines per location. 
Amusement machines are restricted to 3 per location pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118) unless a special use permit is obtained for an amusement establishment. 
(Code 1979, § 43.036(3))  
Sec. 14-67. - Seizure of machines used for gambling. 
If the Village Manager or designee shall have reason to believe any automatic amusement machine is used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded. Subsequent to impoundment, notice of said impoundment shall be sent either by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested to owner of such machine. If, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as a gambling device, the exhibitor is found guilty, such machine shall be disposed of in accordance with the appropriate court order. 
(Code 1979, § 43.037)  
Sec. 14-68. - Electrical safety requirements. 
A machine or device licensed under this article, if operated electrically, shall bear the seal of an approved electrical testing laboratory.  
Sec. 14-69. - Obstruction of exits. 
A machine or device licensed under this article shall not be placed on the premises, indoors or outdoors, so as to block the ingress or egress of the exits on the premises.  
Sec. 14-70. - [Electronic sweepstakes machines.] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into operation, an electronic machine or device for the following purposes: 
(a)  To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or 
(b)  To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4452, § 1, 5-6-2019)  
Secs. 14-71—14-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND PREMISES PERMIT 
 
Sec. 14-91. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to place, install, or permit to be installed or placed for use by the public or any person any automatic amusement machine without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  No person owning or operating any premises shall place on such premises for use by the public any automatic amusement machine unless the automatic amusement machine is licensed by the Village, or without a permit for the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 43.031)  
Sec. 14-92. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses and permits under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 43.034)  
Sec. 14-93. - Action on application. 
All licenses and permits required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 14-94. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 14-95. - Qualifications for premises permit. 
No person shall be granted a premises permit under this division who is not of good moral character, nor shall any such permit be granted or issued to any person who has been convicted of any offense against the laws of the United States or this State punishable by imprisonment in a State prison or other penal institution as a felony, unless the person so convicted has been duly pardoned. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an Illinois corporation or a foreign corporation licensed to do business in the State. Such provisions, however, shall apply to all officers, shareholders and directors of such corporations. 
(Code 1979, § 43.033)  
Sec. 14-96. - Display of permit. 
Any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the permit has been issued.  
Sec. 14-97. - License emblem. 
(a)  Upon the execution of an application and payment of fees as provided in Section 46-73, the Village Manager or designee shall deliver to the applicant for a license under this division a sticker license emblem, the form and size of which shall have been approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix the sticker license emblem or plate in a conspicuous place on the licensed automatic amusement machine and it shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove the emblem or plate from the automatic amusement machine during the year for which it is licensed. 
(Code 1979, § 43.032)  
Sec. 14-98. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses and permits issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license or permit. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license or permit if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee or permittee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee or permittee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license or permit. 
(3)  The licensee or permittee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 14-99. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license or permit. The notice shall inform the applicant, licensee or permittee that the applicant, licensee or permittee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or permittee specified on the application, license or permit. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 14-100. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license or permit issued under this division. A license or permit shall not be revoked unless the licensee or permittee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's or permittee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee or permittee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-99. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee or permittee does not request a hearing in writing, the license or permit shall be revoked.  
Sec. 14-101. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses and permits under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 43.034)  
Sec. 14-102. - Transfer. 
No license or permit issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license or permit was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee or permittee shall act or do business under such license or permit.  
Secs. 14-103—14-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Gross receipts tax on athletic exhibitions, § 46-75. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to regulate athletic contests and exhibitions for gain, 65 ILCS 5/11-54-1. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-121. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of an athletic exhibition in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-122. - Admittance of Village employees. 
Village employees shall not be denied free and open access to the premises while fulfilling official duties under this article.  
Secs. 14-123—14-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-141. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to conduct, operate, sponsor or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball, football, or basketball game, boxing or wrestling contest, or any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged (excepting those given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a charitable, educational or religious organization), without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 43.051)  
Sec. 14-142. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 14-143. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 14-144. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 14-145. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 14-146. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 14-147. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 14-148. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-147. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 14-149. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-75.  
Sec. 14-150. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 14-151—14-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AUTOMATIC COIN-OPERATED RIDES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-171. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of any automatic coin-operated ride in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-172. - Electrical safety requirements. 
A machine or device licensed under this article, if operated electrically, shall bear the seal of an approved electrical testing laboratory. 
(Code 1979, § 43.062(1))  
Sec. 14-173. - Obstruction of exits. 
A machine or device licensed under this article shall not be placed on the premises, indoors or outdoors, so as to block the ingress or egress of the exits on the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 43.062(2))  
Secs. 14-174—14-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-191. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to display, whether indoors or outdoors, for public patronage, or keep for operation or use in any public place in the Village, any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, token, slug, plate or disc into any slot, crevice or opening, or by the payment of any price, shall operate, or may be operated, so that the person astride, or sitting or standing thereon, shall or may experience the sensation of being alternately moved forward, upward, downward and backward, or any combination or combinations thereof, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 43.061)  
Sec. 14-192. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 14-193. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 14-194. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 14-195. - License emblem. 
(a)  Upon the execution of an application and payment of fees as provided in Section 46-73, the Village Manager or designee shall deliver to the applicant for a license under this division a sticker license emblem, the form and size of which shall have been approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix the sticker license emblem or plate in a conspicuous place on the licensed automatic amusement machine and it shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove the emblem or plate from the automatic coin-operated ride during the year for which it is licensed. 
(Code 1979, § 43.062(3))  
Sec. 14-196. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 14-197. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the licensee that the licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 14-198. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-197. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 14-199. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 43.061)  
Sec. 14-200. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 14-201—14-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BOWLING ALLEYS, BILLIARD ROOMS OR POOL HALLS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to regulate billiard tables and bowling alleys, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-221. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a bowling alley, billiard room, pool hall, or pool table in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-222. - Hours of operation. 
No bowling alley, billiard room, or pool hall shall be open for business or used between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Code 1979, § 43.072)  
Secs. 14-223—14-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-241. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to operate, maintain, or conduct a bowling alley, billiard room, pool hall, or pool table open to the public without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 43.071)  
Sec. 14-242. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 14-243. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 14-244. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 14-245. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 14-246. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 14-247. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the licensee that the licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 14-248. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-247. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 14-249. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 43.071)  
Sec. 14-250. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 14-251—14-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, FAIRS AND OTHER AMUSEMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Permit fee for carnivals and other amusements, § 46-76. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to regulate carnivals, 65 ILCS 5/11-54.1-1 et seq.; carnival regulation act, 225 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.; carnival and amusement rides safety act, 430 ILCS 85/2-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-271. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of any amusement activity regulated by this article in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-272. - Hours of operation. 
No amusement activity regulated by this article, including setup and dismantling, shall operate or occur between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:00 p.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1979, § 43.092)  
Sec. 14-273. - Gambling prohibited; restrictions on games. 
No licensee shall operate, maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises being occupied for any amusement activity for which a license has been granted under this article any gambling or any game of chance prohibited by State law or this Code. No game of skill or science shall be so controlled, fixed or operated as to substantially deceive the public as to the possibility of succeeding at such game or of winning any prize offered in connection therewith. Money shall not be offered as a prize in any game except as provided by State law. The use of or employing of or permitting of cappers, shills or persons posting as players in connection with any amusement activity is prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 43.093) 
Cross reference— Gambling, § 70-271 et seq.  
Sec. 14-274. - Posting of rules of games. 
The rules of any game of skill or science, the prizes offered, the requirements for winning each prize or group of prizes, and the cost of participating in such games shall be clearly indicated and prominently displayed at the location where such game is played. No changes in such rules shall be made and such games shall be conducted substantially as described in the application for the license. 
(Code 1979, § 43.099)  
Sec. 14-275. - Lighting. 
The area around and between tents, facilities and equipment of any amusement activity regulated by this article shall be well lighted at all times during the operation of such amusement activity or part thereof. An emergency lighting system approved by the Department of Community Development to provide adequate lighting for orderly evacuation of the enclosed area in the event of disaster or emergency shall be provided by the licensee. The operation of any amusement activity at any time when such requirements are not being fully met is prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 43.094)  
Sec. 14-276. - Health and sanitation requirements. 
An amusement activity regulated by this article, and each portion thereof, shall conform to the health and sanitation requirements established by the Village Manager or designee and by applicable State and Village laws. 
(Code 1979, § 43.095) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86.  
Sec. 14-277. - Alcoholic beverages. 
No licensee under this article or other person shall sell or maintain for sale on the premises occupied for any amusement activity any form of alcoholic beverage, nor shall any licensee permit sale, maintenance for sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on any premises while any amusement activity is being operated or conducted thereon, unless specifically authorized to do so by the terms of a Village license. 
(Code 1979, § 43.096) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 10.  
Sec. 14-278. - Uniformed guards. 
The number of peace officers or guards as required by the Chief of Police shall be on duty during all hours of operation of an amusement activity regulated by this article, or any portion thereof, and shall cooperate fully with the law enforcement, health and fire protection agencies of the Village. Peace officers or guards shall register with the Chief of Police and shall identify themselves and prove their status as peace officers or licensing by the State prior to the first day of any amusement activity. The Village Manager or designee may determine that Village personnel shall serve in this capacity. In such cases the licensee shall be responsible for all related costs. 
(Code 1979, § 43.097)  
Sec. 14-279. - Compliance with building and fire codes and other applicable regulations. 
A licensee under this article shall comply with the building and fire codes and reasonable requirements of the Village Manager or designee and shall be responsible for compliance with such codes by every activity carried on pursuant to the license. Upon request, the licensee shall furnish proof to the Village that all equipment, rides, tents and structures utilized in connection with the amusement activity have been inspected and are in compliance with applicable State and Village laws and regulations, and shall cooperate with the inspection thereof by local police, fire, building, health or other public officials and personnel. 
(Code 1979, § 43.098) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50.  
Sec. 14-280. - Tents. 
If a licensee under this article will install tents in conjunction with the amusement activity or any related activity, a license for the installation and maintenance of such tents shall be required. 
(Code 1979, § 43.099)  
Secs. 14-281—14-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Required; dates of operation. 
No person or corporation shall establish, set up, maintain, exhibit, participate in, conduct, or carry on in the Village any carnival, circus, fair, Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, rodeo, or other similar or related type of amusement place or activity, or parade any such amusement activity in whole or in part within the Village, with or without a charge being made therefor, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. Every license shall show consecutive dates of operation not to exceed 6 days. 
(Code 1979, § 43.081)  
Sec. 14-302. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 43.082)  
Sec. 14-303. - Filing of application. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be filed at least 90 days prior to the proposed date of first conducting such activity as the Manager shall require to review, investigate, consider and determine such matter. 
(Code 1979, § 43.082)  
Sec. 14-304. - Issuance to persons under 21 years of age. 
No license shall be granted under this division to any person under 21 years of age, or in any case where the applicant is a person under 21 years of age. 
(Code 1979, § 43.083)  
Sec. 14-305. - Processing and review of application. 
(a)  An application for a license under this division shall be processed in accordance with procedures established by the Village Manager. 
(b)  The Village Manager shall review and consider the application and reports, and shall determine whether a license should be granted for the proposed activity or any part thereof. No license shall be granted unless, in the sound judgment of the Village Manager, the conduct or maintenance of such amusement activity at the proposed location will not endanger public peace, health, safety or welfare. In granting any license, the Village Manager may impose such conditions or requirements as the Manager deems necessary to protect public peace, health, safety and welfare. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Village Manager in granting or denying any application for a license may appeal such action to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, which shall consider and determine the matter at its next regular meeting, or at any special meeting called in whole or in part for such purpose. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall, in reviewing the action of the Village Manager, exercise the same discretion and be subject to the same guides and limitations as are provided in this section for consideration and determination of such matters by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 43.086)  
Sec. 14-306. - Notice to residents; objections. 
No license shall be issued to allow an amusement activity governed by this article to be located within 500 feet of any occupied residence dwelling or to be conducted upon any public street or alley unless at least 30 days prior thereto the licensee or applicant shall give written notice, by First Class United States Mail or personal delivery, to every property tenant or occupant within 500 feet. In addition, for multi-family units in the subject area, such notice shall be posted in the common areas of the building. The notice shall set forth substantially the information contained in the license application and the name and telephone number of the Village Manager or designee at the Village with whom objection to the granting of the license may be filed. A copy of the notice shall be attached to the license application and is subject to Village approval as to form. Within 15 days after mailing of the notice, the Village Manager or designee may issue the license upon a determination by the Manager or designee that the amusement activity will not pose a threat or nuisance to the public health, welfare or safety. 
(Code 1979, § 43.091; Ord. No. 02-11-C-3131, § 1, 11-4-2002)  
Sec. 14-307. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 14-308. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties. 
(c)  Any license granted under this division may be revoked by the Mayor and Board of Trustees or by the Village Manager, without regard to who granted such license, at any time that it appears that the proposed or actual operation of the amusement activity will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance, or to endanger public peace, health, safety or welfare. Any license may be suspended in whole or in part at any time that the amusement activity is conducted contrary to the license or to any State or Village law, or when any such amusement activity or portion thereof is conducted so as to constitute a public nuisance or to disturb the peace, or to be injurious to the public peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension shall become effective immediately upon delivery of written notice to the person in immediate charge of the amusement activity or portion thereof affected by such suspension, or if no such person be found upon the premises, immediately upon the posting of such notice in 3 prominent places near the entrances to the premises occupied or the portion thereof affected, by a Village employee or official. Such posting shall be carried out in all cases and shall give notice of such suspension. Such notice shall, in general terms, state the reason for such suspension. The Mayor and Board of Trustees may, for good cause, cancel any suspension, but in all cases they shall promptly take such steps as are necessary to inform related Village officials of the action taken and of the reasons therefor. Upon delivery or posting of such notice of suspension in the manner specified, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, engage, or participate in, except as a patron, any such amusement activity as may be ordered suspended by such notice of suspension. 
(Code 1979, § 43.088)  
Sec. 14-309. - Appeals. 
The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall decide all appeals by a licensee from the suspension, revocation, or refusal of a license under this division and shall hold a hearing on the appeal not later than 24 hours from the date it is filed; otherwise such suspension, revocation or refusal shall become ineffective. At such hearing, the licensee shall have opportunity to show cause why such suspension or revocation should not be continued or made permanent, or a license issued, and the decision of the Board of Trustees shall be made within 24 hours after the conclusion of such hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 43.089)  
Sec. 14-310. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-76. 
(Code 1979, § 43.084)  
Sec. 14-311. - Bond. 
(a)  A licensee under this division shall, in addition to payment of business license fees and license fees provided in Section 46-76, deposit with the Village, not later than 48 hours prior to the first day of conducting any amusement activity, and shall maintain for a period of 90 days after the termination of activities under such license as may be issued by the Village, a cash bond in an amount determined by the Village Manager or designee, or in lieu thereof shall post and maintain in full force and effect during such period a surety bond in an amount determined by the Village Manager or designee. The bond shall be issued by a surety company approved by the Village Manager or designee and shall be in a form approved by the Village Manager or designee. Such bond shall, by its terms: 
(1)  Ensure payment to the Village of any damage to Village property occasioned by the operation of such amusement activity or parade, including damage occasioned by the entrance into or exit from the Village of the licensee or of the equipment, facilities, or personnel of such amusement activity as shall be permitted by the license; 
(2)  Ensure the cleaning of the premises used for such amusement activity, and of the immediate surrounding properties and streets, of such litter and debris as may result from the operation thereof, to return the lot to its original condition, unless otherwise agreed between the property owner and owner of the place of amusement; 
(3)  Ensure the removal, with 48 hours after the licensee shall leave the Village, of any signs, placards or advertising matter placed upon any property within the Village limits by authority of any licensee or by any employee, agent of the licensee or by an person conducting or engaged in any amusement activity covered by such license; and 
(4)  Ensure payment of any fines levied against the licensee for violation of this Code or any other ordinance or State law, while conducting amusement activities in the Village. 
(b)  Such bonds may be returned by the Village Manager or designee when, in the reasonable judgment of the Manager or designee, the conditions of and/or reasons for requiring such bonds have been satisfactorily met. The licensee shall be promptly notified of any claims made or contemplated against such bond or surety, and shall have the right to appeal from any such claim, or the amount thereof, to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The decision of the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall be final. 
(Code 1979, § 43.087)  
Secs. 14-312—14-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-331. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of any motion pictures or theatricals in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-332. - Premises permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, present or conduct any motion pictures or theatricals on premises which are not covered by the license required or without a permit therefor. No permit shall be issued for such presentation in or on any building or premises which does not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the Village for the construction or maintenance of buildings or places for this purpose. 
(Code 1979, § 43.103)  
Sec. 14-333. - Prohibited performances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or present any motion picture which has a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of the peace, or any picture or performance that violates State or federal law. 
(Code 1979, § 43.104)  
Sec. 14-334. - Building requirements. 
It shall be unlawful to present any motion picture or theatrical in any building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required by the ordinances of the Village or by statute concerning buildings or places intended for motion pictures or theatrical performances, or in premises in which the electrical wiring does not comply fully with the ordinances of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 43.107; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 1, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, deleted § 14-334 which pertained to seating of patrons, and derived from Code 1979, § 43.105, respectively. Said ordinance renumbered former § 14-336 as § 14-334 to read as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22.  
Secs. 14-335—14-350. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, deleted §§ 14-335 and 14-337, which pertained to scenery to be nonflammable; obstruction of exits, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 43.106 and 43.108.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-351. - Required; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or organization to give, present or conduct any motion pictures or theatricals, for admission to which a fee is charged, except performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a not-for-profit, educational, governmental or religious organization, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 43.101)  
Sec. 14-352. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 43.102)  
Sec. 14-353. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 14-354. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 14-355. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 14-356. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this division, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 14-357. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 14-358. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-357. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 14-359. - Fees. 
Fee for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 43.101)  
Sec. 14-360. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 14-361—14-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MUSIC VENDING MACHINES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-381. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a music vending machine in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 14-382. - Electrical safety requirements. 
Every jukebox or music vending machine or device, if operated electrically, shall bear the seal of an approved electrical laboratory. 
(Code 1979, § 43.112(1)) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 110.  
Sec. 14-383. - Obstruction of exits. 
A jukebox or music vending machine or device shall not be so placed on the premises so as to block the ingress or egress of the exits on the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 43.112(2))  
Sec. 14-384. - Maximum sound level. 
The sound volume of any jukebox or music vending machine or other similar device shall be so regulated that it will not be heard outside the confines of the premises of the licensee. 
(Code 1979, § 43.112(3))  
Secs. 14-385—14-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-401. - License. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to display for public patronage, or keep for operation, any jukebox or music vending machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, token, slug, plate, or disc into any slot, crevice or opening, or by the payment of any price, shall operate, or may be operated, for the emission of songs or music, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. A license is required for each such jukebox displayed or operated. 
(Code 1979, § 43.111)  
Sec. 14-402. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 43.034)  
Sec. 14-403. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 14-404. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 14-405. - License emblem. 
(a)  Upon the execution of an application and payment of fees as provided in Section 46-73, the Village Manager or designee shall deliver to the applicant for a license under this division a sticker license emblem, the form and size of which shall have been approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix the sticker license emblem or plate in a conspicuous place on the licensed music vending machine and it shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove the emblem or plate from the machine during the year for which it is licensed. 
(Code 1979, § 43.032)  
Sec. 14-406. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 14-407. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant, licensee that the applicant, licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 14-408. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 14-407. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 14-409. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 43.034)  
Sec. 14-410. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq.; license and impoundment fees for dogs and cats, § 46-37; health and sanitation, ch. 54; killing or injuring birds, § 70-152. 
State Law reference— Animal Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.; powers of municipalities, 510 ILCS 5/24; Humane Care for Animals Act, 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(a)  Protect the public from rabies by specifying such preventive and control measures as may be necessary; 
(b)  Protect animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, inhumane treatment and health hazards, particularly rabies; 
(c)  Provide security to the public from annoyance, intimidation, and injury from cats, dogs and other animals; 
(d)  Encourage responsible pet ownership. 
(Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative Law Officer means the individual(s) appointed as an Administrative Law Officer in the Village's Administrative Hearing System pursuant to Chapter 2 of the Village Code. 
Altered means any animal that has been surgically spayed or neutered. 
Animal shall be defined as set forth in the Humane Care for Animals Act, 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq., and future amendments to that statute. 
Animal Control Officer means the Animal Control Officer (ACO) of the Village or other individual designated by the Village Manager, or designee, that is charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Animal Shelter means any public or private organization, including the organization's officers, agents and representatives when acting in the name or on behalf of the organization that controls, rescues, shelters, or cares for, animals as all or part of the purpose of the organization. 
Apiary means a Beehive and its equipment, including Honeybees, comb, honey, pollen, brood, and the surrounding fencing and flyway. 
Beehive means a frame or structure used or employed as a domicile for Honeybees. 
Beekeeper means a person who owns or has charge of one or more Colonies of Honeybees. 
Beekeeping Equipment means anything used in the operation of an Apiary, such as Beehive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors. 
Cat means any member of the feline family (Felis domesticus), 4 months or more of age. 
Colony means all of the Honeybees living together as one (1) social unit. 
Dangerous Animal means any animal designated by an Administrative Law Officer as a Dangerous Animal as described in Section 18-61. 
Dog means any member of the canine family, 4 months or more of age. 
Domestic Animal means a dog, cat, or other animal, the keeping of which is not otherwise prohibited under the terms of this chapter, which has been raised or maintained in confinement or otherwise domesticated so as to live in a tame condition. 
Great Bodily Harm means a physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or injury requiring plastic surgery. 
Honeybee means the common domestic Honeybee, limited to the Apis mellifera species, specifically excluding the African Honeybee, Apis mellifera ssp scutellata or Africanized Honeybees. 
Impoundment means taken into custody by the Animal Control Officer. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection of rabies vaccine, subcutaneously or otherwise, as approved by the State Department of Agriculture. 
Langstroth Type Beehive means a Beehive consisting of an outer frame with a solid top cover, an inner cover, a bottom board, and a number of boxes and supers containing tightly spaced movable frames. 
Leash means a cord, rope, strap, or chain that is securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog and is sufficient to physically restrain and control the dog. No leash shall be longer than 8 feet in length. 
Menacing Animal means any animal designated by an Administrative Law Officer as Menacing Animal as described in Section 18-60. 
Microchip means an identifying device consisting of a microchip or similar device that is humanely and permanently installed in or injected under the skin of an animal by a licensed veterinarian and when scanned by an electronic reader, provides for the identification of the animal and the name, address, and telephone number of the Owner. 
Muzzle means a fastening or covering of the mouth of an animal used to prevent an animal from biting. The muzzle shall not injure the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration. 
Non-Retractable Leash means a leash that cannot be increased or decreased in length via any mechanical device or any other means. 
Overly Aggressive Honeybee Colony means a Colony of Honeybees that exhibits a level of aggression in response to stimuli that makes the Colony a public health hazard. 
Owner means any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in such person's care or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by such person. 
Owner's Agent means an adult 18 years of age or older authorized by the Owner to provide care for the Owner's animal(s). 
Police Dog means any dog utilized by a law enforcement agency. 
Queen means an adult, mated female Honeybee that lives in a Honeybee Colony or Beehive. 
Run Line means a securely anchored system of tying and keeping an animal in place with either a rope or chain sufficient to physically restrain and control the animal. 
Running at Large means that a dog is off the premises of its Owner and not under the physical control of the Owner, or the Owner's Agent. 
Service Dog means any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, without limitation, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to sounds, and pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items for individuals with mobility impairments. 
Secure Enclosure means a structure erected that: 
(1)  Is designed to confine and prevent the escape of a Dangerous Animal or Vicious Animal and prevent the entry of children or other animals; 
(2)  Is at least 6 feet tall; 
(3)  Locks securely, and includes a secure top, sides, and bottom; 
(4)  Has sides that embed into the ground at a depth of at least one foot and attach to the bottom of the enclosure so that the animal confined within cannot escape by digging under the sides of the enclosure; 
(5)  Is adequately lighted, kept in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(6)  Is labeled with a prominently displayed warning sign at each entrance that indicates that a dangerous or vicious animal is confined within. 
Severe Injury means any physical injury that results in deep punctures, lacerations or muscle tears or requires multiple sutures. 
Swarm means a cluster or flying mass of Honeybees. 
Vicious Animal means an animal designated as a Vicious Animal pursuant to Section 18-62. 
Wildlife means any animal that is not ordinarily tamed or domesticated. 
(Code 1979, § 13.01; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 1, 11-4-2013; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-3. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 13.22; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 18-4. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this chapter, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court or for an administrative hearing to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Code 1979, § 13.23; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 18-5. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Code 1979, § 13.24; Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 2, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 18-6. - Animal Control Officer. 
The Director of Public Health shall be ex officio Animal Control Officer for the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 13.03; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 18-7. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act of cruelty to any animal, or to knowingly cause or allow to be caused any act of cruelty to any animal, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Willfully shooting, poisoning, killing, drowning, injuring, abusing, tormenting or ill-treating any animal; 
(2)  Treating any animal in a cruel manner; 
(3)  Failing, refusing or neglecting to provide any animal in his or her charge or custody with proper food, water, exercise, shelter, air or adequate veterinary care; 
(4)  Containing any animal in such manner that the animal does not have adequate space or ventilation; 
(5)  Abandoning any animal within the corporate limits of the Village; 
(6)  Leaving any animal in an unattended motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature exceeds 72 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(7)  Confining an animal in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer in such a manner that places it in a life- or health-threatening situation such as, by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold; 
(8)  Transporting an animal in the trunk of a vehicle; 
(9)  Transporting an animal in the open bed of a truck unless the animal is restrained in a secured kennel; 
(10)  Owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or taking custody of any animal for the purpose of causing, instigating or staging the fighting or baiting of any animals; 
(11)  Owning or managing any real property located within the corporate limits of the Village that is used for the causing, instigating, or staging the fighting or baiting of any animals or for the purpose of training animals for fighting or baiting; 
(12)  Cropping the ears or docking the tail of an animal, unless it is done as a surgical procedure performed by a licensed veterinarian; 
(13)  The utilization of leg-hold traps under any circumstances. 
(b)  Any person who kills or injures a Domestic Animal while driving a vehicle shall stop at the scene of the accident and immediately report the incident to the Skokie Police Department. 
(c)  Any Animal Control Officer or Police Officer may take custody of any animal, upon either private or public property, that such officer reasonably determines has been the victim of cruelty, appears to be gravely injured or is otherwise in need of urgent medical attention. The Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall place the animal in the care of a licensed humane society or licensed veterinarian for treatment, boarding or other care. If upon examination by a licensed veterinarian, he or she determines that the animal is suffering and in the best interest of the animal it should be euthanized, the veterinarian may euthanize the animal. 
(d)  If a person is found liable for a violation of this Section by the Administrative Law Officer or guilty by the Circuit Court of Cook County, and either the Administrative Law Officer or Judge determines that the animal(s) involved would be subject to any cruelty in the future, then the Administrative Law Officer or Judge may order that such animal(s) shall not be returned to or remain in the custody of such person and the animal(s) relinquished to either a licensed animal shelter, an animal rescue organization or licensed veterinarian for adoption. 
(e)  A person found liable or guilty of violating Section 18-7 may be prohibited from owning or possessing a Domestic Animal for a period of 1 year by order of the Circuit Court of Cook County or Administrative Law Officer. 
(Code 1979, § 13.17; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
State Law reference— Humane Care for Animals Act, 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.  
Sec. 18-8. - Prohibited species. 
(1)  No person shall keep, or suffer to be kept, any cattle, goats, horses, swine, poultry or other livestock in the Village. 
(2)  No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any species which may endanger the safety of persons or property. This includes species, other than commonly recognized domestic pets, which may harm or injure humans by injection of toxins, by constriction or suffocation, or by vicious biting, scratching or mauling. It is no defense to a violation of this subsection that the keeper of such species prohibited herein has attempted to domesticate such species. Exceptions to this subsection are species displayed or harbored under the auspices of a governmental agency and the Beekeeping as outlined in Article IV of this Chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 13.18; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, changed the title of § 18-8 from "Keeping livestock" to "Prohibited species."  
Sec. 18-9. - Noisy animals. 
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(Code 1979, § 13.20; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012) 
Cross reference— Noise, § 42-71 et seq.  
Sec. 18-10. - Keeping, killing or injuring wildlife. 
No person shall keep, kill or wound, or attempt to keep, kill or wound, any wildlife, game or songbird in the Village, or shall take the eggs or young of any such animal without appropriate permits from the State Department of Agriculture or the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 1979, § 13.19; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012) 
State Law reference— Wildlife Code, 520 ILCS 5/1.1 et seq.  
Sec. 18-11. - Feeding wildlife or birds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Feed means any material, including but not limited to bird seed, bird feed, corn, bread pieces, food scraps, domestic animal food, or any like or similar substance which can be utilized for consumption by wild/feral mammals and/or birds to provide nourishment. 
Feeding means the spreading, casting, laying, depositing or dumping of feed on any private or public property within the Village. 
Hanging feeder means feeders designed for suspension from a stationary object, but which may be mounted on a post or similar object. The majority of the feed remains enclosed within the feeder with access points for the intended species. The term "hanging feeder" includes but is not limited to hoppers, tube feeders, window feeders and post-mount feeders. 
Hummingbird feeder means feeders designed to hold liquid feed and attract nectar-feeding bird species. 
Platform feeder means feeders designed for the open placement of feed generally intended for consumption by ground-feeding species. 
Post-mount feeder means feeders designed for mounting on a post or stationary object. The majority of the feed remains enclosed within the feeder, with access points for the intended species. 
Suet feeder means a fat-based feed generally formed into a ball or block and intended primarily for feeding insect-eating birds. 
Water dispenser means containers that hold water used by birds for drinking and bathing. The term "water dispenser" does not include ornamental ponds. 
Wild/feral animal and/or bird means any mammal or bird not generally considered domesticated, including but not limited to the following: gray squirrel, ground squirrel, chipmunk, rat, mouse, rabbit, raccoon, opossum, skunk, pigeon, sparrow, mourning dove, starling or crow. 
(b)  Ground feeding prohibited. All feed must be placed within an approved container, receptacle or feeder designed for the feeding of wild/feral mammals and/or birds and as defined in this section. 
(c)  Number of feeders. The maximum number of feeders per residential or business/commercial lot shall be as follows: 
Type of Feeder 	Quantity Allowed 
Hanging feeders 	4 
Suet feeders 	2 
Water dispensers 	2 
Platform feeders 	1 
Hummingbird feeders 	No limit 
 
(d)  Design of feeders. No feeder shall have a base area exceeding 400 square inches. Feeders must be designed to minimize any nuisance, including but not limited to excessive spillage of feed. 
(e)  Platform feeders. 
(1)  A maximum total of 1 pound of feed shall be present on any platform type feeder. 
(2)  A minimum 1-inch-high lip shall encompass all platform feeders. 
(3)  All unused food product shall be removed from platform feeders prior to sunset each day, except for platform feeders designed with a tightly closing cover to prevent access. Platform feeders designed with such a cover shall be covered prior to sunset each day. 
(f)  Location of feeders. All feeders must be located at least 5 feet inside property lines. 
(g)  Prevention of nuisance. Unused food product, food waste and animal droppings shall not be allowed to accumulate and become foul, putrid, offensive in odor or an attractant to rodents, vermin or insects. 
(Code 1979, § 13.21; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 18-12. - Tethering. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to tether an animal to a fixed object, except upon the satisfaction of each of the following conditions: 
(1)  The chain, rope, Leash, Run Line or other device used to tether the animal shall be placed or attached so as to prevent the animal from becoming entangled with a structure, tree, plant, shrubbery, another animal or any other object; 
(2)  The chain, rope, Leash, Run Line or other device used to tether the animal shall be of sufficient length, in proportion to the size of the animal, to allow the animal to obtain proper exercise, convenient access to food and water and protection from direct sunlight or extreme weather conditions, but shall not allow trespass upon public property including within 500 feet of a school, or upon private property without the consent of the property owner; 
(3)  The chain, rope, Leash, Run Line or other device used to tether the animal does not weigh more than one-eighth the amount of the animal's weight and is not made from a logging chain or tow chain; 
(4)  The animal is not attached to the chain, rope, Leash, Run Line or other device by any collar or means of restraint that may injure the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, including, without limitation any type of "choke" collar that constricts around the animal's neck when pulled; 
(5)  The animal to be tethered has not been designated as a Dangerous Animal or a Vicious Animal; 
(6)  The animal is not tethered in a manner that threatens the health, safety or welfare of any person or animal; 
(7)  The animal is not tethered and unsupervised between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(8)  The animal is not tethered and unsupervised within 500 feet of any school at any time; 
(9)  The animal is not tethered and unsupervised on public property at any time; 
(10)  The animal is not tethered on private property without the prior consent of the property Owner; and 
(11)  The animal is not tethered and unsupervised during extreme temperatures, including without limitation, during heat advisories or when the temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, 1-21-2014)  
Secs. 18-13—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS; CONTROL OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 18-31. - License for dogs and cats. 
(a)  Generally. Every dog or cat that is housed within the Village of Skokie and that is more than four months of age shall be licensed by the Village, pursuant to this Chapter, not more than 30 days subsequent to the acquisition of the dog or cat or when the dog or cat reaches four months of age. Said license must be maintained annually commencing with the next annual license renewal period as long as the dog or cat is alive or until the dog or cat is no longer residing in the corporate limits of the Village. 
(b)  Fee. Every owner of a dog or cat within the Village shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in Section 46-37, and shall receive from the Village a tag bearing the legend "Skokie Animal License," as well as the license number and the year issued, marked thereon. 
(1)  When making application for a license for an Altered dog or cat, the owner thereof shall present evidence that the dog or cat is so Altered. Any owner of a licensed dog or cat whose license tag has been lost may obtain a replacement tag by payment of the fee set forth in Section 46-37. 
(2)  Any individual involved in breeding animals shall first obtain an Individual Breeder license and pay the $250.00 fee. Any person found breeding animals without the required breeding license shall be in violation of this chapter. This does not apply to Commercial Businesses. 
(3)  No license shall be issued pursuant to this Section to any applicant or Owner who has been declared to be a Problem Pet owner Pursuant to Section 18-40. 
(c)  Tag. Every owner of a dog or cat within the Village shall keep such license tag securely attached to a sturdy collar or harness fastened around the neck or body of such dog or cat at all times when the dog or cat is off the premises of the licensed owner. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner, the owner's agent or a member of the Department of Public Health to remove a license tag from a dog or cat. 
(d)  Term. It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog or cat within the Village unless such person shall procure a license therefor. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on August 31. 
(e)  Rabies inoculation. Rabies inoculations are mandated for all dogs and cats. No Village license shall be issued for any dog or cat without proof of current rabies inoculation. 
(Code 1979, § 13.02; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
State Law reference— Inoculation against rabies, 510 ILCS 5/8.  
Sec. 18-32. - Exemption from license requirement for animals of nonresidents. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to the licensing of animals shall not apply to animals of nonresidents remaining temporarily in or passing through the Village, provided such animals have a license from some other jurisdiction. 
(Code 1979, § 13.14)  
Sec. 18-33. - Impoundment of unlicensed dogs and cats. 
All unlicensed dogs or cats within the limits of the Village in violation of this chapter shall be impounded. 
(Code 1979, § 13.04)  
Sec. 18-34. - Impoundment of nuisance animals. 
Any dog or cat found running at large in the Village shall be deemed and considered to be a public nuisance. The owner of a dog or cat shall exercise proper care and control of the animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance, and every instance of a dog or cat becoming a public nuisance shall constitute a violation of this chapter by the owner of the dog or cat. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of the Village to impound any such dog or cat deemed to be a public nuisance. The Animal Control Officer, or the Animal Control Officer's duly appointed deputy, shall, immediately upon the impounding of any dog or cat, make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog or cat, and whether licensed, if known; and, if licensed, the Animal Control Officer shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag, if known, and if bearing an inoculation tag, the number of such tag shall be recorded. When any licensed dog or cat shall be impounded, the Animal Control Officer, or the Animal Control Officer's deputy, shall forthwith give notice in person, by mail or by telephone to the owner of such licensed dog or cat, informing such owner of the impounding of the dog or cat. 
(Code 1979, § 13.05) 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Dogs running at large, 510 ILCS 5/9.  
Sec. 18-35. - Disposition of licensed impounded animals. 
Any dog or cat, with current licensing, which shall have been impounded, may be redeemed by the owner of such dog or cat upon the payment of the fee provided in Section 46-37 for the taking up or impounding of such dog or cat and the payment of the cost of keeping such dog or cat while impounded. If, at the expiration of 7 days from the date of impounding, such dog shall not have been redeemed by the owner thereof, the Animal Control Officer may dispose of such animal. The cost of keeping impounded animals shall be determined from time to time by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 13.06)  
Sec. 18-36. - Disposition of unlicensed impounded animals. 
Any unlicensed dog or cat which shall have been impounded may be redeemed by the owner or the agent of the owner upon payment of the fee set forth in Section 46-37 for taking up or impounding such animals, the annual license fee, and the cost of keeping such animal while impounded. If any such animal is not redeemed within 5 days after being impounded, the Animal Control Officer may dispose of such animal. The cost of keeping impounded animals shall be determined from time to time by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 13.07)  
Sec. 18-37. - Animals in public areas. 
(a)  Leash required. It shall be unlawful to permit a dog, except when on a leash controlled by the owner or the owner's agent, to use or be upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway or public area within the Village. 
(b)  Places of business and public buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or cause to be brought any animal into any shop, store, or retail place of business wherein the public is invited to do business or any public building. However, it shall not be considered a violation of this subsection if any animal is under such person's control and is brought for the purposes of conducting business or inquiry wherein the physical presence of the animal is required. 
(c)  Schools and parks. It shall be unlawful to permit any dog, even though on a leash, to go or be upon any school premises, public playground, public swimming pool or public park within the Village or upon a path or sidewalk extending through or within any school premises, public playground, or public park within the Village unless otherwise permitted by the governmental authority owning or controlling the property. 
(d)  Length of leash. No leash shall be longer than 8 feet in length. 
(e)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to animals assisting persons with disabilities or to animals in the Canine Unit of the Village Police Department. 
(f)  Removal of feces. It shall be deemed to be a public nuisance for any person to cause or permit any dog owned, controlled, or kept by such person to defecate upon any public street, sidewalk, or other public place, or upon any other premises not owned or controlled by the person owning, controlling, or keeping the dog. However, any person owning, controlling, or keeping a dog who promptly and completely removes such defecation shall not be considered in violation of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 13.08) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 18-38. - Animals trespassing on property of another. 
No person shall, without the consent of the owner of the property concerned, permit any animal in such person's custody and control to enter upon the premises of another within the Village. No dog or cat shall be allowed to injure, destroy or carry away any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other things which may be on such premises or which may be planted or seeded there. 
(Code 1979, § 13.09)  
Sec. 18-39. - Maximum number of dogs. 
No person shall allow or permit more than 2 dogs and more than 4 cats, whether licensed or not, to be or remain in or about any single-family residence, building or lot, or more than 1 dog and more than 2 cats in any single-family apartment or condominium, within the Village under such person's control, at any 1 time, except in veterinary hospitals, pet shops and pounds. 
(Code 1979, § 13.15; Ord. No. 06-11-C-3474, § 1, 11-20-2006)  
Sec. 18-40. - Problem pet owners. 
(a)  Problem Pet Owners. For purposes of this chapter, a Problem Pet Owner is a person who has been determined by the Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook County to have committed: 
(1)  Three separate and unrelated violations of Section 18-61; or 
(2)  Two separate and unrelated violations of Section 18-62; or 
(3)  Two separate and unrelated violations of Section 18-61 and a separate and unrelated violation of Section 18-62; or 
(4)  Two separate and unrelated violations of Sections 18-7; or 
(5)  Two separate and unrelated violations of Section 18-12. 
(b)  Designation of Problem Pet Owner. A person shall be designated as a Problem Pet Owner when the Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook County, at the request of the Health Department, has considered evidence pertaining to past violations of this chapter by the person, and entered an order designating the person as a Problem Pet Owner. 
(c)  Notice of Hearing. A person whom the Health Department requests be designated as a Problem Pet Owner shall be provided with written notice of a hearing before the Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(d)  Pre-Hearing Confinement of Animals. Upon service of notice pursuant to Section 18-40(c), all of the animals for which a license is required, owned by a person whom the Health Department seeks to be declared to be a Problem Pet Owner may be impounded if the Village Manager or his designee determines that impoundment is in the interests of public safety or the health and welfare of the animals. Upon such a determination by the Village Manager or designee, an Animal Control Officer or police officer may require that all of the animals be held in an animal shelter or a secure veterinary hospital until a hearing is held. If all of the animals are not impounded prior to the hearing, the owner shall comply with any and all requirements imposed by the Village Manager or designee for the confinement and care of the animals pending the hearing. Any failure to comply with any such requirement is a violation of this section, and each day of non-compliance will constitute a separate violation. The owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with impoundment. 
(e)  Bar on Licensing or Owning Animals. If, after conducting a hearing, the Administrative Law Officer or the court determines that a person should be declared a Problem Pet Owner, all animal licenses held by that person will be immediately revoked, and it shall be unlawful for that person to license or own any animal in the Village for a period of 24 months from the date of the entry of that determination. Further, upon the designation by the Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook County, that a person is a Problem Pet Owner, that person must immediately surrender all animals, for which a license is required, in his or her possession to the Animal Control Officer. Such person shall have no right to recover such animal nor be compensated for the loss. 
(Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, 1-21-2014)  
Secs. 18-41—18-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MENACING, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS; RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, adopted June 5, 2017, amended the title of Art. III to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article was entitled "Dangerous or Vicious Animals; Rabies Control." 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Vicious and dangerous dogs, 510 ILCS 5/15; dogs exhibiting rabies, 510 ILCS 5/12; dog or other animal bites, 510 ILCS 5/13; prevention of spread of rabies, 510 ILCS 5/14. 
 
Sec. 18-60. - Menacing Animals. 
(a)  An owner or owner's agent who fails to exercise proper care and control of the owner's animal, which results in the animal behaving in a menacing manner, shall be construed as a violation of this section by the owner. An owner's agent may also be in violation as well. Any such animal is hereby declared a public nuisance as provided in Section 18-34, for impoundment purposes. For the purposes of this section, an animal behaves in a menacing manner when, without provocation, it: 
(1)  chases or approaches a person or a domestic animal upon any public or private property in a menacing fashion or with an apparent attitude of attack that does not cause injury; or 
(2)  behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of bodily injury to any person or domestic animal. 
(b)  An animal shall be considered to be provoked when the animal acted in a menacing manner and any of the following circumstances existed: 
(1)  the threatened person was committing or attempting to commit a crime or an act of physical harm against the owner or owner's agent or member of its household; 
(2)  the threatened person was committing or attempting to commit a crime against the property of the owner or custodian of the animal, including without limitation, burglary, vandalism or criminal trespass; 
(3)  the threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the animal or its offspring; 
(4)  the threatened domestic animal was attacking or threatening to attack the animal or its offspring; 
(5)  the threatened domestic animal or threatened person was on the property of the animal's owner, without consent of the property owner; 
(6)  the animal was responding to the infliction of pain or injury; 
(7)  the animal was protecting itself or its offspring; 
(8)  the animal is a service dog or a police dog and was performing its duties; 
(9)  the threatened domestic animal was running at large. 
(c)  Designation. Any animal who has been found to exhibit behavior as outlined in Section 18-60(a) shall be designated as a Menacing Animal. 
(d)  Additional penalties. In addition to the penalties established in Chapter 1, Section 1-6, the following penalties pertain to a violation of Section 18-60(a), in which a designation of Menacing Animal has been made by an Administrative Law Officer or a Judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County. The owner of the Menacing Animal may be required to do any or all of the following: 
(1)  pay a minimum fine of $100.00; 
(2)  have the animal evaluated within ten (10) days by a certified dog trainer, and complete training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the Menacing Animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; 
(3)  have the animal surgically altered and microchipped within 14 days at the owner's expense, if not previously done. 
(4)  keep the animal retained on a Non-Retractable Leash controlled by the owner or owner's agent whenever the animal if off the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 18-61. - Dangerous Animals. 
(a)  An owner or owner's agent who fails to exercise proper care and control of the owner's animal, which results in the animal behaving in a Dangerous Manner, shall be construed as a violation of this section by the owner. An owner's agent may also be in violation as well. Any such animal is hereby declared a public nuisance as provided in Section 18-34, for impoundment purposes. For the purposes of this section, an animal behaves in a Dangerous Manner when, without provocation,: 
(1)  chases or approaches a person or a domestic animal upon any public or private property in a with an apparent attitude of attack that leads to a less than severe injury; or 
(2)  bites or scratches a person or domestic animal which leads to a less than severe injury. 
(b)  An animal shall not be considered to behave in a Dangerous Manner when the behavior occurred due to any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The threatened person was committing or attempting to commit a crime or an act of physical harm against the owner or owner's agent or member of its household; 
(2)  The threatened person was committing or attempting to commit a crime against the property of the owner or custodian of the animal, including without limitation, burglary, vandalism or criminal trespass; 
(3)  The threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the animal or its offspring; 
(4)  The threatened domestic animal was attacking or threatening to attack the animal or its offspring; 
(5)  The threatened domestic animal or threatened person was on the property of the animal's owner, without consent of the property owner; 
(6)  The animal was responding to the infliction of pain or injury; 
(7)  The animal was protecting itself or its offspring; 
(8)  The animal is a service dog or a police dog and was performing its duties; 
(9)  The threatened domestic animal was running at large. 
(c)  Designation. 
(1)  Any animal who has been found to exhibit behavior as outlined in Section 18-61(a) shall be designated as a Dangerous Animal. 
(2)  No owner shall sell, transfer, or otherwise place a Dangerous Animal in the permanent possession of any other person, including without limitation any animal shelter, without first notifying that person that the animal has been designated a Dangerous Animal and notifying the jurisdiction to which the animal will be transferred of the animal's designation as a Dangerous Animal pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Animals Designated as Dangerous Animals in Other Jurisdictions. Any person desiring to bring an animal to live in the Village that has been previously declared within another jurisdiction to have behaved in a Dangerous Manner or a similar manner, or has been designated within another jurisdiction as a Dangerous Animal or any similar designation, must notify the Health Department prior to moving the animal into the Village of such declaration or designation. Upon moving the animal into the Village, the animal will be considered as a Dangerous Animal pursuant to this chapter, and the owner must comply at all times with each and every requirement and restriction established in this chapter pertaining to Dangerous Animals. 
(e)  Additional penalties. In addition to the penalties established in Chapter 1, Section 1-6, the following penalties pertain to a violation of Section 18-61(a), in which a designation of Dangerous Animal has been made by an Administrative Law Officer or a Judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County: 
(1)  For the first violation of 18-61(a), an Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook Count, may require the owner any or all of the following: 
(i)  Pay a minimum fine of $200.00; 
(ii)  Have the animal evaluated within 10 days by a certified dog trainer, and complete training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the Dangerous Animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; 
(iii)  Have the animal surgically altered and microchipped within 14 days of the determination at the owner's expense, if not previously done; 
(iv)  When outside, keep the animal confined in a secure enclosure or restrained on a Non-Retractable Leash no longer than 6 feet in length controlled by the owner or the owner's agent, over the age of 18, at all times. 
(v)  Pay any and all veterinary or medical bills of the injured person or domestic animal, arising out of the incident; 
(2)  For a second violation of 18-61(a), involving an animal which had previously been designated a Dangerous Animal pursuant to Section 18-61(a), arising out of a subsequent and separate incident, the following penalties may be ordered: 
(i)  Pay a minimum fine of $300.00; 
(ii)  When outside, keep the animal in a secure enclosure or restrained on a Non-Retractable Leash no longer than 6 feet in length controlled by the owner or the owner's agent, over the age of 18, at all times, and muzzled when taken off the owner's property; 
(iii)  Have the animal evaluated within 14 days by a certified dog trainer, and complete training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the Dangerous Animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; 
(iv)  Obtain liability insurance coverage for the animal, within 14 days of being ordered to do so, in the amount of at least $100,000, which coverage includes, without limitation, coverage for animal bites. Evidence of the required insurance must be provide to the Village within the same 14 days. This insurance must be maintained on this animal for the duration of its life while living within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie. In lieu of liability insurance, the owner of a Vicious Animal may obtain a surety bond in the value of at least $100,000, must be maintained on this animal for the duration of its life while living within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie 
(v)  Pay any and all veterinary or medical bills, for the injured person or domestic animal, arising out of the incident; 
(3)  For a third violation of 18-61(a), involving an animal which has previously been designated as a Dangerous Animal pursuant to Section 18-61, arising out of two separate incidents, the following penalties may be ordered: 
(i)  The owner of the animal shall be fined a minimum of $500 but not more than $750; 
(ii)  The owner shall be designated a Problem Pet Owner, pursuant to Section 18-40. 
(Code 1979, § 13.10; Ord. No. 09-6-C-3680, § 2, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 18-62. - Vicious Animals. 
(a)  An owner or owner's agent who fails to exercise proper care and control of the owner's animal, which results in the animal behaving in a Vicious Manner, shall be construed as a violation of this section by the owner. An owner's agent may be in violation as well 
(b)  For purposes of this section, an animal behaves in a Vicious Manner when, without provocation, it bites or attacks a person or domestic animal causing a severe injury. Any such animal is hereby declared a public nuisance as provided in Section 18-34, for impoundment purposes. 
(c)  An animal shall not be considered to behave in a Vicious Manner if the behavior occurred due to any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The attacked or injured person was committing or attempting to commit a crime or act of physical harm against the owner or owner's agent or member of its household; 
(2)  The attacked or injured person was committing or attempting to commit a crime against the property of the owner or owner's agent, including without limitation, burglary, vandalism, or criminal trespass; 
(3)  The attacked or injured person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the animal or its offspring; 
(4)  The attacked or injured domestic animal was attacking or threatening to attack the animal or its offspring; 
(5)  The attacked or injured domestic animal or attacked or injured person was on the property of the animal's owner, without consent of the property owner; 
(6)  The animal was responding to inflicted pain or injury; 
(7)  The animal was protecting itself or its offspring; 
(8)  The animal is a service dog or police dog and was performing its duties; 
(9)  The attacked or injured domestic animal was running at large. 
(d)  Any animal that inflicts a severe injury or great bodily harm on a person or domestic animal may be immediately impounded by an Animal Control Officer or Police Officer pending an investigation into the circumstances. The owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with impoundment, unless found after investigation or hearing, not to be in violation of the Skokie Village Code. 
(e)  Designation. 
(1)  Any animal who has been found to exhibit behavior as outlined in Section 18-62(a) shall be designated as a Vicious Animal; 
(2)  No owner shall sell, transfer, or otherwise place a Vicious Animal in the permanent possession of any other person, including without limitation any animal shelter, without first notifying that person that the animal has been designated a Vicious Animal and notifying the jurisdiction to which the animal will be transferred of the animal's designation as a Vicious Animal pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  No owner or keeper of any animal found to be vicious by an Administrative Law Officer or a Judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County shall sell or give away the animal without a written order from an Administrative Law Officer or a Judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County. Whenever an owner of a Vicious Animal relocates, he or she shall notify both the Administrator of the County Animal Control and Skokie Animal Control where he or she has relocated. 
(g)  Animals Designated as Vicious Animals in Other Jurisdictions. Any person desiring to bring an animal to live in the Village that has been previously declared within another jurisdiction to have behaved in a Vicious Manner or a similar manner, or has been designated within another jurisdiction as a Vicious Animal or any similar designation, must notify the Health Department prior to moving the animal into the Village of such declaration or designation. Upon moving the animal into the Village, the animal will be considered as a Vicious Animal pursuant to this chapter, and the owner must comply at all times with each and every requirement and restriction established in this chapter pertaining to Vicious Animals. 
(h)  Additional penalties. In addition to the penalties established in Chapter 1, Section 1-6, the following penalties pertain to a violation of Section 18-62(a), in which a designation of Vicious Animal has been made by an Administrative Law Officer or a Judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County: 
(1)  For the first violation of 18-62(a) where an individual animal has been designated a Vicious Animal, pursuant to Section 18-62, an Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook County Judge, may require any or all of the following of the owner: 
(i)  Pay a minimum fine of $500.00; 
(ii)  Pay any and all veterinary or medical bills of the injured person or domestic animal, arising out of the incident; 
(iii)  Have the animal surgically altered and microchipped within 10 days at the owner's expense, if not previously done; 
(iv)  Confine the animal within a building or a secure enclosure, subject to the approval of the Skokie Health Department; 
(v)  Have the Vicious Animal evaluated within 10 days by a certified dog trainer, and complete training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the Vicious Animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; 
(vi)  Obtain liability insurance coverage for the animal, within 14 days of being ordered to do so, in the amount of at least $150,000, which coverage includes, without limitation, coverage for animal bites. Evidence of the required insurance must be provided to the Village within the same 14 days. This insurance must be maintained on this animal for the duration of its life while living within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie. In lieu of liability insurance, the owner of a Vicious Animal may obtain a surety bond in the value of at least $150,000 which must be maintained on this animal for the duration of its life while living within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie. 
(2)  A Vicious Animal, as determined by an Administrative Law Officer or a Circuit Court of Cook County Judge, shall only be allowed outdoors and outside of a secure enclosure if: 
(i)  The animal is securely muzzled and restrained on a Non-Retractable Leash controlled by the owner or the owner's agent who is over the age of 18, not to exceed 6 feet in length; 
(ii)  The release is necessary for veterinary care of the animal, pursuant to the sale or other change of ownership of the animal, or other direction as ordered by an Administrative Law Officer or the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(3)  For a second violation of 18-62(a), involving an animal which had previously been designated a Vicious Animal pursuant to Section 18-62, arising out of a subsequent and separate incident: 
(a)  an Administrative Law Officer or Circuit Court of Cook County Judge shall order the following penalties: 
(i)  The owner of the animal shall be required to pay a fine in the amount of $750.00; 
(ii)  Pay any and all veterinary or medical bills of the injured person or domestic animal, arising out of the incident; 
(iii)  The owner shall be determined to be a Problem Pet Owner; 
(b)  an Administrative Law Officer or a the Circuit Court of Cook County Judge may order that the animal be humanely euthanized. 
(4)  If an animal causes great bodily harm to or the death of a person, then an Administrative Law Officer or a Circuit Court of Cook County Judge shall order that the offending animal be humanely euthanized, unless extraordinary mitigating circumstances can be demonstrated by the animal owner. 
(Code 1979, § 13.11; Ord. No. 09-6-C-3680, § 2, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 18-63. - Rabies control; animal bites. 
When a person or domestic animal is bitten by an animal within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie, the injured person, the owner of the domestic animal or any witness to the bite has a duty to report the incident to the Village of Skokie Health Department. 
(a)  Impoundment of animals suspected of having rabies. Every veterinarian or other person discovering or suspecting any animal to be suffering with rabies shall forthwith report such fact to the Department of Public Health or designee, giving the name and address of the owner of such animal and the license number thereof, if known. If such animal, after examination by the Department of Public Health, is suspected to be suffering with such disease, the animal shall be immediately impounded according to regulations adopted by the County Department of Animal Control at the expense of the owner. If such animal should die during the interval of observation, the intact brain shall forthwith be delivered to the laboratory of the State Department of Public Health. 
(b)  Impoundment of animal bitten by another animal. Any animal which shall have been bitten by another animal having or suspected of having rabies shall be immediately impounded according to impoundment regulations adopted by the County Department of Animal Control. 
(c)  Confinement of animal biting or scratching person. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any animal, when notified that such animal has bitten, scratched or has otherwise injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away such animal or to permit or allow such animal to be taken beyond the limits of the County. It shall be the duty of such owner, upon receiving notice of the character, to immediately place such animal in a duly licensed veterinary hospital located in the County, where such animal shall be confined according to regulations adopted by the County Department of Animal Control for observation, or deliver such animal to any Village Animal Control Officer for such placement. In case such animal is delivered to a veterinary hospital, notice of the name and location of such hospital shall be immediately furnished to the Department of Public Health by the owner or person in control of such animal, and upon receipt of such animal the veterinary hospital shall submit to the Department of Public Health and the County Rabies Control Division a certificate stating that such animal either shows no symptoms of rabies or does show symptoms of rabies. If, at the expiration of rabies observation in such veterinary hospital, the veterinary hospital shall submit to the Department of Public Health or the County Rabies Control Division a second certificate stating that the animal does not have rabies, the animal may then be released by the Department of Public Health. If, however, the Department of Public Health is presented evidence from a licensed veterinarian that such animal has been inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law prior to the biting and the person bitten was an immediate family member, such animal shall be confined in the house of its owner or in a manner that will prohibit such animal from biting a person for a period of 10 days, unless in the judgment of a licensed veterinarian, circumstances are such that the animal should be confined elsewhere. At the end of the 10-day period a licensed veterinarian shall examine the animal and certify if appropriate that the animal is free of rabies. 
(d)  Surrender of animal. The owner, person in control or custodian of any animal suffering from or suspected to be suffering from rabies, as provided in this section, shall surrender possession of such animal to the Department of Public Health on demand. 
(Code 1979, § 13.12; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012)  
Sec. 18-64. - Authority to destroy animals that cannot be safely impounded. 
If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such animal may be slain by any sworn police officer or Animal Control Officer of the Village. However, in all cases where any animal so slain has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any such person, it shall be the duty of the officer slaying such animal to immediately deliver the carcass and the brain of such animal to the State Department of Public Health. 
(Code 1979, § 13.13)  
Sec. 18-65. - General quarantine. 
Whenever the number of dangerous animals or animals suffering from rabies running at large in the Village shall be such as to endanger the public health, public safety or general welfare, the Village shall apply to the State Department of Agriculture for a quarantine. A proclamation of the Village Manager containing such declaration shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. After the first publication of such proclamation by the Village Manager, it shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to permit such animal to be at large contrary to the terms of such proclamation. 
(Code 1979, § 13.16)  
Sec. 18-66. - Proceedings. 
Any violation of this chapter may be brought before an Administrative Law Officer in the Village of Skokie's Administrative Proceedings or a Judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County. A complaint may be initiated by a witness to the incident, the injured person or owner of an injured animal, or the Village of Skokie. 
(Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-6-C-4296, § 1, adopted June 5, 2017, repealed § 18-66, which pertained to additional penalties for owners of dangerous or vicious dogs and derived from Ord. No. 09-6-C-3680, § 2, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 12-8-C-3931, § 1, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 1, 1-21-2014. Additionally, said ordinance renumbered § 18-67 as § 18-66.  
Secs. 18-67—18-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BEEKEEPING—RESIDENTIAL ONLY 
 
Sec. 18-81. - Beekeeping permit required. 
Persons seeking to have and maintain a Beehive or establish a Honeybee Apiary in the Village of Skokie shall first obtain a Beekeeping Permit. Applicants may be Beekeepers on the residential property of another, as long as all requirements have been satisfied and permission has been granted from the property owner to keep an Apiary and verified in writing. Applications shall be submitted to the Village Manager or designee. Beekeeping Permits are only available for residential property. Beekeepers who owned or operated a Honeybee Apiary within the Village prior to the effective date hereof and who continue to do so after the effective date hereof, shall have thirty (30) days after such effective date to apply for a Beekeeping Permit. 
(a)  At the time of application for a Beekeeping Permit, the applicant shall: 
1.  Submit a scaled site plan of the proposed Apiary showing placement of the Beehive(s), the flyway barrier and fences and compliance with all applicable requirements outlined in this Article; 
2.  Provide a Certificate of Insurance from property owner's homeowner's insurance company verifying that Beekeeping is covered by the insurance policy covering the property where the Apiary will be located; 
3.  Provide a certificate of completion or similar documentation, from a Beekeeping training course provided by an entity approved by the Village of Skokie. The Skokie Health Department shall maintain a list of approved courses. Beekeepers are required to stay current and demonstrate their knowledge of Colony health and management; 
4.  Submit written consent from all neighbors on residential property that abuts the proposed location, in a form provided by the Village of Skokie. Notification is not required for renewals. 
5.  Submit a properly executed hold harmless agreement between the applicant, (if the location of the Apiary is owned by a 3rd party, then the property owner as well) and the Village, waiving any liability for any loss or injury resulting from the design, construction or operation of the Apiary, in lieu of any zoning or building permits that may be associated with the construction of an Apiary; 
6.  Pay a One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollar ($125.00) nonrefundable initial permit fee. 
7.  Provide written consent of the property owner, if the Apiary will be located on residential property not owned by the applicant. The property owner will be required to sign the application as well. 
(b)  State Registration. Beekeeper must, within 30 days of installation of a Colony into a Beehive, register their Beehive(s) with the Illinois Department of Agriculture or as otherwise required by the State of Illinois. State Registration must be maintained for the life of the Beehive. 
(c)  Expiration and Renewal. Beekeeping Permits shall be valid for up to one year. All Beekeeping Permits expire on March 31st of each calendar year. Beekeepers must submit their renewal application at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the expiration date. A renewal permit shall be subject to the requirements [in subsection] 18-81(a)1—3 and (b) as outlined in [subsection] 18-81(c), with payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) permit renewal fee. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-82. - Apiary inspection. 
By signing an application for a Beekeeping Permit, the applicant (and the residential property owner whereon the Beehive is located) authorizes the Village Manager or designee to enter onto that part of the property which contains the Beehive or Apiary for the limited purpose of inspecting the Colony and Apiary for compliance with this Article. Two inspections will be conducted each year by the Skokie Health Department as well other inspections as may be needed. Beekeepers must have their Beehives inspected by the State of Illinois Apiary Inspector at least every other year. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-83. - Beehive type. 
All Honeybee Colonies shall be kept in Langstroth Type Beehives with removable combs, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-84. - Apiary maintenance. 
Beekeepers shall keep all Beekeeping equipment in good condition and secure unused equipment from weather, potential theft, vandalism or occupancy by migratory Colonies. 
(a)  Components. Beekeepers shall ensure that no bee comb, wax or other materials are left upon the grounds of the Beehive or Apiary site. Beekeepers shall promptly store or dispose of any bee comb, wax or other materials which have been removed from the Beehive in a sealed container or within a building or other bee proof enclosure. 
(b)  Water. Beekeepers shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available within ten (10) feet of the Beehive at all times during the Beehive's active months, March through November. The water source must be maintained in a secure receptacle so as not to create a breeding site for mosquitoes. 
(c)  Colony Maintenance. Beekeepers shall monitor and maintain their Colony or Colonies so as not to become a nuisance. Colonies must be monitored at least twice a month from March 1st to November 30th. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-85. - Aggressive behavior. 
In any instance in which a Colony exhibits Overly Aggressive behavior by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation, or exhibits an unusual disposition towards Swarming, it shall be the duty of the Beekeeper to immediately contact the State Apiary Inspector or the Skokie Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-86. - Beehive location. 
Apiaries may only be located and maintained in residential districts with detached residences occupied by the Beekeeper. 
(a)  Apiaries shall be located only in a rear yard at least sixty (60) feet from a front lot line. 
(b)  Apiaries shall be located at least six (6) feet from a side property line. 
(c)  Apiaries shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from a property line that abuts a street right-of-way. 
(d)  Apiaries shall be located at least five (5) feet from a rear lot line that does not abut an alley. 
(e)  Two Apiary sites may not exist within six hundred (600) feet of each other. 
(f)  Apiaries and Beehives shall not be permitted on rooftops or balconies. 
(g)  Beekeepers shall not keep more than five (5) Colonies in their Apiary on any property. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-87. - Fencing and flyways. 
(a)  Fencing. The Apiary shall be enclosed on all sides by a fence five (5) feet in height and shall be at least three (3) feet from the Beehive on all sides. Fencing shall be constructed of a minimum nine (9) gauge woven mesh corrosion resistant material or a solid material. The fence posts shall be constructed of decay and corrosion resistant material set in concrete. The entrance to the Apiary shall have a gate with a locked latch at least four (4) feet from the ground, which shall be closed at all times when the Beekeeper is not present. 
(b)  Flyways. Each Beehive entrance must have a flyway barrier which directs the Honeybees upwards as they exit the Beehive. The distance between the Beehive entrance and flyway barrier shall be no more than ten (10) feet. The flyway barrier may be part of the fence surrounding the Apiary, but must be (6) feet in height and four (4) feet wide and constructed of a solid material that bees cannot fly through. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-88. - Signage. 
Beekeepers shall conspicuously post a weatherproof sign at least ten (10) inches by one (1) foot on all lot lines facing abutting properties and on the Beehive or Apiary fence outside of the latched gate with the statement, "State Registered Beehive(s) on Property" or similar language that makes clear that bees are on the premises. The sign must be visible and easily read from outside the property. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-89. - Nontransferability. 
A Beekeeping Permit shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person, or to any other location. No refund shall be granted for any unexpired period of a Beekeeping Permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Sec. 18-90. - Revocation of beekeeping permit. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke a Beekeeping Permit issued under this Section. The Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation of a Beekeeping Permit. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke the Beekeeping Permit if the Village Manager finds: 
1.  The Beekeeper has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
2.  The Beekeeper has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the permit. 
3.  The Beekeeper owes the Village fees, outstanding fines or penalties. 
(c)  Notice and Hearing. The Village Manager may revoke, suspend or take other action with respect to a Beekeeping Permit in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The Village Manager or designee shall send written notice of the intent to revoke a Beekeeping Permit by First Class US Mail or personal delivery, setting forth the reasons for revocation. 
2.  The notice shall state the effective date of the revocation which shall be no longer than thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, and shall inform the Beekeeper of the right to submit in writing, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice, either: documentation to explain the past occurrences stated in the notice and to propose corrective action to eliminate the violations or request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
3.  If the Village Manager accepts the corrective action proposed by the Beekeeping Permit holder, the Village Manager shall respond in writing, stating the conditions for continuing to hold the Beekeeping Permit, and retracting or deferring the notice of intent to revoke or suspend the Beekeeping Permit. 
4.  If the Beekeeping Permit holder requests a hearing, the Village Manager shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of the date of the original notice, at which hearing the Beekeeper and representative(s) from the Village shall have the right to present any evidence and/or witnesses. 
5.  The Village Manager conducting the hearing shall render a written decision within seven (7) days of the hearing, which shall be sent to the Beekeeper by First Class US Mail or personal delivery. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4015, § 2, 11-4-2013)  
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Compliance with building and fire codes for carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements, § 14-279; building requirements for motion pictures and theatricals, § 14-336; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 42; fees, ch. 46; contractors' surety bonds and registration fees, § 46-133; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; signs, ch. 82; solid waste, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; subdivisions, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 118; nonconforming lots, structures, and uses, § 118-251 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.; control over building and construction, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provisions of adopted codes or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, or who shall erect, construct, alter, repair, convert, remove, demolish or use a building, structure or residence in violation of any approved plan or direction of the Village Manager or designee, or of any permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Sections 1-6 and 1-7 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 23.07; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3613, § 1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 1, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 22-2. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this chapter or the provisions of codes, statutes or rules and regulations referenced in this chapter, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court or an administrative hearing to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Code 1979, § 23.08)  
Sec. 22-3. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Code 1979, § 23.09)  
Secs. 22-4—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 22-31. - International Building Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the International Building Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the building code, excepting those provisions that are modified or deleted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 24.02; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3613, § 1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 14-12-C-4106, § 1, 12-1-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 22-32. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the International Building Code, 2012 edition, is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the International Building Code, 2012 edition, shall have no force or effect. 
(Code 1979, § 24.03; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3613, § 1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 14-12-C-4106, § 1, 12-1-2014)  
Sec. 22-33. - Amendments to International Building Code. 
The International Building Code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
101.1 Title. Insert "Village of Skokie" 
(1)  101.4.3 Plumbing 
The provisions of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to all plumbing systems. 
(2)  101.4.5 Fire Prevention. 
The provisions of The National Fire Protection Association Codes and International Fire Code, 2012 edition, as adopted herein, shall apply to all matters affecting life safety in structures. 
(3)  101.4.6 Energy. Replace "International" with "The State of Illinois as amended". 
(4)  105.1.1 Delete in its entirety. 
(5)  105.1.2 Delete in its entirety. 
(6)  105.2 Work exempt from permit. Delete items 1, 2, 4, 6, and 12, in their entirety. 
(7)  105.5 Expiration. 
a.  Insert the following at the beginning of the paragraph: 
The issued permit shall be granted for 18 months, and pursuant to submission of an application from the permitee, a 6-month extension may be granted by the Village Manager or Designee. 
b.  Delete the last two sentences. 
(8)  Add 105.8 Filing with County Assessor. The Village Manager or designee shall cause to be forwarded to the County Assessor's office a copy of the building permit, together with a copy of all plans, blueprints, drawings and other papers filed in making application for the building permit within 15 days after issuing the permit. Each permit shall show the complete legal description of the land area to which the permit pertains, together with the street and number assigned to the property involved. 
(9)  Section 108 Temporary Structures and Uses. Delete in its entirety. 
(10)  109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Delete the text and replace with the following: 
Fees for the issuance of permits for new buildings, alterations, and other structures and other permits shall be as set forth in Section 46-113 of the Village Code. 
(11)  Add 109.7 Contractors registration fee. Contractors shall register with the Village and pay registration fees as set forth in Section 46-134 of the Village Code. 
(12)  Section 111 Certificate of Occupancy. Delete Section 111 in its entirety and replace with the following: 
Section 111 Certificate of Compliance. 
111.1 General. A certificate of compliance shall be required prior to occupancy or use of any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued. 
111.2 Compliance with codes. No certificate of compliance shall be issued unless a building or structure has been completed in accordance with the building permit and all applicable codes, ordinances and rules and regulations of the Village. 
111.3 Inspections. Upon written application and payment of the fees required in Chapter 46, Article IV, of the Village Code by the owner, building permit holder or their designated agent, the Village Manager or designee may issue a certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance shall only be issued after inspection by the Building, Fire, Engineering, Plumbing, Electrical, and Health Inspectors of the Village to determine whether the building or structure has been completed in accordance with the building permit, plans and specifications and compliance with all codes, ordinances and rules and regulations of the Village. 
111.4 Partial approval. In the case of a multi-unit structure or building, or complex of buildings, a certificate of compliance may be applied for as provided above for any unit, section, floor, or building in case of a complex of buildings, provided that all common areaways and facilities serving the unit, section, floor or building have been completed in accordance with the permit, plans and specifications and compliance with all codes, ordinances and rules and regulations of the Village. 
111.5 Conditional approval. A conditional approval of a certificate of compliance may be issued as hereinafter provided prior to completion of exterior parking requirements, sidewalks, driveways and landscaping, upon determination by the Village Manager or designee that seasonal weather conditions are unfavorable for exterior construction or other factors that prevent the completion of work in a timely manner. Conditional approval of a certificate of compliance shall only be issued upon the Village's receipt from the owner or building permit holder of a cash deposit in an amount equal to 110 percent of the exterior construction to be performed. The cost shall be determined by the Village Manager or designee. The owner or building permit holder shall agree in writing to complete the exterior construction in accordance with the plans and specifications on or before a date certain as determined by the Village Manager or designee. Upon completion of all exterior construction in compliance with the building permit plans and specifications and all codes, ordinances and rules and regulations of the Village, as specified in this subsection, the Village Manager or designee shall refund the cash deposit. Further, the written agreement shall provide that, upon failure of the owner or building permit holder to satisfactorily complete the exterior improvements within the prescribed time, the cash deposit shall be forfeited and the Village shall have the right, without further notice, to cause the work to be performed in accordance with procedures established for public improvements. If the cash deposit is insufficient to cover the cost incurred by the Village to complete the work, the owner or building permit holder shall be responsible for the insufficient amount. If such amount is not paid, the Village shall have the right to place a lien on the property that has benefited from the work for the insufficient amount. 
(13)  Section 113 Delete in its entirety. 
(14)  115.3 Unlawful continuance. Insert the following after the word "penalties": "as required under Section 1-6 of the Village Code." 
(15)  Add Section 117 Construction Hours. The erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or site work requiring a permit is prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and Sundays and holidays except in case of an emergency in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with written permission from the Village Manager or designee. Such permission may be granted for a period not to exceed 3 days while the emergency continues and may be extended for an additional 3 days if the emergency continues. 
(16)  310.1 Residential Group R. At the end of the last sentence, add the following: 
Allowable occupancy shall be defined by the Village Zoning Ordinance. 
(17)  713.3 Materials. At the end of the last sentence, add the following: 
All wood construction to be of masonry concrete block. 
(18)  Add the following language to 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. 
Exception: A complete automatic fire alarm system may be installed throughout the building in lieu of an automatic sprinkler system in the basement where: 
A.  Use is in nonresidential zoning districts; 
B.  Building is a single story having basement compartments with 1-hour fire protective rating no larger than 2,500 sq. ft., with basement use limited to storage of dry goods, merchandise and food products, not needing specialized fire protection, ventilation or handling, with access to basements limited to employees or employee agents only and not for public use with no production work or continuous operations; 
C.  The area in the basement shall be signed as directed by the Fire Chief or designee with a 24-inch square sign, or multiple signs if determined appropriate, with the following text in red 2-inch letters on white background: "Limited Access Basement Area for Employees Only - No Production or Continuous Operation in this Basement"; 
D.  Exiting from the basement is otherwise provided in compliance with the Building Code; 
E.  A sprinkler system is not required by other portions of the Building Code. 
(19)  Add [F] 903.2.13 nonresidential zoning districts. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all occupancies that are in nonresidential zoning districts that are not covered under site plan or special use provisions when the fire area of a single story exceeds 5,000 square feet or the total building fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet . 
(20)  [F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. Delete items 3 and 4 in their entirety. 
(21)  [F] 907.2.10.1.1 Group R-1. Delete the text and replace with the following: 
Single- or multiple location smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with The Smoke Detector Act, 425 ILCS 60/1 et seq., and rules and regulations related thereto, are hereby adopted by reference in Group R-1, except as modified as follows: 
(22)  Add [F] 907.2.10.1.2.4 Every structure which (1) contains more than 1 dwelling unit, or (2) contains at least 1 dwelling unit and is a mixed-use structure, shall contain at least 1 approved smoke detector at the uppermost ceiling of each interior stairwell. If each unit opens directly into a common enclosed stairway, a detector shall also be installed on the ceiling of each floor landing. 
(23)  Table 1021.2(1) Delete in its entirety. 
(24)  1103.1 Where required. Add the following text at the end of the paragraph: The State of Illinois Capital Development Accessibility Standards, May 1997 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be made part of this section. 
(25)  Add 1203.2.2 All concealed areas shall have all roofing materials removed down to roof deck. 
(26)  1203.3 Under-floor ventilation. Replace text with the following: 
The space between the bottom of the floor joists and the earth under any building except spaces occupied by basements or cellars shall be provided with ventilation. This shall be accomplished as follows: 1. Where continuously operated mechanical ventilation is provided at a rate of 1.0 cubic foot per minute (cfm) for each 50 square feet (1.02 L/s for each 10 sq.m.) of crawl space floor area and the ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor retarder. 2. Where the ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor retarder, the perimeter walls are insulated and the space is conditioned in accordance with the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code. 
(27)  Chapter 27 Electrical. Delete in its entirety. 
(28)  Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Delete in its entirety. 
(29)  Add 3001.5 Permits. ASME Safety Code adopted. As a criteria for the issuance of permits hereunder, and the maintenance of all such equipment, the ASME Elevator Code, A17.3-90, is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this code. 
(30)  Add 3001.5.1 Application for permit. It shall be unlawful to install or alter elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, or mechanical equipment used for, or in connection with, the raising or lowering of any stage, orchestra floor or platform lift without first having secured a permit. Applications for a permit shall be accompanied by such drawings and specifications as shall be necessary to inform of alterations, and the location thereof. If the drawings and specifications show that the equipment to be installed or altered is in conformity with the building provisions of this code, the Village Manager or designee shall cause a permit to be issued, provided that all permit fees have been paid. 
(31)  Add 3001.5.2 Inspections. Every elevator, movable stage, movable orchestra floor, movable platform, dumbwaiter or escalator shall be inspected under the direction of the Village Manager or designee at least once every 6 months, and no new equipment shall be placed in operation until an inspection of such equipment has been made. When the required inspection shows that all equipment and safety devices are in good working condition and good repair, it shall be the duty of the Village Manager or designee to cause to be issued a certificate setting forth the result of such inspection and tests and containing the date of inspection, the weight which such equipment will safely carry, and a statement that all equipment complies with the applicable provisions of the code. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager or designee to order that all equipment found to be in an unsafe condition be stopped and remain inoperative until equipment is found to be in compliance with all provisions of this code. 
(32)  Add 3001.5.3 Display of certificate of inspection. It shall be the joint duty of the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of the building in which such equipment is located and of each person in charge or control of such equipment to frame the certificate and place the certificate in a conspicuous place in each elevator and near each dumbwaiter, movable stage, movable orchestra floor, platform lift or escalator. 
(33)  3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher. Delete the first sentence and replace with the following language: 
In new buildings equipped with an elevator at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. 
(34)  Chapter 32 Encroachments into the Public Right-of-Way. Delete in its entirety. 
(35)  Add 3009 Existing elevators. 
3009.1 Safety equipment. Elevators existing and in operation as of January 3, 2005, shall conform to the standards established for emergency standby lighting, telephone and alarm bell as set forth in ASME A17.3. 
3009.2 Firefighters' elevator recall. Elevators in buildings four stories, or greater, shall conform to the requirements of ASME A17.1. 
3009.3 Exemption. Elevators in buildings that are four to seven stories are exempt from Section 2.27.3 of the ASME A17.1, if, prior to January 1, 2010, they are equipped with systems approved by the Skokie Fire Department that provide for: (i) a fire alarm system with smoke detection; and (ii) an activation system that notifies the Skokie Fire Department or other central station. 
(36)  Add 3303. Demolition. 
3303.7 Definition. Demolition is the dismantling or razing of all or part of a building or structure, including all operations thereto. 
3303.8 Demolition Permit. A permit for demolition of a building or structure shall be issued under either Section 3303.8.1 or Section 3303.8.2: 
3303.8.1 Concurrent Demolition. Where a demolition permit and building permit are issued at the same time and construction will begin immediately following demolition, or 
3303.8.2 Demolition Only. Where only a demolition permit is issued and a building permit has not been applied for and/or construction will not begin in less than 30 days. 
3303.9 Site condition. After the demolition of a building or structure as allowed by Section 3303.8.2 and the removal of debris, the following requirements must be met: 
3303.9.1 Purpose. A written statement, which shall include the intended purpose of leaving the site vacant, must be submitted by the property owner to the Community Development Department Director or designee. 
3303.9.2 Grading Plan. A grading plan, prepared by an Illinois Registered Civil Engineer, must be submitted to the Community Development Director or designee. The grading plan shall be submitted for approval by the Village Engineer. 
3303.9.3 Sodding or Seeding. Black topsoil shall be spread four (4) inches deep over the entire surface of the property; and the soil shall be seeded for grass or sodded within thirty (30) days of demolition or the commencement of seasonable weather, i.e., April 15 through October 15 inclusive. If seeded, seeding shall be established at a minimum of five (5) pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet and shall be an approved commercial perennial blend. Once seeded or sodded, the grass shall be maintained. If necessary, it shall be replaced or reseeded or resodded until such time as the grass takes hold, grows and survives. Grass shall be mowed on a regular basis and shall not exceed 6 inches in height. 
Exception: If the submitted grading plan indicated in 3303.9.2, includes paved areas and the property owner requests that paved areas on the site remain, the Community Development Director must approve such a plan or request. In order for the Community Development Director to approve the request for paved areas to remain on site, the following minimum requirements must be met: 
1.  The area to remain paved must be properly paved, curbed, drained, striped, and landscaped pursuant to the Village Code; 
2.  The property owner must indicate in writing that these parking areas are intended for reuse in the future; 
3.  The parking spaces must be made available for general public parking use; 
4.  The parking lot and landscaping must be maintained to Village standards; and 
5.  The property owner shall indemnify the Village for any and all liability related to the Public use of the lot. 
3303.9.4 Signage. Any vacant property with a non-residential zoning, or any property with a residential zoning but with a non-residential use, must be posted with a sign no smaller than two feet by two feet and no larger than four feet by eight feet. Such a sign must provide the name, address, and telephone number of the property owner or agent. The sign must be placed so that the wording shall be legible from the public way. Any and all obsolete signs shall be removed from the property. 
3303.10 Fire safety during demolition. 
(Code 1979, § 24.04; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3613, § 1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-7-C-3629, § 1, 7-21-2008; Ord. No. 12-10-C-3946, § 1, 10-15-2012; Ord. No. 14-12-C-4106, § 1, 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 2, 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 22-34. - Building permit; tree preservation. 
(a)  A building permit shall not be issued until the subject property has been inspected and a determination has been made by the Village Manager or designee, that the tree preservation plan, as required by Section 14.3.1.3.3 of the Skokie Zoning Ordinance, is being properly implemented. 
(b)  The Village Manager or his designee shall have the authority to issue a stop work order or revoke a building permit if any of the following occurs: 
(1)  A tree is removed without first having obtained the necessary tree removal permit; or 
(2)  The required protective fencing has been damaged, destroyed, removed, or otherwise been rendered ineffective; or 
(3)  The necessary precautions as specified in the tree preservation plan were not undertaken before construction commenced, and/or damage to protected trees has occurred or is likely to occur during construction. 
(Ord. No. 03-11-Z-3222, § 3, 11-3-2003)  
Secs. 22-35—22-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SINGLE-FAMILY BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 22-61. - International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Appendix R adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, and regulations thereto and Appendix R, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. as the single-family building code, excepting those provisions that are modified or deleted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 25.02; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3598, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 12-10-C-3946, § 2, 10-15-2012; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4086, § 1, 9-15-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 22-62. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, shall have no force or effect. 
(Code 1979, § 25.03; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3598, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4086, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 22-63. - Amendments to International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition. 
The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  R101.1 Title. Insert "Village of Skokie". 
(2)  R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Delete Building items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10, amend 7 to replace "24 inches (610 mm) deep" with 36 inches (914.4mm) deep and 500 Gal.", amend 9 by replacing "54" with "36". Delete the entire Electrical portion, and item 8 under Mechanical. 
(3)  R105.5 Expiration. Add the following, to the beginning of the paragraph: 
The issued permit shall be granted for 18 months, and pursuant to submission of an application from the permittee, a 6-month extension may be granted by the Director of Community Development. Accessory and over-the-counter permits shall be valid for six (6) months. 
(4)  R107.1. General. Replace "180" with "90". 
(5)  R110.4. Temporary occupancy. Delete in its entirety. 
(6)  Section R112 Board of Appeals. Delete in its entirety. 
(7)  Add R115 Construction Hours and Site Protection. The erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or site work is prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and Sundays and holidays except in case of an emergency in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with written permission from the Village Manager or designee. Such permission may be granted for a period not to exceed 3 days while the emergency continues and may be extended for an additional 3 days if the emergency continues. A six (6) foot chain link fence shall be installed around excavation. 
(8)  Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. Insert under each category: 
Ground snow load ..... 30 
Wind Speed ..... 90 
Seismic Design Category ..... A 
Weathering ..... Severe 
Frost Line Depth ..... 42 inches 
Termite ..... Moderate to Heavy 
Winter Design Temperature for Heating Facility ..... 68°F to -10°F w/50% humidity 
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required ..... Yes 
Flood Hazards ..... Nov. 6, 2000 
Air Freezing Index ..... 2000 
Mean Annual Temperature ..... 50°F 
(9)  Table R301.6 Minimum Roof Live Loads in Pounds-Force per Square Foot of Horizontal Projection. Delete Table and replace with the following: 
MINIMUM ROOF LIVE LOADS IN POUNDS 
Roof loading per square foot of coverage is as follows: 
Pitched Roof Rafters - Rise 4 inches per foot (1:3) or greater 	30 lbs. snow load 
	15 lbs. dead load 
Flat Roof Rafters - Rise less than 4 inches per foot 	30 lbs. snow load 
	20 lbs. dead load 
Manufactured Roof Trusses 	30 lbs. snow load 
	10 lbs. top chord dead load 
	10 lbs. bottom chord dead load 
 
(10)  Table R302.6. Delete existing table and replace with: 
SEPARATION 	MATERIAL 
From the residence and attics 	Not less than 5/8-inch gypsum board orequivalent applied to the garage side 
From all habitable rooms above garage 	Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent 
Structure(s) supporting floor/ceiling assemblies used for separation required by this section 	Not less than 5/8-inch gypsum board or equivalent 
Garages located at least 3 feet and no more than 10 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot 	Not less than 5/8-inch gypsum board or equivalent applied to the interior side of all exterior walls and ceiling 
 
(11)  R303.1 Habitable rooms. Delete Exception in its entirety. 
(12)  Add R303.1.1 Basement. The basic requirement for natural light and ventilation in a residential basement is 2% of the gross basement interior area. When the basement is used for open recreational purposes this requirement shall apply. If a basement is created for another use i.e. study, kitchen then the natural light and ventilation requirements of 8% and 4% shall apply. No sleeping quarters shall be established in a basement. 
(13)  R302.5.1 Opening protection. Delete: "solid wood doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors." and replace deleted text with "13/4 inch (44.5 mm) solid core or one hour UL rated fire doors." 
(14)  R306.3 Sewage disposal. Delete "or to an approved private sewage system". Add "Such connection shall be made overhead". 
(15)  R310.2 Window Wells. Add at the end of the paragraph the following: 
"The maximum horizontal area of a window well is 12.25 square feet, with a maximum horizontal projection of 3.5 feet from the structure wall into the required side yard". 
(16)  R311.2 Egress door. Replace "one" in first sentence with "two". Delete second sentence of the paragraph and replace with, "The required exit doors shall be side-hinged doors not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm) in height. The principal exit door shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width and the secondary exit door not less than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) in width". 
(17)  R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Delete in its entirety. 
(18)  Add R314.3 # 4. In the general location of all heating equipment. 
(19)  R315 Carbon Monoxide Alarms. Delete text in its entirety. Replace with R315.1 Carbon Monoxide Detection, Group R . 
"Approved carbon monoxide alarm" or "alarm" means a carbon monoxide alarm that complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, and complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the Canadian Standard Association. "Dwelling unit" means a room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and includes single family residences as well as each living unit of a multiple family residence and each living unit in a mixed use building. 
(20)  R319.1 Address numbers. Add to end of first sentence "and facing alley". 
(21)  R320.1 Scope. Add phrase at the end of the sentence: in accordance with State of Illinois Accessibility Standards, adopted herein. 
(22)  Add R401.5 Foundation Shoring. All excavations for foundations steeper than a 45 degree angle from a property line shall be shored. Shoring shall be designed by the Architect of Record. Shoring shall be constructed no closer than 12 inches from the property line. The minimum height of the shoring shall not be lower than the adjoining grade and maintained until backfilled. 
(23)  R402.1 Delete in its entirety. 
Amend table R402.2 under severe column, 1st and 2nd line to read 3,000, last is to read 4,000. 
(24)  R403.1.1 Minimum Size. Modify by the addition of the following text at the end of the paragraph: 
One-story frame buildings shall have a minimum of 10-inch (254 mm) wide trench foundation with a continuous 16-inch (406 mm) bell. One No. 4 minimum steel reinforcing bar shall be placed 6 inches (152 mm) below the top of the foundation. All other building types may utilize a minimum of 12-inch (305 mm) wide trench with continuous 20-inch (508) bell footing. Two No. 4 minimum steel reinforcing bars continuously lapped shall be placed 6 inches (152 mm) above the bottom of the trench and 2 No. 4 minimum steel reinforcing bars continuously lapped shall be placed 6 inches (152 mm) below the top of the foundation. The bars shall be placed 3 inches (76 mm) from the sides of each trench. The bars shall be set in place before concrete is poured. The trench shall be free of all loose material. 
(25)  R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Modify as follows: 
1.  In the second sentence, delete "gravel or crushed stone drains" and "gravity or". 
2.  At the end of the paragraph add the following: "The drain tile will be installed on the outside of the foundation and below the top of the footing, except where approved by the Village Manager or designee." 
(26)  R405.2 Wood Foundations. Delete in its entirety. 
(27)  Amend R407.3 change "restrained" to "permanently attached". Steel columns require 3/8" base plate. Delete exception. 
R408.1 Ventilation. Delete wording and replace with: The under-floor space between the bottom of the joists and the earth under any building (except space occupied by a basement) shall be provided with mechanical ventilation. 
R408.2. Delete section. 
R408.3. Replace first sentence only with "Ventilation shall be achieved by the following:" Delete pt. 2.3. 
(28)  R408.5 Removal of Debris. Delete text and replace it with the following: 
All crawl spaces shall be cleaned of all vegetation and organic material, sealed with a vapor barrier and leveled with 4 inches (102 mm) of ¾-inch stone or a darby finished concrete floor no less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick. When the underfloor area (except such space as is occupied by a basement or cellar) is less than 36 inches (914 mm) between the earth under any building and the bottom of the floor joists, the underfloor area shall be cleaned of all vegetation and organic material and sealed with a darby finished concrete floor no less than 4 inches (914 mm) thick. 
(29)  Add R409 Crawl Space Height. All crawl spaces shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height between the floor surface under any building and the bottom of the floor joists except where approved the by the Village Manager or designee. 
(30)  R501.3 Fire protection of floors. Replace "1/2-inch (12.7mm)" with 5/8-inch (16mm) Type X". Delete "5/8-inch" (16mm) wood structural panel membrane". Add "Penetrations thru membrane shall be protected by a UL listed 1 hour firestop or equivalent". Delete Exeptions 1, 2 and 3. 
(31)  R503.2.1.1 Insert "and shall be a minimum of 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) in thickness.", at the end of the paragraph. 
(32)  R503.2.2 Allowable spans. Insert "and shall be a minimum of 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) in thickness." at the end of the paragraph. 
(33)  Section R504 Pressure Preservatively Treated-Wood floors (on Ground). Delete in its entirety. 
(34)  R506.2.2 Base. Delete "graded sand, gravel", "or crushed blast-furnace slag". 
(35)  Table R602.3(5) Size, Height and Spacing of Wood Studs. Modify maximum spacing when supporting roof and ceiling only for stud size of 2 by 4 by deleting 24 and replace it with 16. 
(36)  R702.3.2 Wood framing. Add the following text and the end of the paragraph: 
All interior framing, except basement ceilings, shall be protected by a minimum of one layer of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board. 
(37)  Table R703.4 Weather-resistant Siding Attachment and Minimum Thickness. Delete text of footnote (j.) and replace with the following: 
"Except in accessory structures, all exterior walls shall have a minimum of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) sheathing". 
(38)  Add R703.12 Stone and masonry veneer, general. Every dwelling, except a private garage in the rear of lot, shall have at least 51 percent of the exterior walls of masonry. In no case may structural building units made of any cement mixture, which are commonly described as cement or concrete block, be permitted for the construction of the exterior of outside stucco. Brick veneer shall be permissible for the use under the 51 percent and shall be subject to review by the Village of Skokie Appearance Commission, for residential additions where the 51 percent requirement cannot be met. 
(39)  Add R901.2 Concealed areas. Roofing materials shall be removed down to roof deck in concealed areas. 
(40)  Add R1002.1 Listing. All exposed metal chimneys shall be covered as specified by manufacturers installation instructions. 
(41)  Chapter 11 (RE) Energy Efficiency. Delete text in its entirety and replace with "Current State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code." 
(42)  M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems. Delete items 5, 6, 7 in their entirety. 
(43)  Chapters 25—32 Plumbing. Delete in their entirety. Replace with "2012 International Plumbing Code and current version of State of Illinois Plumbing Code, whichever of the two is stricter." 
(44)  P3302.1 Delete "not" from the 5th sentence in paragraph. 
(45)  Chapters 34—43 Electrical. Delete in their entirety. Replace with "2014 National Electric Code, NFPA 70", as amended. 
(46)  Add Appendix R Fire Sprinklers. 
Appendix R Fire Sprinklers. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout an entire one-family, two-family or townhouse residence under the following circumstances: 
A.  Any new construction of such residence; 
B.  Building additions that increase the floor area of such residence by more than 50 percent of the original square footage of the building prior to construction. 
*Any floor (from finished floor to ceiling) that is more than 50 percent below grade shall not be counted as floor area for purposes of the section only. Attached garages are counted towards the original square footage. 
(Code 1979, § 25.04; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 06-10-C-3465, § 1, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3598, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 12-10-C-3946, § 3, 10-15-2012; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4086, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Secs. 22-64—22-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of electrical wiring, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-2; inspection of electrical equipment, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-91. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, and all regulations thereto, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, as the electrical code, excepting those provisions which are modified or deleted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 26.02; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3614, § 1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4087, § 1, 9-15-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 22-92. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the National Electrical Code is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the National Electrical Code shall have no force or effect. 
(Code 1979, § 26.03)  
Sec. 22-93. - Amendments to National Electrical Code. 
The National Electrical Code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  Add 230.1 (A) New commercial, industrial and residential structures requiring electrical service shall be served underground in an approved manner, and shall be suitably protected against physical damage, unless a determination is made by the Village Manager or designee that the service cannot be provided underground. 
(2)  230.43 Wiring Methods for 1,000 Volts, Nominal, or Less shall be modified as follows: 
Wiring Methods for 1,000 Volts, Nominal, or Less. Service-entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this Code covering the type of wiring method used and limited to the following methods: (1) rigid metal conduit; (2) intermediate metal conduit; (3) busways. 
(3)  ARTICLE 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, and NMS. Delete in its entirety. 
(4)  ARTICLE 352, Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit: Type RNC. Delete in its entirety. 
(5)  ARTICLE 362, Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing: Type ENT. Delete in its entirety. 
(6)  The following shall be added to the adopted electrical code as an addendum: 
a.  Copper wire shall be used for all ground conductors and water meter jumpers. 
b.  New construction: Electrical metallic tubing, rigid conduit or intermediate metal conduit shall be used to enclose all branch circuit wiring. Flexible metallic conduit may be used, with its length limited to 6 feet. 
c.  Provide a minimum one-half inch conduit located one foot from the water meter location to the nearest exterior point on the front elevation (street side) of the building. 
(Code 1979, § 26.04; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4087, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Secs. 22-94—22-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Heating requirements for family day care homes, § 54-166(29); utilities, ch. 110. 
 
Sec. 22-121. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the International Mechanical Code, 2012, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the mechanical code. 
(Code 1979, § 27.02; Ord. No. 05-6-C-3363, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3614, § 1, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4088, § 1, 9-15-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 22-122. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the International Mechanical Code is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the International Mechanical Code shall have no force or effect. 
(Code 1979, § 27.03; Ord. No. 05-6-C-3363, § 2, 6-20-2005)  
Sec. 22-123. - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code. 
The International Mechanical Code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  101.1 Title. Insert "Village of Skokie". 
(2)  109. Means of Appeal. Delete entirely. 
(3)  301.1.1. Natural draft combustion. Natural draft combustion appliances are prohibited within a building envelope. 
(4)  301.2 Energy utilization. Delete International Energy Conservation Code and replace with State of Illinois Energy Code in the last sentence of the paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 14-9-C-4088, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Secs. 22-124—22-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate plumbing and plumbing fixtures, materials, design and installation methods, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-5; Illinois Plumbing License Law, 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-151. - Illinois Plumbing Code and the Lawn Irrigation and Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, et seq., and the Illinois Plumbing License Law, 225 ILCS 320/36, the Village hereby adopts by reference the 2014 Illinois Administrative Code Title 77, Public Health, Chapter 1, Department of Public Health, Subchapter, Water and Sewage, Part 890, Illinois Plumbing Code (referred to in this article as the "Illinois Plumbing Code"), the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 892) and all regulations thereto and subsequent amendments. 
(Code 1979, § 28.02; Ord. No. 06-3-C-3423, § 1, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3614, § 3, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4089, § 1, 9-15-2014; Ord. No. 16-3-C-4208, § 1, 3-7-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 22-152. - WaterSense designation. 
All new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed shall bear the WaterSense label as designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency State Sense Program, when such labeled fixtures are available. 
(Ord. No. 16-3-C-4208, § 1, 3-7-2016)  
Secs. 22-153—22-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-9-C-4089, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2014, deleted §§ 22-152—22-155. Former §§ 22-152—22-156 pertained to conflicting regulations; amendments to Illinois Plumbing Code; roof drainage and downspouts; and sanitary waste below grade, respectively, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 28.03—28.05; Ord. No. 06-3-C-3423, § 1, adopted Mar. 6, 2006; and Ord. No. 08-4-C-3614, § 3, adopted Apr. 7, 2008.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-2-C-3820, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 2011, changed the title of Art. VII from existing structures code to property maintenance code. 
Cross reference— Construction requirements for family day care homes, § 54-166(20). 
 
Sec. 22-181. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, and all regulations thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the property standards code, excepting those provisions which are modified or deleted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 29.01; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 05-6-C-3363, § 3, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 08-7-C-3628, § 1, 7-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-2-C-3820, § 1, 2-22-2011; Ord. No. 14-4-C-4051, § 1, 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 22-182. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the International Property Maintenance Code is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance, or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance, or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the International Property Maintenance Code shall have no force or effect. 
(Code 1979, § 29.02; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 22-183. - Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code. 
The International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  101.1 Title. Modify by deleting "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" and replacing with "Village of Skokie". 
(2)  103.5 Fees. Delete in its entirety. 
(3)  Subsection 104.3 Right of entry. Replace the last sentence with the following: 
"If entry is refused or not obtained, the Village of Skokie is authorized to seek any and all legal and equitable remedies to enforce its ordinances." 
(4)  Section 202 General Definitions. 
... 
Bedroom. Any room or rooms intended to be used for sleeping purposes that has a permanent closet of sufficient size to hold clothes. 
(5)  302.2 Grading and drainage. Insert "seeded and sodded" as follows: All premises shall be graded, seeded or sodded and maintained to prevent erosion of soil .... 
(6)  302.3 Sidewalks, driveways and parking lots. Delete text and replace with the following: 
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces, and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions including snow and ice. 
(7)  302.4 Weeds. Modify by replacing the first sentence of the text with the following: 
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds and plant growth in excess of 6 inches (152 mm). 
Modify the first sentence of the second paragraph text as follows: 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of property to cut and destroy weeds or uncontrolled plant growth... 
(8)  302.5 Rodent harborage. Modify by replacing the last sentence of the text with the following: 
After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage, including property and building modifications, and prevent reinfestation. 
(9)  304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Modify by replacing the first sentence of the text with the following: 
Every window, storm window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. Doors shall fit tightly in the door jam. 
(10)  304.14 Insect screens. Modify by replacing the last sentence of the text with the following: 
Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms... 
(11)  304.18.1 Doors. Replace text with the following: 
Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, room unit or housekeeping unit that is rented or let shall be equipped with a heavy-duty deadbolt to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock throw of 1 inch. The door shall also have a heavy-duty door knob-in-lock set with a dead latch mechanism. Such locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. The locks shall be installed with a heavy-duty four-screw strike plate installed with 3-inch screws to penetrate into a door frame. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Each access door shall also be of solid wood or metal construction and be equipped with a wide angle 160° peephole mounted no higher than 58 inches from the floor. Doors that do not meet these requirements or do not have the required locks, peephole or strike plate must be brought into compliance upon the replacement of the door or the sale of the rental property, whichever comes first. 
(12)  308.1 Accumulation of litter, rubbish or garbage. Replace text with the following: 
All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from accumulation of litter, rubbish, garbage and excessive storage or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed or which create a fire hazard. 
(13)  308.4 Disposal of Litter. The owner of every occupied commercial premises used for the sale of packaged or prepared food and the sale of automotive products shall supply at least one approved covered container for litter at the main entrance to the premises for use by customers. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of litter every four hours. Relief from this requirement may be granted if there is no place to locate a container, the main entrance to the premises abuts a public sidewalk, or the business is located in a shopping center where litter containers are provided by the center's management. 
(14)  309.1 Infestation. Modify by replacing the last sentence of the text with the following: 
After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage, including property and building modifications, and prevent reinfestation. 
(15)  309.5 Occupant. Delete in its entirety. 
(16)  402.2 Common halls and stairways. Modify by deleting "Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than one- and two-family dwellings" and replacing with "Every common hall and stairway in buildings containing more than one dwelling unit, as defined in the Village of Skokie Zoning Ordinance", shall be lighted at all times with... 
(17)  404.4.1 Room area. Modify by adding the following as a second sentence: 
In the event the bedroom is occupied by more than one occupant, then the bedroom shall contain at least an additional 50 square feet of floor area for each additional occupant thereof. 
(18)  404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Replace text with the following: 
Dining rooms, kitchens, living rooms, living/dining room combinations and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(19)  404.4.6 Dining and living room requirement. Add this section: 
404.4.6 Dining and living room requirement. Dwelling units having one or more bedrooms must have a separate dining room, living room or living/dining room combination that complies with the room area requirements in Section 404.1, Room area. 
(20)  404.5 Overcrowding. Replace text with the following: 
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the maximum number of occupants allowed by the number and size of bedrooms. 
(21)  404.5.1 Conversion of space to bedrooms. Replace section with the following: 
404.5.1 Conversion of space to bedrooms. Kitchens, bathrooms dining rooms, living rooms, combined living room and dining rooms, and family rooms and other open common areas shall not be converted to bedrooms without replacing the space with similar common open areas. 
(22)  404.6 Efficiency unit. Replace with the following: 
1.  A unit occupied by one occupant shall have a minimum clear floor area of 120 square feet. A unit occupied by two occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 220 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3. 
... 
(23)  602.2 Residential occupancies. Delete "Exception" in its entirety. 
(24)  602.3 Heat supply. Delete "during the period [DATE] to [DATE]" and Delete "Exceptions" in its entirety. 
(25)  602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Delete "during the period [DATE] to [DATE]". 
(Code 1979, § 29.03; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3319, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-7-C-3628, § 1, 7-21-2008; Ord. No. 11-2-C-3820, § 1, 2-22-2011; Ord. No. 14-4-C-4051, § 1, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016)  
Sec. 22-184. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 5(29.04), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 22-185. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this article, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 5(29.05), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 22-186. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 5(29.06), 10-16-2000)  
Secs. 22-187—22-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Act, 210 ILCS 125/1 et seq.; Swimming Pool Safety Act, 210 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-211. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Classes of swimming pools. There shall be 6 classes of swimming pools: 
(1)  Belowground pools. 
(2)  Aboveground permanent pools, which shall mean any swimming pool of a depth of 2 feet or more and which shall have attached a platform of 30 square feet or more or a walkway which is 24 inches or more in width circumscribing the pool. 
(3)  Aboveground portable pools, which shall mean any swimming pool of a depth of 2 feet or more and which shall have attached a platform of 30 square feet or less or a walkway which is less than 24 inches in width circumscribing the pool. 
(4)  Wading pools, which shall mean any portable or storable type pool having a depth not to exceed 2 feet, or a capacity of 500 gallons. Such pools shall not be subject to the terms of this article, except that they shall be located in rear and side yards only, and shall be drained after each use. 
(5)  Private residential swimming pools, which shall mean a swimming pool located in or on premises used as a single-family dwelling unit, or 2-family dwelling unit, used and intended to be used solely by the owner or lessee of the swimming pool and the owner's or lessee's family and friends invited to use it without payment of any fee or consideration. 
(6)  Public pools, which shall mean any other swimming pool other than a private residential swimming pool and excepting and excluding any swimming pool maintained and operated by the Skokie Park District. 
(Code 1979, § 32.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-212. - Permit to construct. 
(a)  No person or organization shall proceed to construct a swimming pool or make structural alterations at any existing private or public pool without first having obtained a permit therefor, issued and signed by the Village Manager or designee upon approval of the application. No permit is required for the erection of a portable pool if the capacity of such pool is 500 gallons or less. 
(b)  Applications for permits under this article shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. Each application for a permit to construct a public pool shall be accompanied by an approval permit for the construction issued by the State Department of Public Health in accordance with provisions of the State swimming pool law. 
(Code 1979, § 32.03)  
Sec. 22-213. - Permit to operate. 
(a)  An annual permit to operate a swimming pool is required for all swimming pools except for 1- and 2-family residential pools. 
(b)  The application shall be made in writing to the Village Manager or designee. An operation permit shall be renewed annually in May and whenever a pool is to be reopened for use after being closed down for a period longer than 3 months. 
(c)  Public pools closed for a period of 1 year or longer shall apply for a permit to operate on a form issued by the Village Manager or designee. 
(d)  The Village Manager or designee shall make inspections of swimming pools before the annual permit to operate is granted. An additional inspection shall take place within 2 weeks after the swimming pool is put into operation. Subsequent inspection of pools shall be made as desired by the Village Manager or designee. Inspection of 1- and 2-family residential swimming pools shall be made upon request and then only after payment of the fee prescribed in Section 46-122. However, the Village Manager or designee may require the inspection of 1- or 2-family residential swimming pools without the prior request of the swimming pool owner. 
(Code 1979, § 32.04)  
Sec. 22-214. - Permit fees. 
The building and plumbing permit fees under this article shall be as set forth in Article IV of Chapter 46. Skokie Park District pools are not subject to the fees. 
(Code 1979, § 32.07)  
Sec. 22-215. - Inspection and testing. 
The Village Manager or designee shall have the right and authority to inspect any swimming pool and to check the operation thereof during reasonable daylight hours. 
(Code 1979, § 32.08)  
Sec. 22-216. - Authority to close pools. 
If Village Manager or designee shall find, after inspection, that the operation of a swimming pool does not meet the hygienic, sanitary and safety requirements of this article, the representative shall direct that the pool shall be closed until the sanitary and safety requirements are met. 
(Code 1979, § 32.09)  
Sec. 22-217. - Location; off-street parking. 
(a)  No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at a distance less than 8 feet from any side or rear property lines, and pools shall comply with the building line requirements. Pumps, filters, and pool water disinfection equipment installation shall be located at a distance not less than 8 feet from any property line and shall comply with the building line requirements. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for a swimming pool until off-street parking is provided as stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). If off-street parking cannot physically be provided for any existing improved property, this restriction shall not apply. 
(Code 1979, § 32.02)  
Sec. 22-218. - Sanitary and equipment requirements for public pools. 
Public pools, and their equipment and operation, shall comply with the State Department of Public Health's minimum sanitary requirements for swimming pools and bathing places, the Illinois Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Act, 210 ILCS 125/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 32.05)  
Sec. 22-219. - Sanitary and equipment requirements for private residential pools. 
(a)  Recirculation of water required. All private residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type, in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. 
(b)  Materials; slope of side walls. Private residential swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank, with white or light colored finish, easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a non-slip finish, as smooth as possible. The sides and walls of the pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least 6 feet or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the flood level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth at that point and 30 inches. 
(2)  To a depth of 6 feet from flood level except as in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the wall slope shall not be less than 1 foot horizontal in 6 feet vertical. 
(c)  Water pressure; slope of bottom. Private residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,200 pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than 5 feet in depth shall not be more than 1 foot in each 7 feet. The maximum slope where the water is 5 feet or more in depth shall not exceed 1 foot in 2 feet. 
(d)  Walk area. Unobstructed walk areas not less than 24 inches wide shall be provided to extend around all belowground swimming pools. The walk area shall be such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of a non-slip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least ¼ inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool. 
(e)  Fence. All private residential belowground and aboveground permanent swimming pools and all aboveground portable pools shall be completely enclosed by a 4-foot fence erected along the periphery of the pool walks, unless that portion of the yard area containing the pool is enclosed with a fence complying with the following: All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be a height of 4 feet above the grade walk level and shall be constructed of a number 9 gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material or of such material and design as approved for safety by the Village Manager or designee. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate, and made inaccessible to small children. All fence posts shall be decay- or corrosion-resistant. This subsection shall also apply to any aboveground pool not equipped with lift-up ladders or steps, with a non-absorbent ground base of not less than 6 square feet. 
(f)  Steps and ladders. Two or more means of egress in pools over 1,000 gallons in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools. At least 1 such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and the shallow end. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of non-slip material at least 3 inches wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides, or a center rail may be provided on steps. 
(g)  Skimmers. In every private residential swimming pool, at least 1 skimming device shall be provided for each 800 square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be located at least 30 feet apart. The hand-hold must be no more than 9 inches above the normal water line. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, adequately remove floating oils and waste, and meet the following general specifications: 
(1)  Be designed for a flow-through rate of at least 30 gallons per minute and the total capacity of all skimmers on any pool shall be at least 20 percent of the required filter flow of the recirculation system. 
(2)  Be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a range of at least 3 inches. 
(3)  An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids. 
(4)  The overflow weir shall be of a sufficient length to maintain a rate of flow of at least 20 gallons per minute per lineal foot of weir lip. 
(h)  Water source. No source of water other than that secured from the Village waterworks distribution system shall be used in private residential swimming pools. 
(i)  Circulation system. Private residential swimming pool water recirculation system inlets shall be located so as to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool, without the existence of dead spots, carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets, and discharge at a minimum depth of 10 inches below the pool overflow level. A minimum of 1 recirculation system inlet shall be provided for every 800 square feet of surface area of the pool or less. 
(j)  Equipment for adding water. Pools shall be equipped with a suitable facility for adding makeup water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply line and the pool system. If the makeup water is added directly to the pool, the outlets shall be at least 6 inches above the flood level of the pool. 
(k)  Water supply system. The system supplying recirculating water and makeup water to the pool shall be constructed in conformance with regulations set up by Village Manager or designee. 
(l)  Water outlets. In private residential swimming pools 30 feet in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least 1 outlet at the deepest point in the pool. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of opening not less than 4 times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removed. 
(m)  Facilities for emptying pool. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool, and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a rate not exceeding 100 gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the sewer. 
(n)  Draining pool during rainy periods. Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged during periods of rain or storms. 
(o)  Required recirculation equipment. Private residential swimming pool recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair lint catchers, and filters, necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, and facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters. 
(p)  Capacity of recirculation system. Every private residential swimming pool shall have a recirculation system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by 18. 
(q)  Water pump. Each circulation system pump shall have a sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for an 18-hour turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculating system. 
(r)  Backwashing pumps. Pumps used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least 10 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. 
(s)  Strainers and filters. A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint, and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be designed, accessible and located so they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection. The design features shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water shall pass through the strainer from the outside. 
(2)  The strainer shall be made of a noncorrosive material. 
(3)  The width or diameter of the strainer opening shall be not more than 1/8 inch. 
(4)  The area of the strainer opening shall be at least 5 times the cross-sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer. 
(5)  The recirculating system shall contain rapid pressure filters, gravity, vacuum, diatomite or other approved systems. 
(6)  Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in 18 hours at the rate of not more than 5 gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. 
(7)  The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at the rate of 10 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. 
(8)  All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection. 
(9)  Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. 
(10)  Sight glasses that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the filter unit. 
(t)  Disinfection. 
(1)  Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compound shall be subject to the approval of the Village Manager or designee. Disinfection equipment installed for the use of chlorine compound shall have sufficient capacity to maintain free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts per million. Materials and testing equipment shall be provided to test chlorine residual. 
(2)  Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be used as a disinfection method. 
(u)  Electrical installations. All electrical installations provided for, installed, and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with the currently adopted National Electrical Code as may be amended from time to time. 
(v)  Enclosures. Permanent swimming pool enclosures of a non-rigid type are not permitted. This does not include winterizing covers. 
(w)  Compliance with plumbing code. All water and drainage shall comply with the plumbing code of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 32.06)  
Sec. 22-220. - Hours of use; nuisance or dangerous conditions. 
(a)  No swimming pool shall be made use of between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, and between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays. All swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition during periods the pool is in use. 
(b)  No swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the Village if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall create a nuisance or be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. 
(Code 1979, § 32.11)  
Secs. 22-221—22-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FENCES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— District regulations for fences, § 118-80. 
State Law reference— Fence Act, 765 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-241. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  No person shall construct or maintain any fence or portion thereof unless a permit therefore shall first have been secured. The definition of a fence is stated in Section 118-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 33.01; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 2, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3607, § 1, 4-7-2008)  
Secs. 22-242—22-270. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-3-C-3423, § 2, adopted Mar. 6, 2006, repealed §§ 22-242—22-247 in their entirety. Former §§ 22-242—22-247 pertained to permit fees; location—fences on corner lots; height; rough side of fence to face owner's property; barbed wire and electrical fences; and maintenance, respectively. Former §§ 22-242—22-247 derived from Code 1979, §§ 33.02—33-07; and Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 2, adopted Dec. 6, 2004.  
ARTICLE X. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 22-271. - Required; contents; suspension or revocation. 
No building, or addition thereto, and no addition or major alteration to a previously existing building, shall be used or occupied and no vacant land shall be used for any purpose until and unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village Manager or designee. No change in a nonresidence use or occupancy shall be made, nor any new use or occupancy established, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village Manager or designee. Every occupancy certificate shall state that the use or occupancy complies with all the provisions of the Zoning Chapter, as amended. The occupancy or use shall operate in compliance with the plans and information submitted for the approval of the certificate of occupancy. The Village Manager shall have the authority to proceed with the suspension or revocation of a certificate of occupancy in accordance with Sections 26-47 and 26-48, respectively. 
(Code 1979, § 23.061; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
Sec. 22-272. - Application contents. 
Applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 22-273. - Action on application. 
All certificates of occupancy shall be granted or denied within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application. If a certificate of occupancy is denied, the Village Manager or designee shall set forth the reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 22-274. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of occupancy, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 22-275. - Display. 
Any certificate of occupancy issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be prominently displayed at the nonresidential location for which the certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Code 1979, § 23.062; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 22-276. - Notification of change in ownership. 
In the event of a change of ownership, but not of use or occupancy, of any nonresidential building requiring a certificate of occupancy, the new owner shall within 30 days after receiving title to the property notify the Village Manager or designee of the change of ownership. The term "owner" shall mean the title holder of record. 
(Code 1979, § 23.063; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 22-277. - Completion bond. 
Every application for a building permit for construction or remodeling shall be accompanied by a cash bond as provided for in Section 46-126, in order to ensure that the premises shall not be occupied or used until a certificate of completion has been issued. The cash bond shall be returned upon the issuance of the certificate of completion unless the premises have been wrongfully occupied or used, in which event the cash bond shall be forfeited to the Village, in addition to the other penalties as provided in Section 1-6. 
(Code 1979, § 23.064; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 22-278. - Conditions for issuance, renewal; term. 
(a)  Conditions. The Village Manager or designee shall only issue a certificate of occupancy or renewal as required in this article if the following conditions have been satisfied: 
(1)  The subject property and premises are in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and rules and regulations of the Village, including but not limited to the provisions of the Zoning Chapter; 
(2)  The use or building or structure is in conformance with the plans and specifications for which the building permit was issued; 
(3)  Any required fees or any monies owed by the applicant to the Village are satisfied. 
(4)  All information provided in the submitted application is true and accurate. 
(b)  Term. All required nonresidential certificates of occupancy shall be for a term of up to 1 year and must be renewed on an annual basis pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 23.065; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, 1-7-2008)  
Secs. 22-279—22-300. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted § 22-279 in its entirety. Former § 22-279 pertained to denial and derived from Code 1979, § 23.066.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 1, adopted June 1, 2009, repealed Art. XI, §§ 22-301—22-303, which pertained to numbering of buildings and derived from Code 1979, § 23.05(1)—(3). 
 
Secs. 22-301—22-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - FLOODPLAINS AND FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS 
 
Sec. 22-400. - Northern Illinois Model Floodplain Ordinance 2008. 
Pursuant to authority granted by the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2 (2006), the Village hereby adopts by reference the Northern Illinois Model Floodplain Ordinance 2008, as modified, pursuant to Village Ordinance Number 08-8-C-3631. 
(Ord. No. 08-8-C-3631, § 1, 8-4-2008)  
Secs. 22-401—22-409. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - VACANT BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 22-410. - Declaration of policy. 
The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and property owners of the Village by enactment of this Article which: 
(1)  Establishes a program for identification and regulation of nonresidential buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  Determines the responsibilities relating to property maintenance and standards of owners of vacant buildings. 
(3)  Provides for administration and enforcement of the regulations contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 22-411. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this Article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Boarded building: A building which has had, in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its components. 
Building: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy. 
Director: The Director of Community Development or his or her designee. 
Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm, trust, or entity: (i) having a legal or beneficial interest in the property; (ii) acting as agent by managing, controlling, or collecting rent; (iii) listed or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or (iv) having control of the property, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or the guardian, executor or administrator of the estate of any person described in the preceding clauses (i), (ii) and (ii). 
Person: Any individual or an entity of any type. 
Property: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon. 
Vacant building: A nonresidential building or portion of a nonresidential building which is: 
(1)  Unoccupied for over thirty 30 days. 
(2)  Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and are in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation has stopped for a period of sixty (60) days. 
But not including: 
Unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and are in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 22-412. - Code violation liability. 
(a)  In the event property is in violation of the Code or other ordinance, then the owner of the property is liable for such violation, whether the violation is existing or occurring, or may have existed or occurred at or during any time in regard to said property, or any buildings thereon. The owner is subject to injunctions, judgments, abatement orders or other remedial orders. 
(b)  The liabilities and obligations imposed on an owner of property shall be applicable to any mortgagee, that holds a mortgage on the property, or any other person that knowingly takes any action in any judicial or administrative proceeding that is intended to delay the correction of a violation, or compliance with the Code or other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 22-413. - Owner responsibilities. 
The owner of any nonresidential building that is vacant, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any nonresidential building that has become vacant shall, within 30 days, shall do the following: 
(1)  Enclose and secure the building in a manner approved by the Village. Buildings shall only be boarded after application and receipt of a permit except for emergencies such as fire or wind damage for which an application shall be filed within 48 hours of the board up. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than 90 days unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the Director; 
(2)  Properties with 100 percent building vacancy shall have a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized agent. The sign shall be no smaller than two (2) feet by two (2) feet, but no larger than four (4) by four (4) feet and be placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer. In addition, for buildings which are the subject of a foreclosure action or have been foreclosed on, the name, address, and telephone number of the maintenance company shall be on the sign; 
(3)  Maintain the property including any building on the property, in a secure and closed condition; 
(4)  An alarm system shall be installed by the owner of any building that is 100 percent vacant no later than eleven (11) months after notification that the building is vacant. The property owner shall pay for the alarm service one year in advance prior to the annual Certificate of Compliance renewal of the property or vacant tenant space. The alarm service company and level of detection shall be subject to approval by the Village Manager or designee; 
(5)  Install a Knox "Rapid Entry" key box at all vacant buildings/units within 30 days of vacancy. Commercial and industrial buildings that already have a Knox box do not need to install a box for individual units; 
(6)  The owner of a vacant property with ground floor windows facing a street shall: 
a.  Window covering. Cover the windows with a window display or decorative screening approved by the Village. Each window shall have at least 80 percent coverage so as to obscure a direct public view of the building interior. Allowable window coverage materials must be of one color and shall be in the form of one of the following: 
1.  Plastic film; 
2.  Horizontal, pleated and vertical shades; 
3.  Pleated paper; 
4.  A display of products, with a backdrop, which are sold by other businesses in a building, art work or an alternative window covering may be permitted if submitted to and approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
b.  Window signage. The only type of window sign that shall be allowed is a real estate sign for the sale or rental of that property that does not exceed 25 percent of the total of a window pane area. Only one sign shall be allowed per street frontage for a building. A window sign shall not be allowed if a ground sign is used to advertise the sale or rental of the property. Additional window signs shall be allowed if the property is participating in the Village's Window Covering Program. 
(7)  Maintain the building and property in compliance with the requirements of the most recently adopted International Property Maintenance Code, Zoning Chapter, and all other codes and ordinances of the Village. These regulations include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Maintenance of parking areas. 
1.  All parking areas shall be maintained at all times in broom clean condition, without potholes, broken wheel stops and/or curbing or other surface irregularities. 
2.  All landscaping shall be maintained in a flourishing condition, free of weeds and debris, and all dead landscaping shall be replaced. 
3.  Pavement markings shall be visible at all times, and parking lot signage shall be readable at all times, with the signpost maintained in an upright manner. 
4  All parking lot curbing shall be maintained and vehicle stop blocks securely mounted in their proper locations. 
5.  Compliance is required with all conditions of the Village's private property fire lane sign maintenance program and the Village's designation of private property handicapped parking spaces program. 
6.  All area lighting shall be maintained in functioning condition. Drainage systems shall be maintained in a free-flowing working condition. 
7.  It shall be unlawful to alter any aspects of an approved parking lot plan unless approval has been received through the Director of Engineering. 
8.  Parking areas shall be used exclusively for parking purposes and not for storage of vehicles, boats, trailers, campers or other personal property. 
9.  All parking lot drainage structures and facilities shall be maintained and in working order. 
b.  Maintenance of landscaping. 
1.  All landscaping on public or private property that is part of an approved development plan shall be properly maintained in a vigorous growing condition by the owner of the property. Any landscaping which has deteriorated shall be replaced. 
2.  All shrubbery shall be maintained to a height not to exceed 30 inches for a distance of 15 feet from any vehicular access point into or out of the site. All trees planted near the drives on the property are required to have a ground clearance of 6 feet minimum to the bottom of the foliage. 
3.  All property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 6 inches in height. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers or gardens. 
c.  Maintenance of exterior property areas. 
1.  All property shall be maintained in a clean, litter free, safe and sanitary condition. 
2.  All property shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
3.  All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions including ice and snow. 
4.  No vehicles that are inoperable shall be permitted to be stored in the open. 
5.  Open off-street parking shall be located upon an approved surface. 
6.  There shall not be accumulations of litter, decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, appliances, tires, landscape waste, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed or which create a fire hazard. 
7.  There shall be no active rodent infestation. 
8.  Stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply shall not be allowed. 
9  Substances or things on the property emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the Village shall not be allowed. 
10.  Garbage, paper products, rubbish, litter or any offensive substance shall not be allowed. 
11.  Marking, carving or graffiti shall not be allowed on buildings, fixtures, or other structures on the property. 
12.  The property shall not be used for nuisance activities. 
d.  Maintenance of building exterior. 
1.  The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
2.  All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
3.  All exterior walls shall be free from dents, holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
4.  All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
5.  After the removal of wall signs or other fixtures the wall shall be repaired and/or painted to have the same surface color and finish as the rest of the building wall to which it was attached. 
6.  Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
7.  All glazing materials shall be clean and maintained free from cracks, holes or other defects. 
8.  Marking, carving or graffiti shall not be allowed on buildings, fixtures, or other structures on the property. 
9.  Painted or color treated surfaces shall have a consistent surface color that is not faded, chipped, or discolored. 
10.  Buildings that have been approved by the Appearance Commission shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan. 
e.  Maintenance of building interiors. 
1.  The building shall remain vacant unless a Certificate of Occupancy is obtained for a new use. 
2.  All interior fixtures, fire alarms, sprinkler system, utilities, and structural elements of the building shall be maintained and protected from the elements. 
3.  There shall be no harborage of rodents and active infestation in the building. 
4.  The interior of the building shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
5.  The building shall not be used for nuisance activities. 
f.  Maintenance and removal of signs. 
1.  Every sign box or structure shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and sound structural condition. 
2.  To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, all sign boxes and supports shall be painted unless they have been anodized or similarly treated. 
3.  Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign shall be replaced or repaired. 
4.  The owner shall be responsible for the removal of unused signs. A sign box may display a blank sign face until such unit is occupied. 
5.  All ground signs shall be removed if a building is 100 percent vacant or the building is removed. 
6.  Any sign which presents an immediate danger to the public may be removed at the direction of the Village Manager or designee in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
7.  Signs that have been approved by the Appearance Commission shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan. 
(8)  Submit the property for a Certificate of Compliance inspection for the vacancy at the request of the Director. Submit the property for an annual inspection each fiscal year thereafter that the vacancy exists. Pay the initial inspection fee and an annual inspection fee as required in subsection 46-117(c) as a condition of obtaining a Certificate of Compliance. 
(9)  Acquire or otherwise maintain commercial general liability insurance for as long as the building is 100 percent vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the director, as follows: two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or commercial building. Any insurance policy acquired after the building is vacant shall require written notice to the Community Development Department of any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The owner and the owner's authorized agent for service of process shall provide evidence of the insurance, with certificates evidencing renewal or replacement of said policy of insurance at least fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration or cancellation of any such policy. The owner and the owner's authorized agent for service of process shall provide evidence of the insurance, upon request, to the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016)  
Sec. 22-414. - Authority of the Village. 
The Village shall have the following authority: 
(1)  Inspect the exterior and interior of all vacant buildings, and the property on which the building is located, for compliance with all applicable codes. Such inspection will determine the extent of compliance with the Code or other ordinances. If the property is in compliance, a Certificate of Compliance will be issued, which will be valid for one year; 
(2)  To charge an initial inspection fee for all vacant buildings and an annual inspection fee each fiscal year thereafter that the vacancy exists. The Owner will be invoiced for the inspection fees as provided in section 46-117(c), within thirty (30) days of the inspection; 
(3)  Access to property, and any building thereon, to turn off electrical, gas, and water utilities in case of system failures or emergencies that may threaten the safety of the building or surrounding property. The Owner shall pay all costs related to the Village's disconnection of utilities and securing the building; 
(4)  Secure a building that is opened by unauthorized entry by persons other than the owner or to turn off utilities for safety purposes. The owner shall pay all costs related to the Village's efforts to secure the building; 
(5)  Nothing herein contained prohibits the Village taking immediate action to the extent permitted under this Code to condemn or otherwise remediate a building which is determined to be a public nuisance or pose a danger to the occupants of the building, or the public, health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 22-415. - Notice. 
The Village will give written notice to the property owner a minimum of 10 days in advance of entering a building for inspection or other non emergency purposes. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 22-416 - Rules and regulations to be promulgated. 
The Village Manager or designee, may issue rules and regulations for the administration of this Article. These rules may designate materials for covering windows and securing materials and methods which must be used when securing a building so that the material is reasonably incapable of being removed by trespassers or others acting without the building owner's consent. Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined as set forth in section 2-1095. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 22-417. - Certification. 
A Certificate of Occupancy is required before occupancy by a new tenant or owner of a vacant building or unit in a building. The Director will require payment in full of all fees and liens imposed by the Village and the correction of all violations of the Code and other ordinances prior to any occupancy of a vacant building or unit in a building. 
(Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Secs. 22-418—22-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RENTAL UNIT REGISTRATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, adopted Jan. 6, 2014, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as Art. IX, §§ 22-500—22-518. In order to maintain the existing numbering style, at the discretion of the editor, this article has been included as Art. XIV, §§ 22-500—22-518. 
 
Sec. 22-500. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Common Exterior: The open space and exterior of a building on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of the property Owner. The premises or property shall include the principal building, accessory structures, driveways, parking areas and all improvements to the property. Such common areas may serve, in whole or in part, one or more Multi-Unit Building. 
2.  Common Interior: Any portion or part thereof of a Multi-Unit Building having communal areas (laundry, furnace, storage rooms, hallways, stairways, meeting rooms, etc.) and all other areas, but not including a Dwelling. Interior common areas shall also include structural, mechanical and other elements or areas of a Multi-Unit Building for which the Owner is directly responsible for the proper maintenance thereof. 
3.  Dwelling: Any rooms or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, bathing and eating. 
4.  Multi-Unit Building: A structure that is designed and built with two (2) or more Dwellings. 
5.  Operator: Any person who has charge, care, control or management of a rental unit or building, in which rental units are let, including but not limited to building managers, managing agents, brokers or superintendents. 
6.  Owner: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others has legal title to any Multi-Unit Building, or Dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the Owner; is a mortgagee in possession, or is a senior officer or a trustee of the association of unit Owners of a homeowners' association. Owner shall also mean any homeowners' association or other legal entity having the charge, care or control of any common area which serves in whole or in part one or more Multi-Unit Buildings. 
7.  Person: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity. 
8.  Residential Rental Unit: A Dwelling, whether in a Multi-Unit Building, single-family home, townhouse, co-op or any other structure that is occupied by individuals other than the Owner, pursuant to Section 22-505 of the Skokie Village Code, or is vacant, that is being advertised to rent or is rented, through the exchange of money, goods, or services. 
9.  Tenant: Any occupant of a Residential Rental Unit. 
10.  Neighborhood Standards Officer: A Village Officer trained in the Crime Free Housing Program, including the Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design Program, as well as other types of property management and standards training, and working under the supervision of the Police Department and in cooperation with the Property Standards Division. In addition, the Neighborhood Standards Officer shall complete training regarding fair housing statutes and domestic violence education. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-501. - Residential rental unit registration. 
All Owners of a Residential Rental Unit must register each and all of their Residential Rental Units owned and operated in the Village. A Residential Rental Unit must be registered with the Village of Skokie in order to have Tenants. 
A.  Residential Rental Unit Registration shall not be required for residential units in a Multi-Unit Building with more than four (4) Dwellings organized and owned pursuant to the Illinois Condominium Act 765 ILCS 605, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-502. - Registration prior to rental. 
Each and every Residential Rental Unit must be registered prior to it being offered for rent in any manner, including but not limited to listing with a leasing agent, print advertisement or signs posted on property. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-503. - Method of registration and fee. 
To obtain a Residential Rental Unit Registration the Owner must file the prescribed application with the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department of the Village containing all of the required information to include but not be limited to property Owner, management name and contact information for both. Applications to register a Residential Rental Unit shall be obtained from the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department. Any fee required for the Residential Rental Unit Registration shall be submitted with the application, as set forth in Section 46-135 of the Skokie Village Code and the date of a completed application submission with fee and confirmation of compliance with Section 22-508 of the Skokie Village Code, shall be the date of Residential Rental Unit Registration. Should the Owner decide not to rent or lease the Residential Rental Unit within ninety (90) days of Residential Rental Unit Registration, the Owner may apply for a refund of the registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-504. - Change of information or ownership. 
A.  Every Owner shall report to the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department any change in information previously provided on the required Residential Rental Unit Registration application within twenty-one (21) days of such change. This information shall include, but not be limited to, the removal or change of any Owner or Operator pursuant to Section 22-500(7) of the Skokie Village Code, or a change in ownership interest of more than 50% of the building. 
B.  If the ownership of a Residential Rental Unit or Multi-Unit Building changes during the registration year, the new Owner shall be required to register the Residential Rental Units anew under the new Owner's name and pay a pro rata registration fee. No refund of any registration fee shall be paid to the former Owner. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-505. - Owner occupied exemption. 
A.  Any Residential Rental Unit which is Owner occupied as the Owner's primary residence is exempted from the requirements of registration. 
B.  All Owners must comply with and nothing in this Act shall be construed to negate or alter the provisions of the Skokie Fair Housing Act (Chapter 58, Article II, of the Skokie Village Code). However, no portion of this section shall curb the rights of an Owner as described in Section 58-37 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-506. - Fee waiver. 
A.  Any Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit found to be substantially in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the Village upon inspection, as described in Section 22-509 of the Skokie Village Code, for three (3) consecutive years shall have the Residential Rental Unit Registration Fee waived the following year and every year thereafter, unless and until noncompliance is found. 
B.  Any Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit which was substantially in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations of the Village for the most recent inspection, prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, by the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department shall have the Residential Rental Unit Registration Fee waived the following year and every year thereafter, unless and until noncompliance is found. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-507. - Owner seminar. 
The Owner or Operator applying for registration shall have successfully completed the Village Residential Rental Property Landlord Seminar (hereinafter "Village Seminar") within three (3) months from the date of registration. 
A.  An Owner or Operator of any Residential Rental Unit, who has successfully completed prior professional training commensurate with the Village Seminar, may apply to the Village Manager or designee for a waiver from the Seminar requirement. The Village Manager or designee, in his or her sole discretion, shall determine whether the applicant's prior professional training constitutes the substantial equivalent of the Village's Seminar. 
B.  An Owner or Operator who successfully completes the Village Seminar shall not be required to attend another Village Seminar during subsequent renewal of registration. However, if an Operator who completed the Village Seminar is replaced, the Owner or the new Operator shall attend the Seminar. 
C.  The Village Manager may require an Owner or Operator to re-attend and complete a Village Seminar if there are multiple code violations within an eighteen (18) month period. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-508. - Compliance and certification. 
A.  Every Residential Rental Unit shall be owned, operated and maintained in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations. 
B.  An Owner that continues to meet the following standards shall be designated by the Village as a Certified Owner, may advertise as a Certified Landlord, and will receive annual proof of Certification from the Village: 
a.  All Residential Rental property has been inspected by the Property Standards Division and is in substantial compliance as of the most recent inspection. 
b.  Owner agrees to allow Property Standards Division, in addition to its regular inspections, to confirm that each Residential Rental Unit is equipped with working smoke and CO detectors, and GFI outlets where required. 
c.  Owner or Operator has successfully completed the Village Seminar. 
d.  Owner agrees to submit all Residential Rental property to a security audit performed by the Neighborhood Standards Officer and is in substantial compliance as of the most recent audit. 
e.  Owner or Operator has contact information posted in compliance with Sec. 22-512. 
Any use of the "Certified" designation for any purpose shall make clear that it is the Owner/Landlord that is Certified, rather than any individual building or Dwelling. 
C.  Improper use of this designation shall be subject to fine. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-509. - Regular property inspection. 
A.  The Village shall conduct regular property inspections of every building containing a Residential Rental Unit. 
B.  Inspections shall be conducted by the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department, in consultation with or with the participation of the Neighborhood Standards Officer working under the supervision of the Skokie Police Department. 
C.  The Owner or Operator shall make available at the time of inspection all leases with the Crime Free Addendum for each Residential Rental Unit. 
D.  The scope of any inspections conducted pursuant to this section shall be limited to the exterior areas, Common Interior and Common Exterior of the property and upon a request by an Owner, Operator or Tenant, may include the interior of a Dwelling. 
E.  Where any common area is shared by more than one Residential Rental Unit, no Residential Rental Unit served in whole or in part by such common area shall be deemed to be in compliance for the purposes of registration until the common area is in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-510. - Registration terminates upon sale. 
Notwithstanding any provision contained in this Article, Residential Rental Unit Registration shall terminate upon the sale of the Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-511. - Inspection upon sale. 
A.  Transfer Stamps shall not be issued for a Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit until an inspection has been performed by the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department, and any and all code violations that have been identified have been corrected as verified by a subsequent re-inspection. 
B.  In the event the Owner disputes the determination of code violations, the Owner may request an administrative hearing. An Administrative Hearing Officer appointed by the Village shall conduct the review within five (5) business days from the date of request. Upon completion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer will issue a final determination. 
C.  After being notified of code violations, an Owner shall complete the necessary repairs and notify the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department which shall conduct a reinspection within three (3) business days and issue a determination. 
D.  The initial Inspection Upon Sale report must be dated no more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of closing and dated no later than the day of the closing on the sale of the Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit. Inspection areas shall include exterior areas, Common Interior, Common Exterior and all Dwellings. 
E.  Transfer Stamps may be issued for a Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit which has code violations, identified by the Inspection Upon Sale report, when such violations are not corrected, if a cash bond is posted with the Village for 110% of the cost of the required work or proof is submitted showing that a loan is in place exclusively for such required work If a Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit which has code violations, identified by the Inspection Upon Sale report, is intended for demolition, Transfer Stamps may be issued once a cash bond is posted and the cash bond shall be returned once the demolition is completed. 
F.  The request for an Inspection Upon Sale must be made in writing, not less than twenty-eight (28) days prior to the closing for the sale and may be made prior to offering the Multi-Unit Building or Residential Rental Unit for sale. 
G.  The fee required for the Inspection Upon Sale shall be as set forth in Section 46-136 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-512. - Owner identification posting. 
A.  Owner or Operator shall post a weather proof sign with his or her name and active phone number in the Multi-Unit Building's Common Exterior or Common Interior next to the front door and accessible to the public, no smaller than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches. 
B.  Multi-Unit Buildings that are Owner occupied and contain four (4) Residential Rental Units or less are exempt from this posting. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-513. - Tenant application and tenant information. 
A.  No Residential Rental Unit shall be rented without the Owner or Operator obtaining a written application. 
B.  It is recommended that the written application request, but need not require, applicants' and all potential tenants' names (first, middle and last), addresses, birth dates, social security numbers (if any), driver's license numbers (if any), work and home telephone numbers with a list of the applicant's current and past residences during the previous three (3) years, including addresses and name of landlords. 
C.  A certification as to the correctness of the information being provided signed by all of the adult prospective Tenants should be part of the written application. 
D.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-514. - Occupancy. 
No Owner or Operator shall permit the maximum occupancy of any Residential Rental Unit to be exceeded. The maximum occupancy of any Residential Rental Unit shall be: 
Number of Bedrooms 	Maximum Number of Persons in Household 
Studio 	2 
1 	2 
2 	4 
3 	6 
4 	8 
5 	10 
6 	12 
 
Owner or Operator shall also comply with Section 22-183 of the Skokie Village Code and may request additional occupancy for bedrooms which exceed one hundred (100) square feet for one (1) additional occupant for every additional fifty (50) square feet of floor area. If there is any conflict between the two sections, the more restrictive section shall apply. The decision of the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department shall be the sole determiner as to what constitutes a bedroom for purposes of occupancy and shall be binding. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-515. - Tenant rights and responsibilities. 
A.  No Tenant shall commit vandalism in or upon the building in which the Tenant's Residential Rental Unit is located, and no Tenant shall permit vandalism to occur or shall violate any of the provisions of this Article or any applicable ordinance, code or regulation of the Village in the Residential Rental Unit occupied by the Tenant. 
B.  Every Owner or Operator shall maintain the premises in compliance with all local, state, and federal codes and shall promptly make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill the obligation. 
C.  Every Tenant shall keep that part of the premises that he or she uses in a safe, clean and healthy manner. 
D.  Every Owner or Operator shall disclose to the Tenant in writing at or before the commencement of the tenancy, the name, address and telephone number of a Person authorized to manage the premises. 
E.  Every Owner or Operator shall notify all prospective Tenants in writing that "The Village of Skokie prohibits discrimination of real estate transactions based on race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, national origin, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, sexual orientation or source of income (Chapter 58, Section 58-36 of the Skokie Village Code)." Such language may be included with other printed materials. 
F.  Every Owner or Operator shall attach to any lease or written rental agreement or similar document a copy of Chapter 22, Article XIV, Rental Unit Registration and Chapter 58, Article II, Discrimination and Fair Housing, of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-516. - Registration renewal. 
A Residential Rental Unit Registration shall be renewed annually. Any Residential Rental Unit and Owner that is not substantially in compliance with this Article and any and all applicable codes, including health, safety and building codes shall be required to pay double the registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-517. - Administration of this article. 
The Village Manager or designee shall administer this Article and may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 22-518. - Implementation. 
A.  Inspections of Residential Rental Units by the Property Standards Division of the Community Development Department and the Neighborhood Standards Officer shall be prioritized based on Nuisance Intervention and Prevention Committee findings, code violations, location, timing of last inspection, complaints and other conditions that warrant an increased level of review and intervention. 
B.  Each registration shall be an annual registration, the term of which shall commence on May 1 of a given year and shall terminate on the following April 30. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 2, 1-6-2014)  
Secs. 22-519—22-620. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 22-621. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the fuel gas code. 
(Ord. No. 14-9-C-4090, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 22-622. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the International Fuel Code is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the International Fuel Gas Code shall have no force or effect. 
(Ord. No. 14-9-C-4090, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 22-623. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
The International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  101.1 Title. Insert "Village of Skokie" 
(2)  109. Means of Appeal. Delete entirely. 
(3)  301.2 Energy utilization. Delete International Energy Conservation Code and replace with State of Illinois Energy Code in the last sentence of the paragraph. 
(4)  301.1.1 Other fuels. Add after last sentence - Natural draft combustion appliances are prohibited within the building envelope of use group R occupancies. Exception: In Existing group use R buildings natural draft appliances may be installed with approval of the Village Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 14-9-C-4090, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Secs. 22-624—22-650. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - ILLINOIS ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 22-651. - Illinois Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, et seq., and the Illinois Energy Conservation Code, 20 ILCS 3125, the Village hereby adopts by reference Illinois Administrative Code, and all regulations thereto, as the energy code, excepting those provisions which are modified or deleted as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-9-C-4091, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 22-652. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the code, ordinance or rules and regulations shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code shall have no force or effect. 
(Ord. No. 14-9-C-4091, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Secs. 22-653—22-723. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - MOUNTED TELECOM AND/OR CELL PHONE ANTENNAE ANNUAL INSPECTION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 1, adopted April 1, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XVII, §§ 22-624—22-628. At the editor's discretion, to preserve the style of this Code, these provisions have been included as Art. XVII, §§ 22-724—22-728. 
Cross reference— Mounted telecom or telephone cell antennae inspection fee, § 46-139. 
 
Sec. 22-724. - Annual inspection required. 
All mounted telecom and/or cell phone antennae installation which have been reviewed, approved and have received all necessary permits and approvals for initial installation, on the rooftop or side of a structure or building, higher than 35 feet, not including the installed telecom and/or cell phone equipment, shall be inspected annually. The inspection will determine and ensure the structural safety of the mounted antennae. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 22-725. - Inspections. 
(a)  Access to location. It shall be the duty of the owner of the property or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit or authorize entry thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, to any employee of the Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that access to the antenna is requested or required. 
(b)  Refusal to permit inspection. Should a Village employee or authorized agent of the Village be refused access or be hindered in making an inspection, the Village Manager or designee may in addition to any other penalty provided, direct the removal of a telecom and/or cell phone antennae installation. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 22-726. - Separate inspections required for each antennae. 
While a single building or structure may house multiple telecom and/or cell phone antennae installations, each installation shall be deemed as separate and an inspection shall be required for each. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 22-727. - Authority of the Village. 
The Village shall have the following authority: 
(1)  To inspect the installation and mounting of each telecom and/or cell phone antennae installation annually. The Village may inspect by access to roof or location of mounted telecom and/or cell phone antennae installation or by an electronic inspection which may include use of a drone, of all equipment including but not limited to mounts and antenna; 
(2)  If upon inspection the Village deems it necessary, the Village, at its discretion, may require inspection and certification from a structural engineer as to the safety of the equipment installation or mounting. Such an inspection will be at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Sec. 22-728. - Inspection fee. 
The fee for the annual inspection in located in Chapter 46, Section 46-139 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 1, 4-1-2019)  
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic liquor, ch. 10; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; community development, ch. 30; consumer protection, ch. 34; emergency services, ch. 38; fees, ch. 46; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; fire extinguisher servicers, § 50-39; foreign fire insurance companies, § 50-40; automobile service stations, § 50-41; day care centers, § 54-131 et seq.; day care homes, § 54-161 et seq.; longterm care facilities, § 54-221 et seq.; food service establishments, § 54-291 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 78; private solid waste collectors, § 86-41 et seq.; taxation, ch. 98; telecommunications, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 110; vehicles for hire, ch. 114; home occupations in residential districts, § 118-79; district regulations for motor vehicle service stations, § 118-82; business districts, § 118-141 et seq.; industrial districts, § 118-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal power over certain businesses, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Applicability of general licensing provisions. 
The provisions of Article II of this chapter, relating to licenses, shall govern the businesses, occupations and uses licensed under this chapter where no provision to the contrary is provided. 
(Code 1979, § 42.01)  
Sec. 26-2. - License and permit fees. 
Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the applicable license and permit fees for the businesses, occupations and uses licensed under this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 46. 
(Code 1979, § 42.02)  
Secs. 26-3—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Issuance and revocation of municipal licenses, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensee means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity licensed or subject to license. 
Owner means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the endeavor subject to license to maintain and manage its operation. 
(Code 1979, § 41.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Application. 
Applications for licenses and permits under this chapter shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 41.02)  
Sec. 26-33. - Persons subject to license requirement. 
Wherever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation, or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, every person shall be subject to the requirements if, by such person's own acts or through an agent or employee, such person is held forth as being engaged in the business or occupation, or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any such business or occupation in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 41.03)  
Sec. 26-34. - Investigation of applicant; issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where an inspection or investigation is required before the issuance of such permit or license, the Village Manager or designee shall cause an investigation to be made as to the applicant's business and moral character, and secure such other information as the Village Manager or designee deems necessary for the protection of the public good, in keeping with the license or permit required. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon to the Village Manager or designee, favorable or otherwise, within 10 days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character, business responsibility, or other matters concerning the application are found to be unsatisfactory, the Village Manager or designee shall endorse on such application disapproval and the reasons therefor and no permit shall be issued. The Village Manager or designee shall promptly notify the applicant that the application is disapproved, and that no license or permit will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character, business responsibility, and other matters concerning the application are found to be satisfactory, the Village Manager or designee shall endorse on the application approval and the license or permit shall be issued on payment of the fee. 
(Code 1979, § 41.05)  
Sec. 26-35. - Fee. 
Every license or permit authorized or required by any provision of this Code shall be issued by the Village Manager or designee upon payment of the prescribed fee or tax in accordance with the schedule set out in Chapter 46, or as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1979, § 41.06)  
Sec. 26-36. - Bond. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to approve the security in all cases where any code, ordinance, and rule and regulation require a bond to be given to the Village before such license or permit shall be issued. The approved bond shall be filed with the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 41.07)  
Sec. 26-37. - Term. 
(a)  Licenses. All licenses shall terminate on April 30 of each year where no provision to the contrary is made. The Village Manager or designee shall mail to all licensees of the Village a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual license, at least 3 weeks prior to the date of such expiration. A failure to send out notice or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee for a failure to obtain a new license or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license. 
(b)  Permits. Permits shall be valid for the period stated thereon. 
(Code 1979, § 41.08)  
Sec. 26-38. - Building and premises to comply with applicable regulations. 
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act if the premises, buildings, or location to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the applicable codes, ordinances, and rules and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 41.09)  
Sec. 26-39. - Change of location of business. 
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed provided 10 days' notice is given to the Village Manager or designee, provided that all codes, ordinances, and rules are regulations are complied with. 
(Code 1979, § 41.10)  
Sec. 26-40. - Transfer. 
(a)  When an existing business, for which a current and valid license is in effect, is sold or leased, the unexpired term of such license may be transferred to the purchaser or lessee of the business, provided the purchaser or lessee would qualify as an original applicant for such license. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to a license for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(c)  A fee shall be payable for the transfer of a license as provided in Section 46-72. 
(Code 1979, § 41.11)  
Sec. 26-41. - Citizenship not required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by federal and State statutes, no person of good moral character who has a legal right to be gainfully employed in the United States shall be denied any license, permit or other privilege solely because such person is not a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  All of the provisions of the this Code contrary to subsection (a) of this section are hereby revoked to the extent necessary to effectuate this section. 
(Code 1979, § 41.12)  
Sec. 26-42. - Separate license required for each location. 
No license for the operation of a licensed establishment in the Village shall be construed by any person to permit the operation of a licensed establishment in more than 1 location in the Village. A separate license shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment. For this purpose, the determination of 1 location shall be construed that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or on the same lot or parcel, be operated and managed by the same person or owner, and be an establishment with the same classification. Two or more buildings separated by 1 or more dedicated public rights-of-way or by 1 or more buildings or vacant lots or parcels shall not be considered as 1 location. 
(Code 1979, § 41.13)  
Sec. 26-43. - Nuisances. 
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. 
(Code 1979, § 41.14)  
Sec. 26-44. - Inspections. 
(a)  Access to premises. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, code, rule or regulation or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance, code, rule or regulation or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested or required. 
(b)  Samples of materials. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure performance with any ordinance, code, rule or regulation or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to give to any authorized officer or employee of the Village requesting such samples sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request. 
(c)  Refusal to permit inspection. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Manager may revoke the license of any licensed owner of any licensed business in the Village who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection or to take an adequate sample of the commodity or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of the officer's or employee's duties in making such inspection. No license shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises in the name of the Village stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 1979, § 41.15)  
Sec. 26-45. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the Village to keep the license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 1979, § 41.16)  
Sec. 26-46. - Vehicle tags. 
Wherever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a license fee, the Village Manager or designee shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each vehicle while it is in use. 
(Code 1979, § 41.17)  
Sec. 26-47. - Suspension of license, permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimical to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance or give rise to an emergency, the Village Manager shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business, the close of premises, and suspension of the certificate of occupancy, license, and/or permit for a period not to exceed 10 days. 
(b)  Within 5 days after the Village Manager has acted summarily, the Village Manager shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the certificate of occupancy, license and/or permit should be revoked in accordance with Section 26-48(b) and (c). 
(Code 1979, § 41.18; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 2, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-48. - Revocation of license, permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Grounds. Certificates of occupancy, licenses, and permits issued by the Village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Village Manager after notice and hearing as provided in this section for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the certificate of occupancy, license, and/or permit. 
(2)  Any violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance, code, rule or regulation provisions relating to the certificate of occupancy, license, and/or permit, the subject matter of a certificate of occupancy, license, and/or permit, to the premises occupied, or for the violation of any condition of a special use permit or zoning variation. 
(3)  Conviction of the certificate of occupancy holder, licensee, and/or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(4)  Failure of the certificate of occupancy holder, licensee, and/or permittee to pay any fee, fine, or penalty owning to the Village. 
(5)  Refusal to permit inspection or take samples, or interference with an authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making such inspections as provided in Section 26-44(c). 
(6)  Failure of the certificate of occupancy holder to operate in compliance with the plans and information submitted for the approval of the certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  Violation of any code, ordinance, statute, or rules and regulations. 
The revocation, if ordered, shall not be in lieu of any other provision imposing a penalty for the violation of any ordinance, code, rule or regulation of the Village. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally delivered, to the certificate of occupancy holder, licensee, and/or permittee to such persons' last known addresses at least 5 days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Conduct of hearing. The office of the Corporation Counsel shall present the complaint and shall represent the Village. The certificate of occupancy holder, licensee, and/or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The Village Manager shall preside and shall render the decision. 
(Code 1979, § 41.19; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 3, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-49. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Manager in regard to the denial of the application for a certificate of occupancy, license, and/or permit, or in connection with the revocation of a certificate of occupancy, license, and/or permit, shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Mayor and Board of Trustees, within 10 days after notice of a denial of an application or a revocation, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or certificate of occupancy holder, licensee, and/or permittee in the same manner as provided in Section 26-48(b). The decision of the Mayor and Board of Trustees on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1979, § 41.20; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 4, 12-17-2001)  
Secs. 26-50—26-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AUCTIONEERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate auctioneers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1; sale by auction, 810 ILCS 5/2-328. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of the business of auctioneer in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 26-72. - Conduct of patrons. 
All auctions shall be conducted in an orderly manner. It shall be unlawful to create, cause, permit or cause to permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct at any auction. 
(Code 1979, § 42.032)  
Sec. 26-73. - Fraudulent statements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person selling goods at auction to make any fraudulent or untrue statements concerning the goods or articles to be sold. 
(Code 1979, § 42.033)  
Sec. 26-74. - Right of patrons to inspect goods. 
Every article offered for sale in a public auction shall be open to the inspection of any person wishing to purchase it prior to or during the bidding. 
(Code 1979, § 42.034)  
Sec. 26-75. - Location. 
No goods, wares, merchandise or any other thing shall be sold or exposed for sale in any street, alley, or public place in the Village at auction. All auctions shall be held or conducted in a store, warehouse or other proper place, which shall be so arranged that none of the bidders or bystanders will be compelled or required to stand or remain on the street or sidewalk in front of such warehouse, store, or other place in such a manner as to obstruct free travel. 
(Code 1979, § 42.035)  
Sec. 26-76. - Attracting attention. 
No bellman or crier, or any instrument of music, or mechanical reproducing device such as a loudspeaker connected to a record player or a record player, or any show, signal or means of attracting the attention of passersby, other than a sign or flag, shall be utilized or employed at or near any place of sale, auction room, or auction. 
(Code 1979, § 42.036)  
Secs. 26-77—26-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to engage in the business of auctioneer without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 42.031)  
Sec. 26-92. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 26-93. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 26-94. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 26-95. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 26-96. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this division, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 26-97. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 26-98. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-97. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 26-99. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.031)  
Sec. 26-100. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 26-101—26-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. IV, §§ 26-131—26-200, in its entirety. Former Art. IV, §§ 26-131—26-200, pertained to barbershops, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.041—42.044. 
 
Secs. 26-131—26-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. V, §§ 26-201—26-270, in its entirety. Former Art. V, §§ 26-201—26-270, pertained to catchbasin cleaners, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.071. 42.073, and 42.074. 
 
Secs. 26-201—26-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO SALES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Cigarette tax, 35 ILCS 130/1 et seq.; cigarette use tax, 35 ILCS 135/1 et seq.; Tobacco Products Tax Act, 35 ILCS 143/10-1 et seq.; Tobacco Accessories and Smoking Herbs Control Act, 720 ILCS 685/1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-271. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(b)  In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Village Manager may suspend or revoke the retail cigarette or tobacco products dealer's license for any violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.0811)  
Sec. 26-272. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The sale of cigarettes or tobacco products in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 26-273. - Responsibility of licensee for violations by agents and employees. 
Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee under this article shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee and shall subject the licensee to the same penalty as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. 
(Code 1979, § 42.0810)  
Sec. 26-274. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.0812)  
Sec. 26-275. - Vending machines and self-service sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a vending machine or self-service display for the sale or dispensing of tobacco or cigarette products. Self-service displays means open displays of tobacco or cigarette products and point of sale tobacco or cigarette promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention or assistance of a store employee. 
(Code 1979, § 42.083)  
Sec. 26-276. - Prohibitions regarding underage persons. 
(a)  Sales to underage persons. No licensee under this article, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give or deliver tobacco, e-liquid, cigarette or electronic cigarette products to any person under the age of 21 years. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining tobacco, e-liquid, cigarette or electronic cigarette products, shall sell, give or deliver such tobacco, e-liquid, cigarette or electronic cigarette products to another person under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  Responsibility of parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any person under the age of 21 years of which such person may be the parent or guardian to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Sale by underage persons. No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall engage, employ or permit any person under the age of 21 years to sell cigarette, e-liquid, electronic cigarette or tobacco products. 
(d)  Possession. No person under the age of 21 years shall have cigarette, e-liquid, electronic cigarette or tobacco products in such person's possession. 
(e)  Entry to retail tobacco store. No licensee under this article, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall permit any person under the age of 21 years to be or remain on or in any portion of a retail tobacco store unless the Underage Person is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
(f)  Identification required. 
(1)  If a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of cigarette, e-liquid, electronic cigarette or tobacco products is prohibited because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, the licensee or agent or employee shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of official duties. 
(2)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept the delivery, or have the possession of cigarette, e-liquid, electronic cigarette or tobacco products in violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.086; Ord. No. 15-4-C-4136, § 1, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 18-5-C-4376, § 1, 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 19-11-C-4498, § 1, 11-4-2019) 
Cross reference— Smoking in public places, § 58-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Sale of Tobacco to Minors Act, 720 ILCS 675/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 26-277. - Display of warning sign regarding violations by underage persons. 
In every establishment in the Village where cigarette, e-liquid, electronic cigarette or tobacco products are sold there shall be displayed at all times, in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village and which shall read substantially as follows: 
WARNING TO ALL PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750.00 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF SKOKIE IF YOU PURCHASE CIGARETTE, E-LIQUID, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR IF YOU HAVE IN YOUR POSSESSION A FALSE, FORGED, ALTERED OR DEFACED IDENTIFICATION CARD WHICH MISREPRESENTS YOUR AGE. WARNING TO ALL PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750.00 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF SKOKIE IF YOU ACCEPT A GIFT OF CIGARETTE, E-LIQUID, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR HAVE CIGARETTE, E-LIQUID, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN YOUR POSSESSION. 
(Code 1979, § 42.087; Ord. No. 15-4-C-4136, § 1, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 18-5-C-4376, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 26-278. - Distribution of single products. 
No cigarette or tobacco products licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver cigarette or tobacco products in any form other than an original factory-wrapped package. 
(Code 1979, § 42.088)  
Sec. 26-279. - Distribution of free products or coupons. 
No person shall give away, barter, exchange, distribute or in any way dispense free of charge or at nominal cost any cigarette or tobacco products, samples, and/or coupon redeemable for any tobacco products on any public street, alley, or sidewalk or in any public park, ground or playground. This section does not prohibit the distribution of coupons included in newspapers, magazines or other publications. 
(Code 1979, § 42.089)  
Secs. 26-280—26-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-301. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to sell cigarettes, tobacco and tobacco products in the Village without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 42.081)  
Sec. 26-302. - Application information. 
(a)  Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  Application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by such evidence as shall be required indicating that the applicant is one of good character and reputation. If the Village Manager or designee shall be satisfied that the applicant is of good character and reputation so as to be suitable to be entrusted with the sale of cigarettes, the Village Manager or designee shall issue a license. 
(Code 1979, § 42.082)  
Sec. 26-303. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 26-304. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 26-305. - Contents; display. 
Upon the approval of a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall issue a license designating the year and location for which the license is issued. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent location where the tobacco or cigarette products are sold. 
(Code 1979, § 42.085)  
Sec. 26-306. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 26-307. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 26-308. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-307. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 26-309. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.084)  
Sec. 26-310. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 26-311—26-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. VII, §§ 26-331—26-380, in its entirety. Former Art. VII, §§ 26-331—26-380, pertained to construction material sales centers, and derived from Code 1979, § 42.091.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. VIII, §§ 26-381—26-430, in its entirety. Former Art. VII, §§ 26-381—26-430, pertained to dog services, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.101—42.104.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. IX, §§ 26-431—26-480, in its entirety. Former Art. IX, §§ 26-431—26-480, pertained to dry cleaning establishments, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.111. 42.112 and 42.114.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. X, §§ 26-481—26-530, in its entirety. Former Art. X, §§ 26-481—26-530, pertained to automatic dry cleaning machines, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.121—42-126.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XI, §§ 26-531—26-580, in its entirety. Former Art. XI, §§ 26-531—26-580, pertained to laundries and launromats, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.211—42.213, 42-215.  
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XII, §§ 26-581—26-630, in its entirety. Former Art. XII, §§ 26-581—26-630, pertained to construction material sales centers, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.131—42.134.  
ARTICLE XIII. - FARMERS' MARKET[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Farmers' market fees, § 46-38. 
 
Sec. 26-631. - General policy. 
It is in the public interest for the Village to allow producers of food to sell directly to the public as provided in 505 ILCS 70/1. Therefore, food products may be sold in a farmers' market in the Village as provided in this article without licensing, subject to the conditions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.151; Ord. No. 00-9-C-2926, § 1, 9-5-2000)  
Sec. 26-632. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farmers' market means a designated area where, on designated days and times, growers and producers may sell directly to the public, in accordance with Village regulations. The Village shall have the right to relocate or discontinue the market, to specify the days and times of its use and to stipulate what goods may be sold. 
Grower and producer mean any person offering for sale articles for human consumption, such as fruits, vegetables, edible grains, nuts and berries, apiary products, maple sugars, syrups, eggs, cheese products, sausage, or nonedible articles such as cut or potted flowers, which articles have been raised or prepared by the grower or producer, by members of their family or by persons in their employ. All articles offered for sale by the grower or producer must be grown or processed in the state of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan or Wisconsin. Sale of any type of meat, fish or poultry and refrigerated dairy products or any article proscribed by the Director of Public Health, with the exception of those products specifically permitted to be sold under this article, shall be prohibited. The sale of eggs, cheese products and sausage shall be permitted only if proper refrigeration is provided. 
(Code 1979, § 42.152; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-633. - Market Manager. 
The Village Manager or designee shall act as a Market Manager, shall review the application of any grower or producer offering articles for sale under this article, issue permits and collect fees therefor, assign spaces to growers and producers, establish a system of bookkeeping for the market, and be responsible for maintaining the market's cleanliness and enforcing the market regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 42.153)  
Sec. 26-634. - Days of operation; location. 
The farmers' market shall conduct retail business only on Sundays. The location of the market shall be on Village property as designated by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and may be moved from time to time at the discretion of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 42.154; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-635. - Persons eligible to rent space. 
Permits for a space at the farmers' market shall only be issued to a grower or producer as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-636. - Application for space. 
An applicant for a space to sell goods within the farmers' market shall submit to the Village Manager or designee, together with the required fee, an application on a form prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 42.155; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-637. - Assignment of spaces. 
Spaces in the farmers' market shall be assigned in accordance with the order in which applications are filed with the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 42.156; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-638. - Rental fees. 
Fees for farmers' market spaces shall be as set forth in Section 46-38. 
(Code 1979, § 42.156)  
Sec. 26-639. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Duties of sellers. No permittee under this article shall: 
(1)  Sell any product other than produce of their or the permittee's farm, orchard, vineyard or garden. Permittees shall submit in advance of occupancy an affidavit certifying that articles offered for sale comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
(2)  Sell or offer any article according to weight except in accordance with the established standards for weight of the State. All products must comply with applicable federal, State and local laws. 
(3)  Sell apiary products, maple sugars and syrups or any processed food unless properly labeled in accordance with State and local standards for labeling. 
(4)  Sell or offer any unwholesome or spoiled articles. 
(5)  Attract attention to the goods by loud sounds. 
(6)  Sell or offer any article without first obtaining an Illinois sales tax license of the current year or fail to display prominently the number of such license; provided, however, that when a temporary (daily) space is assigned, suitable evidence of application for such license may be presented to the Market Manager. 
(7)  Transport or display food without adequate protection against contamination. Delivery trucks and other equipment used for transportation and display shall be kept clean at all times. 
(8)  Allow any waste, garbage or any other refuse to remain on or near the space after the closing hour of any market day. 
(b)  Animals. No animals or pets shall be allowed in the market. 
(c)  Motorized vehicles. No motorized vehicles other than those of the sellers and the Market Manager shall be allowed in the market. 
(Code 1979, § 42.157; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001)  
Sec. 26-640. - Cleanup deposit. 
All growers and producers shall pay the cleanup deposit provided for in Section 46-38 upon arrival at the market. Growers and producers shall remove all waste and refuse from their spaces before leaving the market. Any refusal or failure by the grower or producer, or their employees or agents, to clean their respective space shall result in forfeiture of the deposit. 
(Code 1979, § 42.158; Ord. No. 01-12-C-3050, § 1, 12-17-2001)  
Secs. 26-641—26-660. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XIV, §§ 26-661—26-710, in its entirety. Former Art. XIV, §§ 26-661—26-710, pertained to florists and nurseries, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.161—42-163.  
ARTICLE XV. - GARAGE SALES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Permit fee for garage sales, § 46-40. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-711. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale means a garage sale, patio sale, basement sale, backyard sale, or any similar type sale of 3 or more household items, which is held on residential premises to which the general public is invited. 
(Code 1979, § 42.181) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-712. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 42.187)  
Sec. 26-713. - Number and duration; permitted goods. 
No more than one garage sale permit may be issued to a dwelling unit in any one calendar year. Such a sale shall extend over not more than 3 consecutive days, and shall be limited to household goods and furnishings which have been in use in the dwelling unit located on the premises on which such a sale is conducted or which have been in use in more than one dwelling unit on the same block. 
(Code 1979, § 42.182; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3294, § 1, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 26-714. - Signs, flags and banners. 
(a)  No signs or advertisement indicating the address, location or direction of a garage sale shall be allowed upon any tree, shrub or pole located in any street, parkway or other public place; nor shall any sign be allowed on any property other than the property wherein the garage sale is to take place. 
(b)  No flags, banners or buntings shall be displayed in connection with the conduct of any garage sale. 
(c)  Signs advertising the sale may be displayed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. from April 1st through October 31st and from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. November 1st through March 31st, each day the sale is held. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to remove the signs in a timely manner. 
(d)  Each sign must state "Garage Sale" along with an attached adhesive label or other means of identifying the name and address of the person responsible for the placement and removal of the sign. The address and name must be consistent with where the garage sale has been permitted. 
(e)  Signs must be free standing and shall not exceed four square feet. 
(Code 1979, § 42.184; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3294, § 2, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 26-715. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-9-C-3294, § 3, adopted Sept. 7, 2004, deleted § 26-715 in its entirety. Former § 26-715 pertained to display of goods in front yard and derived from Code 1979, § 42.185.  
Sec. 26-716. - Display of goods on public property or right-of-way. 
No household goods or furnishings shall be displayed or offered for sale on any public property or public right-of-way. 
(Code 1979, § 42.186)  
Secs. 26-717—26-730. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 26-731. - Required; procedures for issuance. 
No garage sale shall be allowed until a permit for such sale shall be granted. The Village Manager is authorized to establish necessary administrative procedures for obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1979, § 42.183)  
Sec. 26-732. - Application. 
Applications for permits under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 26-733. - Contents. 
A garage sale permit shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the permittee. 
(2)  Date(s) of the garage sale. 
(3)  A statement that, if a permit is granted, the permittee will abide by all applicable codes and ordinances of the Village. 
(4)  A statement that all goods and furnishings to be sold are in the possession and title of the permittee and meet the conditions set forth in Section 26-713. 
(Code 1979, § 42.183; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3294, § 4, 9-7-2004)  
Sec. 26-734. - Fees. 
Fees for garage sale permits shall be as set forth in Section 46-40. 
(Code 1979, § 42.183)  
Sec. 26-735. - Display. 
The permit issued under this division shall be prominently displayed in such a way that it is visible from the street, at the location of the sale. 
(Code 1979, § 42.183; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3294, § 5, 9-7-2004)  
Secs. 26-736—26-750. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XVI, §§ 26-751—26-800, in its entirety. Former Art. XVI, §§ 26-751—26-800, pertained to hotels and motels, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.751—42.800.  
ARTICLE XVII. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XVII, §§ 26-801—26-850, in its entirety. Former Art. XVII, §§ 26-801—26-850, pertained to identification cards, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.311—42.314.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - MASSAGE SERVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-851. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved massage school means a facility which meets the minimum standards for training and curriculum for the practice of massage and massage therapy and is accredited by one of the following: 
1.  Accrediting Bureau of Health Education Schools (ABHES); 
2.  Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training (ACCET); 
3.  Accrediting Commission for Career Schools and Colleges of Technology (ACCSCT); 
4.  Accrediting Council of Independent Colleges and Schools (ACICS); 
5.  Council of Occupational Education (COE); 
6.  Commission of Massage Training Accreditation (COMTA); 
7.  Distance Education and Training Council (DETC); 
8.  International Massage Somatic Therapies Accreditation Council (IMSTAC); 
9.  North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (NCACAS). 
Massage or massage therapy means a system of structured palpation or movement of the soft tissue of the body. The system may include, but is not limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or kneading, tapotement or percussion, friction, vibration, compression, and stretching activities as they pertain to massage therapy. These techniques may be applied by a licensed massage therapist with or without the aid of lubricants, salt or herbal preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, or a massage device that mimics or enhances the actions possible by human hands. The purpose of the practice of massage, as permitted and licensed under this article, is to enhance the general health and well being of the mind and body of the recipient. "Massage" does not include the diagnosis of a specific pathology. "Massage" does not include those acts of physical therapy or therapeutic or corrective measures that are outside the scope of massage therapy practice as defined in this article. 
Massage services establishment means any business establishment or location in the Village having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage or massage therapy as defined in this section, or which has a place of business where any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity engages in or carries on any of the activities described in the definition of massage or massage therapy. 
Massage services means the transaction or operation of any business or enterprise in the Village, that is organized and operated, in whole or in part, for the purpose of practicing, performing, providing or delivering a massage or massage therapy in return for compensation or consideration of any type. 
Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage or massage therapy as defined in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 42.331; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-852. - Violations declared nuisance. 
Violations of this article are declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief or pursue other civil actions necessary to eradicate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-853. - Sanitation and health regulations, for massage services establishment licensees. 
Massage services establishment licensees must follow certain regulations in the operation of their massage services business to ensure a clean and sanitary environment. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  All massage tables, equipment and areas shall have surfaces that are readily disinfected. 
(b)  The establishment shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing of nondisposable instruments and materials used. Such nondisposable instruments, equipment and materials shall be disinfected after each use. 
(c)  Clean linen, towels and other materials shall be stored in a manner so as to be protected from contamination. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in a covered container and stored separately. 
(d)  An adequate supply of clean linens and towels shall be made available. Linens and towels must be for individual customer use and laundered after each use. 
(e)  All areas in a massage therapy establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(f)  All creams, oils, lotions, etc., shall be kept in clean, closed containers and shall be dispensed in doses so that the bulk containers are not contaminated between customers. 
(g)  No massage treatment shall be administered to a patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption unless a licensed physician certifies in writing that such patron may be safely massaged. 
(h)  The establishment must be equipped with a hand sink with dispensed soap and towels. The therapist shall wash hands in hot running water with soap before treating each patron. 
(Ord. No. 01-9-C-3025, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-854. - Sanitation and health regulations for massage services licensees. 
Massage services licensees must follow certain regulations in the operation of their massage services business to ensure a clean and sanitary environment while conducting the business of massage or massage therapy in the Village. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All massage tables and equipment shall have surfaces that are readily disinfected. 
(2)  Nondisposable instruments, equipment and materials shall be disinfected after each use. 
(3)  An adequate supply of clean linens and towels shall be made available. Linens and towels must be for individual customer use and laundered after each use. 
(4)  All creams, oils, lotions, etc., shall be kept in clean, closed containers. 
(5)  No massage treatment shall be administered to a client exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption unless a licensed physician certifies in writing that such patron may be safely massaged. 
(6)  The therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water with soap before treating each client. 
All massage therapists must comply with the regulations stated in this section in the performance of their conduct. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Secs. 26-855—26-870. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MASSAGE SERVICE LICENSE AND MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT 
 
Sec. 26-871. - Massage services establishment license or massage services license required. 
(a)  No person or entity shall operate a massage services establishment in the Village without first obtaining a massage services establishment license in accordance with the provisions of this division. A separate massage services establishment license shall be required for each massage services location, regardless of whether such multiple establishments are operated by the same person or entity. Hospitals and nursing homes are not required to obtain a massage services establishment license. 
(b)  A massage therapist residing in the Village and performing massages or massage therapy in the Village, who is not affiliated with a massage services establishment, must also obtain a massage services establishment license indicating his or her residence as the establishment location. 
(c)  In relation to persons or entities, not residing or located in the Village, that are organized, in whole or part, and operated for the purpose of providing, performing or delivering massages or massage therapy in the Village for money, gratuity or compensation of any type, then the persons or entities must obtain a massage services license. Any massage therapist not residing in the Village, but performing massages or massage therapy in the Village, must be affiliated with a massage services establishment licensed by the Village or a massage services business licensed by the Village, otherwise such therapist must obtain a massage services license in addition to a therapist permit. 
(Code 1979, § 42.332; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-872. - Massage therapist permit required. 
No person shall practice, provide, perform or deliver a massage or massage therapy on another person in the Village, under circumstances in which it is reasonably expected that that the person receiving the massage or massage therapy, or some other third party, will pay money, or give a gratuity or compensation of any type, for the services rendered, without a valid massage therapist permit issued by the Village pursuant to the terms of this division. Massage therapist permits shall be issued only to natural persons and shall not be issued to any corporation, partnership or other entity. No massage therapist permit shall be issued to an individual who is not affiliated with a massage services establishment, or massage services business, licensed by the Village. If there is no such affiliation, then the prospective permittee must obtain either a massage services establishment license or a massage services license as set forth in section 26-871. 
(Code 1979, § 42.332; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-873. - Exemptions. 
No license or permit shall be required under this article for any occupation, activity or conduct that is exempt pursuant to Section 25 of the Illinois Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 42.333; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-874. - Application information; education requirements. 
Applications for licenses and permits under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from an applicant. Evidence shall be submitted with an application that such applicant for a massage therapist permit has received training in massage or massage therapy from, and is certified by an institution that is an approved massage school, as defined herein. In the case of a legal entity applying for a massage services establishment license or a massage services license, the applicant shall list all officers and owners of the entity. At least one owner or manager of the entity shall be considered the applicant and shall meet the personal training and certification requirements stated in this section. 
Each applicant for a massage services establishment license or a massage services license shall disclose the names and addresses of all massage therapists affiliated with the proposed licensee. If approved for a license, the licensee shall inform the Village in writing, within 10 days, of any additions, deletions and changes in the list of affiliated massage therapists. All licensees have a duty to manage and supervise the activities and conduct of an affiliated therapist in the performance of his or her services. All massages or massage therapy services provided, performed or delivered are deemed to have been accomplished with the direct knowledge of the licensee. 
Each applicant shall be required to submit written proof establishing that the applicant has graduated from an approved massage school with a 500 hour curriculum or program. 
(Code 1979, § 42.334; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-875. - Review of application. 
All licenses and permits required by this division shall be reviewed within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application. Such review shall include, but not be limited to, a criminal background investigation of the applicant or in the case of an entity, the listed owners, officers, managers, members, partners and shareholders. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-876. - Grounds for denial or discipline. 
The Village Manager or designee may (i) deny an application for a license or permit, (ii) refuse to renew a license or permit, or (iii) suspend or revoke a license or permit, if it is determined that the applicant, licensee or permittee, or an owner, officer or manager of a licensee: 
(1)  Was convicted of any crime under the laws of the United States or any state or territory therein that is either: (a) a felony, (b) a misdemeanor, pertaining to battery, prostitution, dishonesty or directly related to the practice of massage, or (c) an offense listed in Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-6 et seq., and Article 16 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/16-1, et seq. Conviction, as used in this paragraph, shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, an admission of guilt, or a plea of nolo contendere; 
(2)  Engaged in immoral conduct in the commission of any act, such as sexual abuse, sexual misconduct or sexual exploitation; 
(3)  Made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements, or material omissions, in the application for the license or permit; 
(4)  Is indebted to the Village for required fees, costs incurred by the Village in relation to the individual or entity, or outstanding fines or penalties; or 
(5)  Has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws or rules and regulations of the Village or State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-877. - Display and renewal of licenses and permits. 
Any massage services establishment license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license or permit has been issued. The massage services license shall be in the possession of any affiliated massage therapist performing massage or massage therapy in the Village. Every massage therapist performing a massage or massage therapy shall have on their person his or her massage therapist permit. 
All licenses and permits expire at the end of each Village fiscal year. Licenses and permits may be renewed, based upon a request and payment of the fee by the respective licensee or permittee, however, the Village Manager or designee is authorized to review a renewal request in the same manner as an initial application. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-878. - Temporary suspension. 
In the event the Village Manager finds that there is sufficient evidence that indicates the occurrence of criminal behavior or a practice that would constitute a danger to the public, he or she may temporarily suspend a license or permit without a hearing simultaneously with the notification of the right to a hearing provided for in section 26-880. In the event that the Village Manager suspends a license or permit issued under this section, a hearing by the Village Manager must be held within 30 calendar days after the suspension has occurred. 
(Code 1979, § 42.335; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-879. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license or permit. The notice shall inform the applicant, licensee or permittee that the applicant, licensee or permittee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or permittee specified on the application, license or permit. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-880. - Hearings. 
In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license or permit. The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license or permit issued under this division. A license or permit shall not be revoked unless the licensee or permittee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's or permittee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee or permittee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-879. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee or permittee does not request a hearing in writing, the license or permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-881. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses and permits under this division shall be as set forth in section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.332; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-882. - Transfer. 
No license or permit issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license or permit was issued. No individual or entity other than the licensee or permittee shall act or do business under such license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Sec. 26-883. - Cease and desist. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue a cease and desist order to any person performing massage or massage therapy, as defined by this article, in the Village that is not properly permitted and affiliated with a licensed massage services establishment or licensed massage services business. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue a cease and desist order to any person or entity operating a massage services establishment or massage services business without being properly licensed. 
(Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 1, 4-19-2004)  
Secs. 26-884—26-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - MORTUARIES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Funeral Directors and Embalmers Licensing Code, 225 ILCS 41/1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-901. - Violations declared nuisance. 
Maintaining an undertaking establishment or operating as an undertaker or mortician in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 26-902. - Notification of delivery of bodies. 
It shall be the duty of every undertaker to notify the Village Department of Public Health whenever a body is brought to the undertaker or turned over to the undertaker for the undertaker's services. 
(Code 1979, § 42.232)  
Secs. 26-903—26-920. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-921. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an undertaking establishment or to operate as an undertaker or mortician without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 42.231)  
Sec. 26-922. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 26-923. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 26-924. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 26-925. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 26-926. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this division, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 26-927. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 26-928. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-927. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 26-929. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.231)  
Sec. 26-930. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 26-931—26-949. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - BODY ART SERVICES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, adopted March 4, 2019, Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, repealed Art. XX, §§ 26-951—26-1000, which pertained to motor vehicle related uses, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.951—42.1000. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-950. - Purpose. 
Tattoo and body piercing practices affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. It has been established that non-sterile needles can lead to the spread of certain blood-borne illnesses such as Hepatitis and HIV. Therefore, the Mayor and Board of Trustees find that the regulation of tattoo and body piercing establishments is necessary to ensure public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-951. - Adoption of the Illinois Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act. 
The Village hereby adopts by reference the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act, (410 ILCS 54) (hereinafter "Act"), and any subsequent revisions or amendments to the Act are hereby adopted and made part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-952. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses and permits under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-953. - Transfer. 
No license or permit issued or granted under this Article shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or entity. No individual or entity other than the licensee or permittee shall act or do business under such license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
DIVISION 2. - BODY ART SERVICES 
 
Sec. 26-954. - Body Art Establishment License Required. 
(a)  All establishments providing body art services such as tattooing, microblading, micropigmentation, piercing, branding or scarification are required to be registered with the Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH) and be in full compliance with the Act. 
(b)  No person or entity shall operate a body art establishment in the Village without first obtaining a body art establishment license in accordance with the provisions of this Article. A separate Body Art Establishment License shall be required for each body art establishment location, regardless of whether such multiple establishments are operated by the same person or entity. 
(c)  The number of licensed Body Art Establishments in the Village shall not exceed eight (8) at any given time. 
(d)  Body Art Establishments shall not be allowed in a residence and do not qualify as a Home Occupation pursuant to Section 118-79 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-955. - Body Artist Permit Required. 
(a)  No person shall practice, provide, perform, engage in or deliver body art services on another person in the Village, under circumstances in which it is reasonably expected that the person receiving the services or some other third party, will pay money or give a gratuity or compensation of any type, for the services rendered, without a valid body artist permit issued by the Village pursuant to the terms of this Article. 
(b)  Body Artist Permits shall be issued only to natural persons and shall not be issued to any corporation, partnership or other entity. No Body Artist Permit shall be issued to an individual who is not affiliated with a body art establishment licensed by the Village. If there is no such affiliation, then the prospective permittee must obtain a body art establishment license as set forth in Section 26-954. 
(c)  A body artist not residing in the Village, and performing body art services in the Village must be affiliated with a body art establishment licensed by the Village and must also obtain a body artist permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-956. - Exemptions. 
The following practices, occupations and persons are exempted from this Part: 
(a)  The practice of electrology as defined in the Electrologist Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 412; 
(b)  The practice of acupuncture as defined in the Acupuncture Practice Act, 225 ILCS 2; 
(c)  The use, by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, of colors, dyes, or pigments for the purpose of obscuring scar tissue or imparting color to the skin for cosmetic, medical, or figurative purposes; and 
(d)  Individuals who pierce only the non-cartilaginous portion or lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE/PERMIT: REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 26-957. - Permit Application; Training and Vaccination Requirement. 
Applications for Body Art Establishment Licenses and Body Artist Permits under this Article shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on prescribed forms. Additional information may be requested from an applicant as part of the review process. 
(a)  Body Art Establishment License 
1.  The applicant for a Body Art Establishment Services License shall list all officers and owners of the entity. At least one owner or manager of the entity shall be considered the applicant and shall meet the personal training and education requirements stated in this section. 
2.  Each applicant for a Body Art Establishment License shall disclose the names and addresses of all body artists affiliated with the proposed licensee. If approved for a license, the licensee shall inform the Village in writing, within 10 days, of any additions, deletions and changes in the list of affiliated body artists. All licensees have a duty to manage and supervise the activities and conduct of an affiliated body artist in the performance of his or her services. All body art services provided, performed or delivered are deemed to have been accomplished with the direct knowledge of the licensee. 
(b)  Body Artist Permit. 
1.  Evidence shall be submitted by or on behalf of the applicant for a Body Artist Permit that the applicant has received training in each body art procedure that they will perform. This can be evidenced by an apprenticeship, either at a school or under the supervision of a permitted or licensed body artist skilled in these techniques. 
2.  Body artists shall provide documentation of completion of "Bloodborne Pathogen Training", as required by OSHA (29 CFR 1910.1030). This training must be completed prior to providing any services and annually, thereafter. Documentation shall be maintained at the body art establishment and shall be submitted to the Village upon request. 
3.  Body artists shall provide documentation of the hepatitis B vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-958. - Application Review. 
All applications for licenses and permits required by this Article shall be reviewed within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt. Such review shall include, but not be limited to, a criminal background investigation of the applicant or in the case of an entity, the listed owners, officers, managers, members, partners and shareholders. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-959. - Grounds for denial or discipline. 
The Village Manager or designee may: (i) deny an application for a license or permit, (ii) refuse to renew a license or permit, or (iii) suspend or revoke a license or permit, if it is determined that the applicant, licensee or permittee, or an owner, officer or manager of a licensee: 
(1)  Was convicted of any crime under the laws of the United States or any state or territory therein that is either: (a) a felony, (b) a misdemeanor, pertaining to battery, prostitution, dishonesty or directly related to the practice of tattooing, or (c) an offense listed in Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-6 et seq., and Article 16 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq. Conviction, as used in this paragraph, shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, an admission of guilt, or a plea of nolo contendere; 
(2)  Engaged in immoral conduct in the commission of any act, such as sexual abuse, sexual misconduct or sexual exploitation; 
(3)  Made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements, or material omissions, in the application for the license or permit; 
(4)  Is indebted to the Village for required fees, costs incurred by the Village in relation to the individual or entity, or outstanding fines or penalties; 
(5)  Is unable to substantiate the requisite training, was trained at a facility which the Village Manager or designee, determines to be inadequate or was trained at a facility at which the licensure was revoked by the issuing governmental entity. 
(6)  Has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws or rules and regulations of the Village or State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-960. - Display and renewal of licenses and permits. 
(a)  Any Body Art Establishment License issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued. The Body Artist Permit of all affiliated body artists performing body art services at the location shall also be prominently displayed. 
(b)  All licenses and permits referenced in this Article expire at the end of each Village fiscal year. Licenses and permits may be renewed, based upon renewal application and payment of the fee by the respective licensee or permittee. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to review a renewal request in the same manner as an initial application. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
DIVISION 4. - LICENSE/PERMIT: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION 
 
Sec. 26-961. - Temporary suspension. 
In the event the Village Manager finds that there is sufficient evidence that indicates the occurrence of criminal behavior or a practice that would constitute a danger to the public, he or she may temporarily suspend a license or permit without a hearing simultaneously with the notification of the right to a hearing provided for in section 26-960. In the event that the Village Manager suspends a license or permit issued under this section, a hearing by the Village Manager must be held within 30 calendar days after the suspension has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-962. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this Article shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation of the license or permit. The notice shall inform the applicant, licensee or permittee that the applicant, licensee or permittee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by regular first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or permittee specified on the application, license or permit. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-963. - Hearings. 
In addition to the provisions contained in this Article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license or permit. The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license or permit issued under this Article. A license or permit shall not be revoked unless the licensee or permittee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's or permittee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee or permittee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-959. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee or permittee does not request a hearing in writing, the license or permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 26-964. - Cease and desist. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue a Cease and Desist Order to: 
a.  Any person or entity operating a body art establishment without required Village and State licenses; 
b.  Any person engaging in body art services in the Village, as referenced by this Article, if he or she is not properly permitted and affiliated with a licensed body art establishment. 
(Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Secs. 26-965—26-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - NEWSRACKS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Exemption of newspapers from handbill regulations, § 6-34. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-1001. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distributor means the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack. 
Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser which fully encloses and secures the periodicals contained therein and is installed, used or maintained for the dissemination of newspapers or other news periodicals, regardless of whether a charge is imposed. 
Official Village newsrack enclosure means a fixture provided by the Village for the placement of multiple newsracks. 
Person means any person, persons, or entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or joint venture. 
Public property means any public property within the Village, which shall include but not be limited to streets, roadways, rights-of-way, and parkways. 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(Code 1979, § 42.321) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-1002. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The violation of any provision of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief. 
(Code 1979, § 42.322)  
Sec. 26-1003. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3215)  
Sec. 26-1004. - Existing newsracks. 
All newsracks existing within the Village as of September 30, 1995, shall be permitted to exist, provided there is subsequent compliance with the terms of this article within 30 days of being notified by the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3216)  
Sec. 26-1005. - Location and manner of installation; size; advertisements; maintenance; distributor identification. 
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public property shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Location and manner of installation. 
a.  No box shall be less than 1.5 feet from the back of the curb edge of the roadway. 
b.  No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public property when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally marked or stopped vehicle, or the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, parking meters, traffic control devices, or other objects permitted at or near the location. 
c.  No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any tree, utility pole, light pole, parking meter, traffic control post, street sign post, or other fixture located on public property, except to other newsracks or an official Village newsrack enclosure. 
d.  Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than 8 feet along a curb, and a space of not less than 3 feet shall separate each group of newsracks. 
e.  No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within 3 feet of any marked crosswalk. 
2.  Within 12 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk. 
3.  Within 5 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility. 
4.  Within 15 feet of any intersection, driveway, alley or street from the point where the curbline meets an imaginary line which constitutes an extension of the boundary of the driveway, alley or street at its narrowest point. 
5.  Within 3 feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop. 
6.  Within 3 feet of the outer end of any bus bench. 
7.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than 3 feet. 
8.  Within 3 feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping. 
9.  On or interfering with any handicapped access ramp. 
10.  On or within any median within any public right-of-way. 
11.  Within 250 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the same publication or periodical. 
(2)  Size. No newsrack shall exceed the following: 
a.  Four feet in height. 
b.  Twenty-four inches in width. 
c.  Twenty inches in thickness. 
(3)  Advertisements; maintenance. 
a.  No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
b.  Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund if the person is unable to receive the paid-for periodical. The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order. 
c.  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be services and maintained so that: 
1.  It is reasonably free of dirt and grease. 
2.  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof. 
3.  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon. 
4.  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the periodicals therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration. 
5.  The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading. 
6.  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen. 
d.  Each newsrack shall fully enclose and secure the periodicals contained therein so as to prevent the periodicals from potentially littering public property. 
(4)  Distributor identification. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism. 
(Code 1979, § 42.327)  
Sec. 26-1006. - Official Village newsrack enclosures. 
(a)  Designation of locations. The Village Manager or designee shall determine various locations in the Village where official Village newsrack enclosures shall be placed for the purpose of avoiding the placement of multiple newsracks, in furtherance of the Village's general health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Exemptions from location restrictions. The installation of newsracks located within an official Village newsrack enclosure shall be exempt from the location provisions set forth in Section 26-1005(1)a, b, and e.1 through 10. 
(c)  Additional newsracks in same block. If an official Village newsrack enclosure exists on a block within the Village, no other newsrack shall be permitted on the same side of a street on such a block unless the official Village newsrack enclosure is filled. If a place becomes vacant in the official Village newsrack enclosure, at the option of the Village Manager or designee, a permittee may be required to remove the additional newsrack on the block and relocate the newspaper or periodical to within the official Village enclosure. 
(Code 1979, § 42.328)  
Sec. 26-1007. - Abandonment. 
If a newsrack remains empty for a period of 30 continuous days, it shall be considered abandoned. 
(Code 1979, § 42.329)  
Sec. 26-1008. - Removal by Village. 
(a)  Authorized. After proper notice is given, the Village Manager or designee may cause the removal of a newsrack: 
(1)  After revocation of a permit in accordance with Section 26-1037. 
(2)  After expiration of a permit. 
(3)  That is installed without a permit. 
(4)  That is deemed abandoned or unclaimed. 
(b)  Immediate removal. If a determination is made that the existence of a newsrack presents an immediate danger to the public's health, safety or welfare, the Village Manager or designee may cause the removal of such a newsrack without giving prior notice. However, notice shall be given as soon as practicable after such removal. 
(c)  Impound fee. The permittee, or, if there is no permittee, the person responsible for installing a newsrack, shall be assessed an impound fee. The impound fee shall be determined by the Village Manager and be based on the actual cost to the Village for removal and storage, including a 10 percent administrative fee and the cost of restoring the public property to its condition prior to the installation and removal of the newsrack. Upon the payment of the assessed fees, the permittee or the person responsible for installing the newsrack shall be entitled to possession of the newsrack removed in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Unclaimed newsracks. Should a permittee or the person responsible for the installation of a newsrack fail to claim a removed newsrack or pay the fees assessed in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, such newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of pursuant to law. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3211)  
Secs. 26-1009—26-1030. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 26-1031. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, install, maintain or operate a newsrack on any public property within the Village without first obtaining an administrative/inspection permit in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 42.323)  
Sec. 26-1032. - Application information. 
Applications for an administrative/inspection permit under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 42.324)  
Sec. 26-1033. - Review of application; action on application; issuance or denial. 
Upon receipt of an application for a newsrack administrative/inspection permit, the Village Manager or designee shall review the application and determine compliance with all applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes, policies and rules and regulations. When the review reveals that all applicable requirements are complied with, an administrative/inspection permit shall be issued within 10 business days of receipt of the application. If a determination is made that the applicant has not complied with all applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, policies and rules and regulations, the application shall be denied, and the reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and mailed to the applicant within 5 business days of receipt of the application. Any applicant that receives a notification of denial for a newsrack administrative/inspection permit in accordance with this section shall have a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 26-1039. 
(Code 1979, § 42.325)  
Sec. 26-1034. - Placement of newsracks prior to obtaining permit. 
Any person may place a newsrack or newsracks on public property prior to submitting the application required in Section 26-1032 provided that the placement and maintenance of the newsrack or newsracks are otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. Any person placing a newsrack or newsracks on public property under this section shall submit the required application no later than the next Village business day after placement of the newsrack or newsracks. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3251)  
Sec. 26-1035. - Agreement by applicant. 
In every application for a newsrack, the applicant shall agree to the following: 
(1)  That any and all costs related to the installation and maintenance or removal of the newsrack shall be incurred by the applicant. 
(2)  That the privileges granted to the applicant are nontransferable and shall only apply to the periodical and location specified in the respective application. 
(3)  That the applicant shall name the Village as an additional insured from any loss or claim for personal injury or property damage alleged against the Village or the applicant, arising out of the installation, removal, existence, use or maintenance of the newsrack. If the Village or its officers, directors, employees and agents are named as defendants in any personal injury or property damage claim or suit concerning a newsrack, the Village may tender and the applicant must accept defense of all claims and suits which do not allege specific misconduct, misfeasance or malfeasance on the part of the Village or its officers, directors, employees and agents as the proximate or contributing cause of the loss. 
(4)  That, upon the removal of a newsrack, the permittee shall restore the property where the newsrack was located to the condition of the property prior to the installation of the newsrack, normal wear and tear excepted. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3252)  
Sec. 26-1036. - Display. 
An administrative/inspection permit issued under this division shall be posted permanently in a conspicuous location upon the newsrack for which it was issued. 
(Code 1979, § 42.323)  
Sec. 26-1037. - Revocation. 
The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke a newsrack administrative/inspection permit if a court of competent jurisdiction finds that: 
(1)  The permittee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations; 
(2)  A newsrack is a danger to the public, health, safety or welfare; or 
(3)  The permittee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for a permit. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3210)  
Sec. 26-1038. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this article shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of an administrative/inspection permit or the removal of a newsrack and the date the newsrack will be removed. The notice shall inform the permittee that the permittee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager and that the decision of the Village Manager, after the hearing, is appealable to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee specified on the application. A copy of the notice shall be sent by first class mail to the distributor, if known. If notice is being sent regarding a newsrack for which no permit has been issued, reasonable efforts should be made to determine the identity of the person placing the newsrack and notice shall be sent in accordance with this section. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3212)  
Sec. 26-1039. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a newsrack administrative/inspection permit or remove a newsrack. A newsrack administrative/inspection permit shall not be revoked unless the permittee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the permittee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the permittee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-1038. If, within 10 days of the notice, the permittee does not request a hearing in writing, the Village Manager shall have the subject newsrack removed. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3213)  
Sec. 26-1040. - Appeals. 
(a)  Generally. A permittee, or, if no permit has been issued, the person responsible for the installation of the newsrack, may appeal decisions of the Village Manager or designee only after a hearing is requested and a decision is rendered by the Village Manager or designee. If a hearing has not been requested, the decisions and determinations of the Village Manager are not appealable to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Filing of appeal. A written notice of intent to appeal a decision of the Village Manager or designee must be filed with the Village Clerk within 20 days of the issuance of a notice of revocation, a notice of removal or the order of findings by the Village Manager or designee as provided in this article. 
(c)  Hearing date. All appeals shall be heard by the Mayor and Board of Trustees at a regularly scheduled Board of Trustees meeting within 30 days of the notice of appeal. The Village Clerk shall be responsible for notifying the individual filing the notice of appeal of the date, by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(d)  Conduct of hearing; decision. The Mayor and Board of Trustees may reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the Village Manager. The Mayor and Board of Trustees' decision shall be based on a review of the facts as presented to the Village Manager and the standards as set forth in this article. The person appealing the decision of the Village Manager may present such person's case to the Board of Trustees, but may not introduce facts or factors not presented to the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 42.3214)  
Sec. 26-1041. - Transfer. 
Administrative/inspection permits issued under this division are only valid for the person, periodical and location specified in the inspection permit application and are not assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1979, § 42.323)  
Secs. 26-1042—26-1060. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XXII, §§ 26-1061—26-1120, in its entirety. Former Art. XXII, §§ 26-1061—26-1120, pertained to public parking lots, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.241—42.249.  
ARTICLE XXIII. - PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted Art. XXII, §§ 26-1121—26-1170, in its entirety. Former Art. XXIVII, §§ 26-1121—26-1170, pertained to public garages, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 42.251, 42.252.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2014, enacted new provisions as herein set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-1121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person or entity who lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling the same back at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at a place of business of any sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote the business, or who publicly exhibits a sign to the effect that it provides money on loan for personal property or deposit or pledge. 
Precious Metals Dealer means any person or entity, aside from a Transient Merchant as defined in Section 26-1371, whose primary business is the purchase and sale of precious metals. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1122. - Violations declared nuisance. 
Violations of this Article are declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager or designee may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief or pursue other civil actions necessary to eradicate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1123. - Transactions with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to purchase or receive from minors, any article of property. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1124. - Required records; inspection of goods and records. 
Every licensee under this Article shall keep a record of all property purchased, pledged, or sold, and shall maintain such record pursuant to the following: 
a.  All records, together with the articles themselves, shall be open to inspection by any member of the Police Department at all reasonable hours. 
b.  All licensees shall subscribe to, utilize, and participate in the recordkeeping system and vendor of the Police Department's approval. 
c.  All items purchased, pawned, or pledged shall be entered into such recordkeeping system within twelve (12) hours of receipt of the item. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-1125. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set up or keep a Pawnbroker's or Precious Metals Dealer's establishment without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Any licensee under this section must have a permanent location in the Village at which to conduct business. A separate license shall be required for each location, regardless of whether multiple establishments are operated by the same person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1126. - Number of licenses. 
(a)  There shall be no more than three (3) active and valid Pawnbroker licenses in existence at any given time. 
(b)  There shall be no more than one (1) active and valid Precious Metals Dealer license in existence at any given time. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1127. - Location. 
No new license shall be granted for any establishment located on a street with an Average Daily Traffic count of 15,000 vehicles or higher, as determined by the Village Engineering Department, or within 300 feet of any intersection with such a street. No new license shall be granted for any establishment located within 300 feet of a school or religious institution. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1128. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this Article shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. In the case of a legal entity applying for a license, the applicant shall list all officers and owners of the entity, and provide an annual corporate report verifying this information. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1129. - Action on application. 
All license applications as required by this Article shall be acted upon within thirty (30) days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1130. - Review of application; investigation of applicant; fingerprinting. 
(a)  In addition to the application required by this Article, each individual applicant, managing partner in a co-partnership, or officers and board of directors of a corporation must undergo fingerprinting, under the direction of the Chief of Police or designee and may also be required to submit to further investigation. The fee for such fingerprinting is set forth in Section 46-73. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, the fingerprints, and the fee, the Village Manager or designee shall review the application and shall cause to be made such investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as the Village Manager shall deem necessary to safeguard and protect the public good, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1131. - Grounds for denial, discipline, suspension and revocation. 
The Village Manager or designee may (i) deny an application for a license, (ii) refuse to renew a license, or (iii) suspend or revoke a license or permit, if it is determined that the applicant or licensee, or an owner, officer or employee of the applicant or licensee: 
(a)  Was convicted of any crime under the laws of the United States or any state or territory therein that is either: (i) a felony, or (ii) a misdemeanor pertaining to battery, fraud, theft or confidence games. Conviction, as used in this paragraph, shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, an admission of guilt, or a plea of nolo contendere; 
(b)  Made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements, or material omissions, in the application for the license; 
(c)  Is indebted to the Village for required fees, costs incurred by the Village in relation to the individual or entity, or outstanding fines or penalties; 
(d)  Has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws or rules and regulations of the Village or State of Illinois; or 
(e)  Is of unsatisfactory moral character and business responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1132. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1133. - Renewal. 
All licenses expire at the end of each Village fiscal year. Licenses may be renewed, based upon a request and payment of the fee by the respective licensee, however, the Village Manager or designee is authorized to review a renewal request in the same manner as an initial application. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1134. - Temporary suspension. 
In the event the Village Manager finds that there is sufficient evidence that indicates the occurrence of criminal behavior or a practice that would constitute a danger to the public, he or she may temporarily suspend a license without a hearing simultaneously with the notification of the right to a hearing provided for in Section 26-1136. In the event that the Village Manager suspends a license issued under this Article, a hearing by the Village Manager may be held within 30 calendar days after the suspension has occurred at the request of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1135. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1136. - Hearings. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee shall, within five (5) business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-1135. 
(c)  If, within ten (10) days of the Notice of Denial of License or Notice of Intent to Revoke, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the Village Manager may: 
(1)  Maintain the denial of the license; 
(2)  Lift or extend the suspension of the license; or 
(3)  Reinstate or revoke the license. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1137. - Fees. 
Fee for licenses under this Article shall be set forth in Section 46-73. Fees for commercial inspections under this Article shall be set forth in Section 46-133. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
Sec. 26-1138. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this Article shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or entity other than to the person or entity to which such license was issued. No individual or entity other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license. 
(Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 1, 8-4-2014)  
ARTICLE XXIV. - RAFFLES[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-1171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means an organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. 
Educational organization means an organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools. 
Fraternal organization means an organization of persons, including but not limited to ethnic organizations, having a common interest, organized and operated exclusively to promote the welfare of its members and to benefit the general public on a continuing and consistent basis. 
Labor organization means an organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis, with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
Raffle means a form of lottery as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2, conducted by an organization licensed under this article, in which: 
(1)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, 1 or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance. 
(2)  The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
Religious organization means any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
Veterans' organization means an organization or association composed of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(Code 1979, § 42.302) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-1172. - Conduct of raffles; use of proceeds. 
Licenses issued under this article are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game. 
(2)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(3)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(4)  A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this article. 
(5)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the licenses. 
(6)  No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by such person's parent or guardian. 
(7)  The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle should not exceed $200,000.00. 
(8)  The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle should not exceed $200,000.00. 
(9)  The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed $200.00. 
(10)  The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold shall not exceed 180 days. 
(Code 1979, § 42.305)  
Sec. 26-1173. - Raffles manager. 
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond, in a sum to be determined by the Village Manager or designee for each application, in favor of the organization, conditioned upon the manager's honesty in the performing of the manager's duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The Village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this article; provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. 
(Code 1979, § 42.306)  
Sec. 26-1174. - Records. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep the records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, and the description of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. 
(b)  Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the State Department of Revenue, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have a separate record of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. 
(c)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership, and to the licensing local unit of government, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. 
(d)  Records required in this section shall be preserved for 3 years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. 
(Code 1979, § 42.307)  
Secs. 26-1175—26-1190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-1191. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to operate or conduct a raffle in the Village without first obtaining a license. 
(Code 1979, § 42.301)  
Sec. 26-1192. - Limitation on scope of license. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than raffles as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.301)  
Sec. 26-1193. - Action on application. 
All raffle licenses shall be acted upon within 30 days from the date of application. 
(Code 1979, § 42.301)  
Sec. 26-1194. - Conditions. 
Raffles shall be conducted only by organizations licensed pursuant to this division, and such licenses are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of 5 years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire 5-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives. 
(2)  The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. 
(3)  The application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization. 
(Code 1979, § 42.303)  
Sec. 26-1195. - Ineligibility for license. 
The following are ineligible for a license under this division: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony. 
(2)  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter. 
(3)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed. 
(5)  Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not. 
(6)  Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle. 
(Code 1979, § 42.304)  
Sec. 26-1196. - Fee. 
The fee for a raffle license shall be as set forth in Section 46-73 and shall only be valid for 1 raffle. 
(Code 1979, § 42.301)  
Secs. 26-1197—26-1220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXV. - RETAIL PRICE MARKING AND DISPLAY OF FOOD[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 410 ILCS 620/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-1221. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall be applicable to all retail stores located in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 42.171)  
Sec. 26-1222. - Marking of prices. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall sell or offer to sell any item in a retail store unless the item contains a price marked thereon in Arabic numerals which can be easily read by the purchaser. 
(b)  The following items are excluded from the price marking requirement of this section: 
(1)  Identical items within a multi-pak package which is properly price-marked. 
(2)  Single cigars and single packages of cigarettes. 
(3)  Items sold in retail food stores that provide each consumer with a printed complete current list of all items for sale in the stores by product category (i.e., canned fruits, canned vegetables, cereal, paper products, etc.) indicating the retail price and the unit price of each item and which display a large sign indicating the price in easily readable Arabic numbers. 
(4)  Shelf marking giving unit prices in ounces or pounds for the purpose of comparison. Such shelf marking shall be in close proximity to each item. 
(Code 1979, § 42.172)  
Sec. 26-1223. - Universal Product Code (UPC) scanners. 
(a)  If UPC scanners are utilized, the following must be provided for the consumer: 
(1)  Cash register receipts shall be provided giving the date, item and price of each item purchased. 
(2)  The scanner price must conform to the marked or listed price. 
(b)  The retail store shall keep a log book of all errors in which the shelf marking price is different than the UPC scanner price and which shall also contain the corrective actions taken. This log book shall be open for inspection by the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 42.173) 
Cross reference— Electronic price scanners, § 26-1429.  
Sec. 26-1224. - Display of meat. 
(a)  All prepacked fresh meat sold or offered for sale shall be packaged in trays affording a minimum of 90 percent visibility of the area of the meat. 
(b)  The following meats are excluded from the packaging requirements of this section: 
(1)  Ground beef. 
(2)  Boneless cube and sandwich steaks. 
(3)  Fresh or smoked sausage. 
(4)  Smoked bacon. 
(5)  Bacon skins. 
(6)  Fresh side bacon. 
(7)  Fresh or frozen poultry parts. 
(8)  Smoked offal (entrails). 
(9)  Beef liver. 
(10)  Beef hooves. 
(11)  Beef franks. 
(12)  Beef hocks. 
(13)  Honeycomb tripe, kidneys, hearts and tongue. 
(14)  Pig tails. 
(15)  Pigs' feet. 
(16)  Pig snouts. 
(17)  Bones. 
(18)  Smoked sweet meats. 
(19)  Suet. 
(20)  Sweet breads. 
(21)  Neck bones. 
(22)  Salted meats. 
(23)  Casings. 
(24)  Hog maws. 
(25)  Cooked meat and poultry. 
(Code 1979, § 42.174)  
Secs. 26-1225—26-1250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVI. - SCRAP, DISCARDED OR USED MATERIALS DEALERS[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate secondhand and junk stores, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-1251. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of any place where any scrap, discarded or used materials, secondhand furniture, old clothing, old jewelry, rags, old metal or miscellaneous articles of personal property are purchased or sold, or engaging in the business of collecting rags, old bottles, old metal or miscellaneous articles of personal property of any sort, with vehicles or carts, or the keeping of a junk shop or junkyard, in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 26-1252. - Transactions with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to purchase or receive from minors, without the written consent of their parents or guardians, any article of property. 
(Code 1979, § 42.263)  
Sec. 26-1253. - Required records; inspection of goods and records. 
Every licensee under this article shall keep a record of all articles purchased, which record, together with the articles themselves, shall be open to inspection by any member of the Police Department at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1979, § 42.264)  
Secs. 26-1254—26-1270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-1271. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up or keep any place where any scrap, discarded or used materials, secondhand furniture, old clothing, old jewelry, rags, old metal or miscellaneous articles of personal property are purchased or sold, or follow the business of collecting rags, old bottles, old metal or miscellaneous articles of personal property of any sort, with vehicles or carts, or keep a junk shop or junkyard, without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.261)  
Sec. 26-1272. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 26-1273. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 26-1274. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 42.262)  
Sec. 26-1275. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 26-1276. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this division, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 26-1277. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 26-1278. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-1277. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 26-1279. - Fees. 
Fee for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.261)  
Sec. 26-1280. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 26-1281—26-1300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVII. - SIDEWALK SALES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
 
Sec. 26-1301. - Designation of sidewalk sale days. 
(a)  The Village Manager is authorized to designate up to four (4) "Sidewalk Sale Days" during a calendar year and each one shall have a duration of no more than four (4) consecutive days. 
(b)  The Village Manager may designate "Sidewalk Sale Days" upon his own initiative or upon application by any duly authorized Skokie business association or the Skokie Chamber of Commerce. 
(Code 1979, § 42.291; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 3, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 14-5-C-4058, § 1, 5-5-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-5-C-4058, § 1, adopted May 5, 2014, changed the title of § 26-1301 from "Designation of sidewalk sale days; permit" to "Designation of sidewalk sale days."  
Sec. 26-1302. - Establishment of application, rules and regulations for sidewalk sale days. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall promulgate a set of rules and regulations with respect to the coordination, conditions and public safety of Sidewalk Sale Days, including the availability of sidewalk space for private vendors and artists in front of businesses not participating in a Sidewalk Sale Day. 
(b)  An application for the designation for Sidewalk Sale Days shall be available in the Village Manager's Office. The application shall be in a form approved by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 42.292; Ord. No. 14-5-C-4058, § 1, 5-5-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-5-C-4058, § 1, adopted May 5, 2014, changed the title of § 26-1301 from "Establishment of regulations for conduct of sales" to "Establishment of application, rules and regulations for sidewalk sale days."  
Sec. 26-1303. - Conflicting regulations. 
All existing codes, ordinances, and rules and regulations that are inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be deemed waived during the days designated pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.293)  
Secs. 26-1304—26-1320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - SOUND AMPLIFIERS[17] 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Noise, § 42-71 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-1321. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)  No licensee under this article shall use, operate or employ any such device within the Village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. No licensee shall use or operate or employ any such device within a radius of 2 blocks from any hospital or church or synagogue while services are being held there. 
(b)  No licensee shall use any device licensed under this article to make any false representation about any matter, product or project for which the sale of is prohibited by any code, statute, or ordinance. No licensee shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any device licensed under this article any lewd, obscene, profane, or indecent language or sounds. 
(Code 1979, § 42.274)  
Secs. 26-1322—26-1340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-1341. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for commercial purposes, public assemblies, parades, street demonstrations or similar activities to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone, or other device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.271)  
Sec. 26-1342. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 42.272)  
Sec. 26-1343. - Issuance; conditions. 
The license required by this division shall be issued upon payment of the required license fee. Any license issued in accordance with this division shall only allow the use of the device for which the permit is issued, subject to the terms and conditions of this article, only for the date specified in the license. 
(Code 1979, § 42.273)  
Sec. 26-1344. - Fees. 
Fee for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.271)  
Secs. 26-1345—26-1370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIX. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference— Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate transient merchants, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5; Transient Merchant Act, 225 ILCS 465/1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-1371. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Transient merchant means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the Village or not, who engages in a temporary business for any period of time less than 12 months, of buying or selling, at wholesale or retail, and delivering to any person, goods, wares, and merchandise within the Village, and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, occupies or uses any parcel of land, building, tent, room, apartment, shop, store, structure, or other place within the Village for the purpose of exhibition and sale or offering to purchase or sell such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately, publicly or at public auction. This definition shall not apply to: 
(1)  The transportation of goods, wares, and merchandise and chattels of every description which are merely being transported or which were raised, produced or manufactured by the person transporting the goods, wares, merchandise or chattels. 
(2)  Persons selling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm products at booths on or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by them. 
(3)  Any persons who, while occupying a temporary location, do not sell from stock but exhibit samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. 
(4)  Persons using motor vehicles for the transportation of goods, wares and merchandise for delivery to an established list of customers or clientele, or to or from an established place of business. 
(5)  Persons conducting judicial or other sales under legal proceedings. 
(6)  Persons selling at circuses, carnivals or other public events, provided they are otherwise licensed by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 42.281) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-1372. - Violations declared nuisance. 
Engaging in business as a transient merchant in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 26-1373. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Village to inspect and inquire of all licensees subject to this article to determine whether the provisions of this article have been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this article against any licensee or person in the licensee's employ found to be in violation thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 42.289)  
Sec. 26-1374. - Applicability to persons temporarily associated with local business. 
No person who would otherwise be conducting or engaged in a transient business shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by reason of being temporarily associated with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such business in connection with or as a part of the business of any such local person. 
(Code 1979, § 42.282)  
Sec. 26-1375. - Use of loud noises or speaking devices. 
No licensee under this article, or anyone in the licensee's behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places of the Village or upon any private premises in the Village, whereby sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced thereby or therefrom capable of being heard upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee offers to sell. 
(Code 1979, § 42.288) 
Cross reference— Noise, § 42-71 et seq.  
Secs. 26-1376—26-1390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 26-1391. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant to engage in or conduct business as a principal or agent in the Village without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 42.283)  
Sec. 26-1392. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 42.284)  
Sec. 26-1393. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 26-1394. - Review of application; investigation of applicant; fingerprinting. 
(a)  In addition to the application required by this division, each individual applicant, managing partner in a co-partnership, or officers and board of directors of a corporation must undergo fingerprinting, under the direction of the Chief of Police or designee. The fee for such fingerprinting is set forth in Section 46-73. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, the fingerprints, and the fee, the Village Manager or designee shall cause to be made such investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as the Manager shall deem necessary to safeguard and protect the public good, safety and welfare. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's moral character and business responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. 
(Code 1979, § 42.285)  
Sec. 26-1395. - Issuance. 
If, as a result of the investigation provided for in Section 26-1394, the applicant's moral character and business reputation is found to be satisfactory, the Village Manager or designee shall so certify in writing, and thereupon the Village shall issue a license to the applicant, provided the fee therefor is paid and the bond or bonds required are deposited, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1979, § 42.286)  
Sec. 26-1396. - Record of licenses; contents of license. 
The Village Manager or designee shall keep a full and complete record in the office of the Manager or designee of all licenses issued, which shall include the application and the certification by the Village Manager. The license shall show the date upon which it was issued, the nature of the business authorized to be conducted, the location or place where the business may be conducted under the license, whether a vehicle, motor or otherwise, will be used in connection with the conduct of the business, the name of the person authorized to conduct the business, the expiration date of the license, the amount of the license fee paid, the nature and amount of the bond or bonds deposited, and the fact that the license is nontransferable both as between persons and the vehicle or location or place of conducting business. A number shall be assigned to the license, which number shall be preceded by the last 2 numbers of the year in which it is issued. 
(Code 1979, § 42.286)  
Sec. 26-1397. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 26-1398. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 26-1399. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 26-1398. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 26-1400. - Fees. 
Fee for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 42.283)  
Sec. 26-1401. - Bond and insurance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of the license issued under this division, the applicant shall have an indemnity and performance bond issued to the Village in a sum determined by the Village Manager. The bond shall be for the faithful observance and performance by the applicant for the license of all of the provisions of this article for which the license is issued and compliance with all codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations, and for the purpose of protecting the public against any fraudulent acts or misrepresentations as to weight, measure, grade, quality, quantity, character or class of the goods, wares and merchandise to be sold and delivered by the licensee, and the bond shall further guarantee the actual payment by the licensee of any and all bank checks, drafts, promissory notes or other evidences of indebtedness delivered by the licensee in payment for the purchase of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold and delivered by the licensee. The bond shall further provide for the indemnification of the Village and hold the Village harmless for all property damage or personal injury resulting from the licensee, and shall be conditioned to pay any judgment or judgments obtained against the licensee for civil liability arising out of the conduct of business, excluding, however, any cause of action or damages arising out of the operation of a vehicle, motor or otherwise, provision for which is provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  If the business of a licensee is to be conducted from or by the use of any vehicle, motor or otherwise, the licensee shall also provide a liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State, and approved as to form by the Village Manager or designee. The insurance policy shall insure or indemnify the licensee for liability arising out of the operation of each vehicle, motor or otherwise, used in connection with the conduct of the licensed business, in an amount to be determined by the Village Manager. 
(c)  All bonds or insurance required shall be maintained by the licensee in full force and effect for the full period of time in which the temporary business is to be conducted, plus 30 days following the discontinuance or termination of such temporary business. If any bond or insurance required by this article expires or is cancelled by either the licensee, the bond company or the insurer, and is not immediately replaced with bonds of the same kind, type and amount, such expiration or cancellation shall operate as a simultaneous revocation of the license, and thereafter it shall be unlawful to conduct or operate such temporary business. All bonds and insurance required by this article shall require that the Village receive written notice from the issuing company, 30 days prior to cancellation, termination or expiration. 
(Code 1979, § 42.286)  
Sec. 26-1402. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license.  
Secs. 26-1403—26-1420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXX. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, amended and replaced the former Art. XXX, §§ 26-1421—26-1430, and enacted a new Art. XXX as set out herein. The former Art. XXX pertained to weights and measures and derived from the Code of 1979, §§ 49.01—49.05, §§ 49.07, 49.08, §§ 49.10—49.12. 
Cross reference— Consumer protection, ch. 34; weights and measures inspection and testing fees, § 46-43. 
State Law reference— Weights and Measures Act, 225 ILCS 470/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-1421. - State and federal standards adopted. 
The Standards of Weights and Measures as received by the State from the United States, and all standards of weights and measures as are adopted by the State, are by reference adopted as part of this article, and such standards shall be and become the standards of weights and measures for the Village. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 26-1422. - Electronic scanners. 
(a)  When an electronic cash register is interfaced with any weighing or measuring device, the final receipt presented to a customer shall include the name of the commodity, the price per pound or price per single count, and the total price charged. 
(b)  When a Universal Product Code scanner is used to arrive at a final selling price for tangible commodities, the final price shall not differ from the marked price of an item, the shelf price of an item, the principal display panel used to advertise the sales price of an item or, when a price list is provided, the listed price for each item. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Cross reference— Universal Product Code scanners, § 26-1223.  
Sec. 26-1423. - Gasoline price signs. 
(a)  Any sign, which advertises the price of gasoline per gallon or liter, and which is viewable to or intended to be viewed by a passing motorist or the general public, shall display the total price of gasoline per gallon or liter. 
(b)  Any automotive fuel station may display not more than 1 sign per street frontage, which shall advertise only the total price of gasoline per gallon or liter. 
(c)  All automotive fuel station price signs shall state the total price of gasoline per gallon or liter in numbers not more than 18 inches in height and not less than 12 inches in height. All fractional numbers which appear on such pump signs or any other gasoline station price advertising sign shall be at least ½ as large as the whole numbers. 
(d)  All automotive fuel station price advertising signs shall be displayed in such a manner as to be clearly viewable and readable from all streets upon which a gasoline station may have street frontage. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "total price of gasoline per gallon or liter" shall mean that price which appears on the gasoline pump and which is the price per gallon or liter of gasoline which includes all federal, State and local taxes and which is to be the final price per gallon or liter of gasoline paid by the consumer. 
(f)  Gasoline shall not be sold by the liter and by the gallon in the same retail automotive fuel station. However, any signs advertising the price of gasoline per liter shall display with equal prominence the price that would be paid by a purchaser if such gasoline were sold by the gallon. 
(g)  Each gasoline dispensing pump in a retail automotive fuel station which dispenses gasoline by the liter shall display both the total price per gallon and the total price per liter. The price per gallon shall appear directly above the price per liter in numerals not less than 4 inches in height and not less than 2 inches in length. The price per liter shall appear directly below the gasoline price in numerals not less than 2 inches in height and 1 inch in length. These numerals shall be protected from the elements at all times. 
(h)  The term "gallon" shall refer to the standard non-metric measure of liquid volume. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Cross reference— Consumer protection, ch. 34; automobile service stations, § 50-41; signs, ch. 82.  
Chapter 30 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; Department of Community Development, § 2-271 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; businesses, ch. 26; environment, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; subdivisions, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 118. 
Federal law references— Community development, 42 U.S.C.A. § 5301 et seq.; enterprise zone development, 42 U.S.C.A. § 11501 et seq. 
State Law reference— Urban problems, 315 ILCS 5/1 et seq.; community planning and development, 65 ILCS 5/11-39.1-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Economic development tax, § 98-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Powers of municipalities re economic development project areas, 65 ILCS 110/60. 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Title of article. 
This article may be referred to as the "Village of Skokie Economic Development Revenue Bond Enabling Ordinance." 
(Code 1979, § 3.2401)  
Sec. 30-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bond ordinance means an ordinance authorizing a specific issue of bonds adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in this article. 
Economic development project means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery, or equipment, or any combination or portion thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary in connection therewith, for use by any person, provided that the existence of such economic development project will create or retain employment opportunities in the Village or increase the tax base thereof. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation (including public utilities), association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, State agency, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
Project means any economic development project located within the Village. 
Project costs includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to the acquisition, construction, or reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension of a project, including, without limitation, the cost of studies and surveys; plans, specifications, architectural and engineering services; legal, marketing or other special services; financing, acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site development of new and rehabilitated buildings, and rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing buildings; and all other necessary and incidental expenses including an initial bond and interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project during construction and for a reasonable time thereafter. 
User means the person or persons who will occupy, operate, maintain, or employ the project after acquisition or construction thereof, whether as owner, purchaser, lessee or otherwise. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2402) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-33. - Purpose of article. 
It is hereby determined and declared that the purpose of this article is to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of projects, and the this article is hereby declared and determined to be for a public purpose and function pertaining to the government and affairs of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2403)  
Sec. 30-34. - Powers of Village enumerated. 
In addition to powers which it may now have, the Village shall have the power under this article to: 
(1)  Construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease, reconstruct, improve, better or extend and finance 1 or more projects, whether or not now or hereafter in existence, and, if desirable, acquire by gift, purchase or lease lands or rights in land in connection with any project. 
(2)  Issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project costs of any project, which bonds shall be issued pursuant to a bond ordinance authorizing the bonds. 
(3)  Enter into leases or other agreements with any user in order to secure the Village's revenue bonds; provided, however, that any such lease or other agreement must provide that such user shall pay to, for or on behalf of the Village an amount sufficient to pay principal, interest, redemption, premiums and all other costs in connection with the Village's revenue bonds so that such bonds will never constitute an indebtedness of the Village or a loan of its credit within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
(4)  Pledge to the punctual payment of such bonds the interest thereon, and the redemption premiums, if any, the revenue and receipts to be received pursuant to such leases or other agreements. 
(5)  Mortgage any project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor. 
(6)  Sell and convey any project, including, without limitation, the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in this article, for such price and at such time as the Mayor and Board of Trustees may determine. However, no sale or conveyance of any project shall ever be made in such manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of any bonds issued under this article. 
(7)  Issue its bonds to refund, in whole or in part, bonds theretofore issued by the Village under the authority of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2404)  
Sec. 30-35. - Exercise of powers; bonds generally. 
(a)  The exercise of all powers granted by this article shall be authorized by majority vote of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, and such bonds shall be authorized by the bond ordinance, which may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced and shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
(b)  The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, shall be payable at such times, may be in 1 or more series, may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their respective dates, may be payable in such medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be subject to such terms of redemption at such premiums, may be executed in such manner, may contain such terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered, as the bond ordinance may provide or as may be subsequently determined by the Mayor and Board of Trustees before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at public or private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The bonds shall be deemed to be investment securities and negotiable instruments within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform Commercial Code, 810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2405)  
Sec. 30-36. - Title to project. 
It shall not be necessary for the Village to own or acquire any project or part thereof financed under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2406)  
Sec. 30-37. - Covenants in bonds. 
(a)  Any bond ordinance may contain covenants as to: 
(1)  The use and disposition of the revenues and receipts from the lease and other agreements or the project for which the bonds are to be issued, including the creation and maintenance of reserves; 
(2)  The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to any project or any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions thereto; 
(3)  The maintenance and repair of any project; 
(4)  The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of insurance moneys; 
(5)  The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the State having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit of the bondholders, paying agent and bond registrar; 
(6)  The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and 
(7)  The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any portion thereof, or any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a receiver. 
(b)  The bond ordinance may provide that the principal of and interest on the bonds shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering the project for which the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture of trust may contain such covenants and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the bond ordinance and shall be executed in the manner provided for in the bond ordinance. The provisions of this article and the bond ordinance and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute a contract with the holder or holders of the bonds and continue in effect until the principal of, the interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any, on the bonds so issued have been fully paid, or until provision for payment shall have been made as provided in the bond ordinance, and the duties of the Village and its corporate authorities and officers under this article and any bond ordinance and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall be enforceable by mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other appropriate suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction, in the manner and subject to the terms of such bond ordinance, mortgage or indenture of trust. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2407)  
Sec. 30-38. - Signatures of officers on bonds; validity of bonds. 
Bonds issued under this article shall bear the signatures of such officers of the Village as may be designated in the bond ordinance and such signatures shall be the valid and binding signatures of such officers, notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payment therefor any or all of the persons whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the Village. The validity of the bonds is not dependent on or affected by the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, or extension of the project for which the bonds are issued. The bond ordinance may provide that the bonds shall contain a recital that they are issued pursuant to this article, which recital shall be conclusive evidence of their validity and of the regularity of their issuance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2408)  
Sec. 30-39. - Lien of bonds. 
All bonds issued under this article shall have a lien upon the revenues and receipts derived from the lease or other agreement between the Village and the user, and the Mayor and Board of Trustees may provide in the bond ordinance for the issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon such revenues and receipts or may provide that the lien upon such revenues and receipts is subordinate. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2409)  
Sec. 30-40. - Liability for bond payments. 
All bonds issued under and pursuant to this article shall be limited obligations of the Village payable solely out of the revenues and receipts derived from such lease or other agreement. No holder of any bond issued under this article has the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the Village to pay the bonds, the interest or premium, if any, thereon, and the bonds shall not constitute an indebtedness of the Village or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provisions. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2410)  
Sec. 30-41. - Exemption from construction and bidding requirements. 
The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or improvements imposed by the Illinois Revised Statutes or any other similar requirements which may be lawfully waived by this article, and any requirements of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purpose or the lease, sale or other disposition of property of the Village is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2411)  
Sec. 30-42. - Supplemental nature of powers. 
The powers conferred by this article are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this section shall not affect, the powers conferred by any law or any other ordinance. Projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended and financed, and bonds may be issued under this article for such purposes, notwithstanding that any law or any other ordinance may provide for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension and financing of a like project, or the issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations or provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2412)  
Sec. 30-43. - Financing fee established. 
The Village shall charge a financing fee each time that bonds are issued by it as provided in this article. The fee shall be computed at the rate set forth in Section 46-33. Financing fees shall be calculated on the principal amount of bonds issued at the time of the issuance of bonds by the Village. Financing fees shall be deemed reimbursement to the Village for its administrative costs in reviewing, evaluating and administering any bond issue and shall be a project cost in addition to those costs described in Section 30-32. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2413)  
Sec. 30-44. - Application fee and deposit for persons requesting financing; payment of financing fee. 
Any person requesting the Village to finance any project by issuance of its revenue bonds shall pay a nonrefundable application charge to the Village Treasurer in the amount set forth in Section 46-33 to reimburse the Village for its preliminary expenses in investigating the desirability and feasibility of such financing. This nonrefundable charge is in addition to the financing fee referred to in Section 30-43. Upon the adoption of the resolution indicating the Village's preliminary agreement (the "resolution of intent") to issue a specific amount of bonds, a deposit in the amount set forth in Section 46-33, to be applied to the financing fee, shall be paid to the Village. The deposit will be disbursed by the Village in payment of such expenses notwithstanding that financing is not completed; however, the deposit may be repaid as a project cost from the proceeds of any bonds issued to finance the project. The balance of the Village's financing fee shall be payable on or before the closing on the bond issue. 
(Code 1979, § 3.2414)  
Chapter 34 - CONSUMER PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Consumer Affairs Commission, § 2-801 et seq.; advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 26; weights and measures, § 26-1421 et seq.; gasoline price signs, § 26-1430; taxpayers' rights, § 98-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Consumer fraud and deceptive business practices act, 815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following words shall have the definitions indicated. 
Lighter means a thing that lights or ignites and includes but is not limited to a mechanical device used in lighting cigarettes, cigars, or pipes for smoking, or for lighting grills or other fires. This will also include those items of dual purpose, i.e. lighter/mini-flashlight, so long as one of the purposes is to ignite or create fire. 
Match means a slender piece of wood, cardboard, or other flammable material tipped with a chemical substance that produces fire when rubbed on a rough or chemically produced surface. Matches means the plural of "match" and the prohibitions included in this Section are applicable to a single match or any combination of matches however grouped together. 
(Ord. No. 07-10-C-3552, § 1, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 34-2. - Prohibitions regarding sale or distribution of lighters and matches. 
(a)  Sales to underage persons. It is prohibited for any person to sell, give, transfer, deliver or distribute a lighter or matches to a person under the age of 18 years. A person under the age of 18 years is prohibited from purchasing or possessing a lighter or matches. If a person believes, or has reason to believe, that another person is under the age of 18 years, then prior to the sale, gift, transfer, delivery or distribution of a lighter or matches, the presentation of some form of positive identification must be demanded and confirmed before the recipient of the item is allowed to take receipt of the lighter or matches. 
(b)  Employer's Responsibility. 
i.  An employer, business owner and/or manager of a business shall inform all employees and agents of their business that it is a violation of Skokie Village Code to sell, give, transfer, deliver, or distribute a lighter or matches to anyone under the age of 18 years. The employer, business owner and/or manager have a duty to properly supervise his or her employees and agents to ensure that no such sale or delivery takes place in violation of this Section. 
ii.  An employer, company or other business entity shall be deemed to be in violation of the prohibition stated in paragraph (a) of this Section, if its employee or agent sells, gives, transfers, delivers or distributes a lighter or matches to a person under the age of 18 years. The Village may issue citations, or seek other action, against the individual who sells, gives, transfers, delivers or distributes a lighter or matches in violation of paragraph (a) and the employer, company or business entity which employs the individual. 
(c)  Possession. A person under the age of 18 years shall not have in her or his possession a lighter or matches, nor shall such person use a lighter or matches, except as may be allowed in Section 34-3. 
(Ord. No. 07-10-C-3552, § 2, 10-15-2007)  
Sec. 34-3. - Exceptions. 
It is not a violation of this Section for a person under the age of 18 years to possess or use a lighter or matches in conjunction with a religious, social or educational event or activity under the supervision of the person's parent or legal guardian or another adult acting in loco parentis. 
(Ord. No. 07-10-C-3552, § 3, 10-15-2007)  
Secs. 34-4—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONDOMINIUMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Condominium inspection fee, § 46-124. 
Federal law reference— Condominium and cooperative conversion protection and abuse relief, 15 U.S.C.A. § 3601 et seq. 
State Law reference— Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the sale and operation of condominiums for the protection and welfare of the citizens of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 30.01)  
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Illinois Condominium Property Act as set forth in 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq. 
Agent means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or other entity or combination of entities who represents or acts for on or behalf of a developer in selling or offering to sell any condominium unit, excepting an escrow officer acting for a title company. 
Blanket encumbrance means a trust deed, mortgage, judgment, or other lien or encumbrance including an option or contract to sell or a trust agreement affecting a condominium including any lien or other encumbrance arising as a result of the imposition of any tax assessment by a public authority. 
Board of managers means the board of managers provided and referred to in 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq. 
Closing of the sale means the transferring of ownership of a condominium unit to the new owner from the developer through a deed of conveyance, articles of agreement for a warranty deed, transferring of beneficial interest in a land trust, or any other method of transfer from the developer to the new owner. 
Common elements means all portions of the property except the units, including limited common elements, unless otherwise specified. 
Common expenses means the proposed or actual expenses affecting the property, including reserves, if any, lawfully assessed by the board of managers of the unit owners' association. 
Condominium means a form of property established pursuant to 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq. 
Condominium project means a plan by a developer to sell condominium units in a building, whether through conversion to condominium status or construction of new buildings with condominium ownership. 
Conversion means the offering for sale by a developer or developer's agent of a conversion condominium unit that was rented by any person before commencement of a condominium project which includes such unit. 
Conversion condominium means a property which contains structures, excepting those newly constructed and intended for condominium ownership, which are or have previously been wholly or partially occupied before recording of condominium instruments by persons other than those who have contracted for the purchase of condominiums. 
Declaration means the declaration referred to in 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq. 
Developer means any person who submits property legally or equitably owned by such person to the provisions of this article, or any person who offers units legally or equitably owned by such person for sale in the ordinary course of such person's business, including any successor or successors to such developer's entire interest in the property other than the purchaser of an individual unit. The term "developer" may include a land trustee or beneficiary of a land trust. 
Limited common elements means a portion of the common elements so designated in the declaration as being reserved for the use of a certain unit or units to the exclusion of other units, including but not limited to balconies, terraces, patios and parking spaces or facilities. 
Notice of intent means the notice of intent to submit the real estate to the Illinois Condominium Property Act which is contained in 765 ILCS 605/30. 
Offering means any statement by the developer or the developer's representative that a condominium unit in a specified condominium project is or may be available for sale. 
Person means a natural individual, corporation, partnership, trustee or other legal entity capable of holding title to real property. 
Plat means a plat or plats of survey of the parcel and of all units in the property submitted to the provisions of this article, which may consist of a 3-dimensional horizontal and vertical delineation of all such units. 
Property report means the property report required by this article. 
Prospective purchaser means a person who visits the condominium project site for the purpose of inspection for possible purchase or who requests the property report. 
Unit means a part of the property designed and intended for any type of independent use. 
Unit owners' association and association mean the association of all the unit owners acting pursuant to bylaws through its duly elected board of managers. 
(Code 1979, § 30.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-33. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  The Corporation Counsel is hereby authorized and directed to receive complaints and conduct such investigations as the Corporation Counsel deems necessary pursuant to the authority vested in that office. 
(b)  Whenever it is determined by the Corporation Counsel that there has been a violation of this article or any duly adopted rule or regulation of the Village, that office is authorized to seek all or a portion of the following relief, or any other relief that may be granted by law: 
(1)  Attempt to conciliate the matter by conference or otherwise and secure a written conciliation agreement; 
(2)  Seek a written assurance of discontinuance, which shall be signed by the developer and the Corporation Counsel; 
(3)  Institute injunctive or other appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a restraining order, permanent or temporary injunction or any other appropriate form of relief; or 
(4)  Institute legal proceedings. 
(c)  The Corporation Counsel may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation which has been found to exist by the Village as a result of an inspection. The penalty for such violation shall be as provided in Section 1-6, for each unit with respect to which the violation has occurred. Each day during which any unit has been advertised or offered and such advertisement or offer has not been withdrawn shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Any unit owner may file a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction for injuries sustained by such owner as a result of a violation by developer of any provisions of this article. The court may also award the unit owner's attorney reasonable fees for the attorney's services if such a violation has occurred. If the court finds that no violation has occurred, the court may assess reasonable attorneys' fees against the unit owners. 
(Code 1979, § 30.18)  
Sec. 34-34. - Property report required; contents. 
(a)  At least 4 weeks before offering for sale any condominium unit in a condominium project, the developer shall file with the Village a property report and shall certify by affidavit that all disclosures are true. The Village Manager may, by regulation, prescribe the form of this report; provided, however, that each separate sheet of the property report, including the exhibits, shall be separately numbered in numerical sequence and the report shall contain a table of contents. 
(b)  The report shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information about the condominium project: 
(1)  Ownership and responsibility. Each property report shall include a statement of ownership and responsibility, which shall include the following: 
a.  The name and address of the developer and owner. If the developer and owner are artificial entities such as a corporation, trust or partnership, then the statement shall include all officers and directors of the corporation, and all partners of a general partnership. The names and addresses of all persons with an ownership interest in the offering equal to 10 percent or more of the total ownership interest therein shall be included. 
b.  All architects, contractors, attorneys, engineers, accountants, and principal sales and management agents. 
(2)  Description of project. Each property report shall include a description of the condominium project, in addition to the legal documents described in subsection (5) of this section, as follows: 
a.  A map or plat showing the size and dimensions of the condominium project together with all improvements, including: 
1.  A description of the condominium units offered and the nature and extent of individual ownership in such condominium units. 
2.  A description and the nature and extent of ownership of all common elements, general and limited. 
3.  A description and the nature and ownership of all property and facilities on the site which are not part of the condominium. 
4.  A description of all existing and proposed facilities, including but not limited to recreational facilities, within the condominium. 
5.  The location, nature and ownership of all existing and proposed streets, parking facilities and roads on and contiguous to the site, as well as all existing and proposed easements on or contiguous to the site. 
6.  Drawings, architectural plans and other suitable documents setting forth the necessary information for location, maintenance and repair of all condominium facilities. Such items shall be incorporated in the property report by reference, and shall be located at the sales office site and shall be turned over to the council co-owners upon transfer of control by the developer. 
b.  Projected initiation and completion dates for any proposed construction, renovation or conversion. 
c.  Uses permitted for individual condominium units by the declaration, the bylaws of the condominium association or organization and applicable zoning provisions, including whether or under what conditions a condominium unit may be rented. 
d.  A statement as to whether a purchaser may purchase more than 1 unit and under what circumstances or conditions. 
e.  A statement of legal ownership, listing all restrictions of record and the condition of title. 
(3)  Financial aspects. Each property report shall include a statement of the financial aspects of the condominium project, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The name of providers of construction and interim funds. 
b.  The name of the institution offering longterm mortgage financing for the condominium units, if available, and terms and conditions of such mortgages. 
c.  A statement of financial ability to complete, within a specified period of time, construction, renovation or conversion of proposed condominium units and recreational and other facilities, including projected costs and methods of payment, and the additional costs to be imposed upon unit owners if such date is not met. 
d.  A statement of any pending litigation which would affect the condominium and/or the developer's ability to convey clear title. 
(4)  Sales materials. Each property report shall include copies of the sales documents and literature, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Copies of the purchase contract. 
b.  Copies of a sample deed of trust, mortgage and promissory note. 
c.  A statement of sale prices, terms and conditions of sale of each unsold unit. 
d.  A copy of the sales brochure and floor plans. 
e.  The identity of the agent of the developer in charge of sales. 
f.  A statement of the terms and conditions of sale, including estimated itemized closing and settlement costs, taxes and expected assessments levied either by the condominium or a governmental entity. 
g.  A statement of anticipated monthly payments based upon a commonly used purchaser's financing arrangement, e.g., 20 percent down payment, 20-year payoff, and taxes, condominium fee and utilities for a period of 1 year from the expected date of settlement, as well as a statement of what costs are included in the assessments made by the board of managers or the developer. 
h.  If financed by the developer, the proposed financing of each unit, including percent of sales price required for down payment, duration of the loan, interest rate, service charge, appraisal charge, closing charges, and total monthly payment. 
i.  A description of all appliances and personal property included with each unit. 
(5)  Legal documents. Each property report shall include copies of legal documents binding or to be binding upon the unit owners and the unit owners' association for 1 year or more from the date of the first sale, including: 
a.  The declaration or master deed and plat. Prior to the recording of the declaration, a preliminary declaration and plat may be supplied, provided it is accompanied by a statement in capital letters inserted in a conspicuous caption as follows: 
The description of units and percentage of ownership interest in common elements herein is preliminary and may be changed in material respects upon the recording of the declaration and plat which must occur no less than 30 days prior to the time of the first closing. 
If a declaration or master deed or plat is not available at the time the property report is prepared, a floor plan shall be provided at least 30 days prior to closing. 
b.  The articles of incorporation or charter of the condominium association. 
c.  The bylaws and regulations of the condominium association. 
d.  Any leases of real or personal property binding for 1 year or more from the date of first sale. 
e.  Schedules of ownership interest in the general and limited common areas. 
f.  Coverage and amounts of condominium insurance policies. 
g.  Any management contract, employment contract, or other contract affecting the use, maintenance or access to all or any part of the condominium, binding for 1 year or more. 
(6)  Management and operation information. Each property report shall include a statement of management and expected operation of the condominium project, including but not limited to: 
a.  The name of the management agent, if any, and the services the agent will perform. 
b.  A statement disclosing that under the provisions of this article the developer may not enter into any exclusive contract for management or services of a condominium project or permit a clause in the sales contract between a developer and prospective purchaser of a condominium unit that would stipulate an exclusive management contract to exceed a period of 1 year after the condominium project is given over to the individual unit owners in accordance with 765 ILCS 605/18.2. 
c.  The length of term of any management contract and charges and circumstances, if any, under which the charges may be increased. 
d.  The conditions, if any, under which the contract may be cancelled or terminated. 
e.  A statement disclosing any relationship between the developer and the management firm and their respective corporate officers and controlling interests. 
f.  An estimated operating budget for the condominium, projected for a period of 1 year from the expected date that control of the condominium project passes to the board of managers. The operating budget shall include at least the following: 
1.  Operation costs: 
i.  Utilities. 
ii.  Heating fuels. 
iii.  Janitorial services. 
iv.  Trash and garbage disposal. 
v.  Ground and building maintenance. 
vi.  Security. 
vii.  Maintenance and operation of recreational and other facilities. 
viii.  Building insurance. 
ix.  Elevator maintenance. 
x.  Sidewalks and street maintenance. 
xi.  Other operating costs. 
2.  Management costs: 
i.  Accounting and bookkeeping services. 
ii.  Legal services. 
iii.  Management fees. 
3.  Reserve costs: 
i.  Reserve for improvements. 
ii.  Reserve for unexpected repair work. 
iii.  Reserve for replacement and upkeep of common areas and facilities, including the basis upon which reserves are calculated. 
iv.  Reserve for taxes and special assessments. 
If no reserve is provided for any 1 or more of the costs listed in this subsection, the following statement must be inserted in the property report in a type, size and style equal to at least 10-point bold type: 
The developer has not provided a reserve for certain possible future costs of the condominium in his budget. Accordingly, it may be necessary to provide for a special assessment to all condominium unit owners to pay for such costs should they occur. 
g.  An estimate of the taxes which will be assessed against the unit owner during the first 2 years of such person's ownership. 
(7)  Report on condition of building. In the case of a conversion from rental or other legal status to a condominium, the property report shall include a report from a qualified licensed engineer or registered architect stating the condition and the rated life and expected useful life of the roof, foundation, external and supporting walls, mechanical, electrical, plumbing and structural elements and all other common facilities, together with an estimate of repair and replacement costs, at current market prices, which shall indicate what the cost per category of co-owner would be if the co-owners were assessed for the estimated replacement cost. This report shall include the approximate dates of installation of the facilities listed in this subsection and the dates of major repairs to such facilities. 
(8)  Warning statement. Each property report shall contain on the first page the following warning in capital letters: 
The Village of Skokie has not passed on the merits of this project or given approval of the statements in this property report. Oral representations cannot be relied upon as correctly stating the representations of the developer and are not binding on the developer. Refer to your purchase contract for binding representations. 
(9)  Facilities included or excluded. Each property report shall include a statement of whether, and under what circumstances, the unit owners are required to be a member of, support, or participate financially in recreational facilities, such as but not limited to health clubs, exercise clubs, exercise rooms, swimming pools, party rooms and golf putting greens. If any such facility is not part of the common elements, the following warning shall be included in capital letters, in a conspicuous caption: 
The (here name facilities) are not included in the common elements. These facilities are available to unit owners for (here describe monthly charge and initiation fee). Unit owners are/are not (as applicable) required to participate financially. 
(10)  Parking facilities. 
a.  Each property report shall include a description of the location, ownership, and availability to unit owners and the general public of accessory off-street parking associated with the condominium. If all of such parking facilities are not (a) part of the common elements or (b) divided as individual parking spaces among and designated as being part of the units, the following statement shall be included in a conspicuous caption: 
Parking facilities associated with this building are not owned by the unit owners and may be subject to being denied to or taken from unit owners. 
b.  The description of the availability of such off-street parking shall include a statement as to the parking requirements contained in the Zoning Ordinance at the time the building was originally constructed or as required under any ordinance enacted under the site plan review procedures of the Zoning Ordinance for a specific development. 
(11)  Restrictions on resale. Each property report shall include a statement as to whether there are any restrictions upon the free sale, transfer, conveyance, encumbrance or leasing of a unit. If such restrictions exist, the following shall be included in capital letters in a conspicuous caption: 
The sale, lease or transfer of your unit is restricted or controlled. 
Immediately following this statement, there shall appear a reference to the documents, articles, paragraphs, and pages in the property report where the restriction, limitation or control on the sale, lease or transfer of units is set forth or described in detail. 
(Code 1979, § 30.03)  
Sec. 34-35. - Submission of property report to prospective purchasers and Village. 
(a)  A copy of the property report and any amendments and supplements thereto shall be filed with the Village Manager or designee by the developer promptly upon preparation. Such copy shall be used for informational purposes only and shall be attached to the building permit files. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions contained in this article, a developer or agent shall not enter into a binding contract or agreement for the sale of a condominium unit until: 
(1)  A copy of the property report and any amendments and supplements thereto, if any, have been given to the prospective purchaser and to all existing tenants in condominium conversions. 
(2)  The prospective purchaser has been given an opportunity to read the property report. 
(3)  A receipt signed by the prospective purchaser has been received by the developer or agent acknowledging that the prospective purchaser has received and has had an opportunity to review the property report. 
(c)  Such receipts shall be kept on file in the possession of the developer for a period of 3 years from the date of signature by the prospective purchaser. Receipts shall be subject to inspection by the Village at any reasonable time. 
(d)  The property report and any amendments and supplements thereto shall be made available by the developer for inspection by the public in a reasonably accessible place and at reasonable hours. 
(e)  If any information required to be contained in the property report is unavailable prior to the time a prospective purchaser desires to enter into a contract of sale, the contract may, at the purchaser's option, be executed without the availability of such information, provided that such information shall be furnished to the purchaser and its receipt acknowledged in writing by the purchaser prior to the closing of the sale. 
(f)  Before making any material changes in the terms of a property report which has been submitted to the Village Manager or designee, the developer shall first notify the Village Manager or designee in writing of such intended change, and shall also notify all purchasers and prospective purchasers and all existing tenants in the condominium conversions of such change. 
(g)  After the signing of the contract of sale for a condominium unit and prior to the closing of the sale, the developer must deliver to the buyer a copy of any amendments, supplements or modifications to the property report. 
(Code 1979, § 30.04)  
Sec. 34-36. - Certificate of inspection required; issuance. 
(a)  Any developer desiring to sell a unit as regulated by this article shall first apply to the Village Manager or designee for a certificate of inspection with respect to such unit and with respect to the common elements of the property containing the unit. The applicant shall submit with the application the declaration and plat pertaining to the property and as-built architectural drawings of the building and site development certified by a registered architect. The Village Manager or designee shall thereupon cause an inspection to be made of the unit and of the common elements to ascertain compliance with current codes and with those codes in force when the unit was built and shall make a determination thereon. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this article, no certificate of inspection shall be issued and no sale shall be made of any unit if such unit or the common elements pertaining thereto are not in compliance with current codes. 
(c)  After the inspection, as provided for in this section, has been completed and compliance with current codes has been ascertained or waived, the Village Manager or designee shall issue a certificate of inspection with respect to each unit inspected. All of the certificates issued shall include therein a specification of each separate condition of noncompliance which has been waived. The Village Manager or designee shall also issue to such applicant clear and legible copies of the certificates suitable for posting. 
(d)  It shall become the obligation of the applicant to post and keep posted 1 copy of the certificate of inspection on the front doorway of each unit to which it pertains until the sale of that unit is consummated and to post and keep posted a copy of the certificate pertaining to the common elements on the doorway of the main entrance and any such other places as may be directed by the Village Manager or designee until the sale of the last unit has been consummated. The developer shall maintain documentation pertaining to each unit to establish that the purchaser of such unit has received from the developer or the developer's agent a copy of the certificate of inspection pertaining thereto. These records shall be maintained and available for examination by appropriate authorities of the Village. 
(e)  It shall be considered an ordinance violation by the developer if a closing of a sale of any unit located within the Village is completed without the issuance of a certificate of inspection for the unit and the common elements, or a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1979, § 30.05)  
Sec. 34-37. - Fee for certificate of inspection. 
The applicant for a certificate of inspection under this article shall pay the fee set forth in Section 46-124. 
(Code 1979, § 30.17)  
Sec. 34-38. - Construction requirements for new buildings. 
Construction requirements for new buildings regulated by this article are as follows: 
(1)  All major items of any significant weight installed on the roof shall be mounted on platforms raised above the roof plane by a minimum of 18 inches so that the roof can be reasonably maintained. 
(2)  If a meeting room is provided, a separate ventilation exhaust system must be provided for that room sufficient to provide 6 air changes per hour. 
(3)  In accordance with State and federal accessibility standards for handicapped persons, all new curbs and sidewalks, and all existing curbs or sidewalks which are a part of or are directly adjacent to any condominium conversion site at the intersections of sidewalks and streets, driveways, sidewalks and alleys, and at other points of major pedestrian flow, shall be constructed or reconstructed so that the sidewalk and street, or the sidewalk and driveway, or the sidewalk and alley, meet at a common level. This requirement shall apply to any sidewalk within the public right-of-way or abutting private property. 
(Code 1979, § 30.06) 
State Law reference— Environmental Barriers Act, 410 ILCS 25/1 et seq.  
Sec. 34-39. - Waiver of building and development requirements. 
For condominium conversions, the requirements of compliance with current codes may be waived under the following circumstances: 
(1)  With respect to the number of off-street parking spaces, if the number was in compliance with the codes in force when the unit was built and if compliance with current codes would lessen the number of off-street parking spaces available to the unit owners. 
(2)  With respect to other provisions of the codes, if the unit containing the building and the common elements pertaining thereto were in compliance with the codes in force when the unit was built and if current compliance would require structural changes. The exceptions to this waiver are as follows: 
a.  Residential buildings with 6 units or less shall have the following fire protection equipment installed: 
1.  Individual in- series smoke detectors in each unit per State requirements. 
2.  A fire alarm system for all common areas, including hallways, stairways, furnace rooms, storage rooms and basements, with notification devices in each unit. 
3.  Exit signs/Emergency lighting with battery back up in common areas, including hallways, stairways, storage rooms, and basements. 
b.  Residential buildings with more than six units shall have the following fire protection equipment installed: 
1.  A fire suppression system in common areas with one sprinkler head over the interior side of each unit entryway. 
2.  Individual in- series smoke detectors in each unit per State requirements. 
3.  A fire alarm system with manual pull stations at exits in buildings over three stories. 
4.  Notification devices in each unit that sound upon activation of the sprinkler system. 
5.  Exit signs/emergency lighting with battery back up in all common areas, including hallways, stairways, storage rooms, and basements. 
6.  Buildings greater than 3 stories shall have manual pull stations at each exit and a stand pipe in the stairwell. 
c.  Conversion of commercial/industrial buildings less than 5,000 square feet shall have the following fire protection equipment installed: 
1.  A fire alarm system in compliance with Life Safety Code. 
2.  Exit signs/emergency lighting with battery back up in all common areas, including hallways, stairways, storage rooms, and basements. 
d.  Conversion of commercial/ industrial buildings greater than 5,000 sq. feet 
1.  A fire alarm system in compliance with current Life Safety Codes. 
2.  A fire suppression system, including notification devices that sound upon activation of the suppression system. 
3.  Manual pull stations in the means of egress, in compliance with Life Safety Code. 
4.  Exit signs/emergency lighting with battery back up in all common areas, including hallways, stairways, storage rooms, and basements. 
(3)  With respect to the total number of and location of units contained within the building, if the number and location were in compliance with the codes in force when the building was built. 
(Code 1979, § 30.07; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 1, 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 34-40. - Warranty. 
Any sale agreement for the sale of a condominium unit under the provisions of this article shall contain a warranty that the unit and common elements are in good condition, free from any latent or patent defects, and that the developer shall repair or replace any defect in the unit or the common elements at the developer's sole cost promptly upon being notified of such defect, in writing, by the purchaser, provided, however, that such notice of defect must be delivered to the developer within 1 year from closing of the sale of the condominium unit. 
(Code 1979, § 30.08)  
Sec. 34-41. - Escrow funds. 
To ensure compliance with the obligations of the developer under this article, the developer shall either: 
(1)  Place in escrow a sum equal to 2 percent of the gross sales price of each unit upon closing, which sum shall be allocated to the owner of the unit sold, or 
(2)  Submit an irrevocable letter of credit to the Village in a form that is acceptable to the Village Manager and the Corporation Counsel in an amount equal to the amount of 2 percent of the gross sales price of each unit. 
The monies shall remain in escrow for 1 year from the date of closing or 1 year from the date the control of the condominium has been transferred to the unit owners' association, as provided in the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq., whichever occurs last. In the event the developer has opted to submit an irrevocable letter of credit to the Village, it shall be effective prior to the closing of the first unit and remain in effect 1 year from the date of the closing of the last unit covered by the letter of credit or 1 year from the date the control of the condominiums covered by the letter of credit has been transferred to the unit owners' association, as provided in the Illinois Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq., whichever occurs last. The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this section. The developer of newly constructed condominiums in tax increment finance districts established by the Mayor and Board of Trustees in accordance with the statutes of the State shall be exempt from placing funds in escrow as required in this section. However, nothing in this section shall relieve such developers from complying with the obligations of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 30.09; Ord. No. 04-11-C-3314, § 1, 11-1-2004)  
Sec. 34-42. - Exclusive management contracts. 
The developer may not enter into any exclusive contract for management or services of a condominium project or permit a clause in the sales contract between a developer and prospective purchaser of a condominium unit that would stipulate an exclusive management or service contract to exceed a period of 1 year after the condominium project is given over to the individual unit owners in accordance with 765 ILCS 605/18.2. 
(Code 1979, § 30.10)  
Sec. 34-43. - Costs to be paid by developer. 
(a)  The developer shall be required to pay the developer's proportionate share of maintenance, service and/or management fees for unsold units. 
(b)  The developer shall pay for all development expenses attributable to the developer which are assessed after closing against the owner of a condominium unit. 
(c)  For conversions only, the developer shall pay all reasonable relocation costs for tenants then residing in the building to be converted having Section 8 housing subsidies on the date that the letter of intent to convert is delivered. 
(Code 1979, § 30.11)  
Sec. 34-44. - Existing tenants in conversions. 
The following additional provisions shall apply to existing tenants in conversions: 
(1)  Delay of eviction beyond existing lease. For tenant families containing at least 1 member of the household who is 65 years of age or older or who is physically or mentally disabled, or for tenant families containing 2 or more children as part of the household, eviction shall be delayed beyond the term of the existing lease for a period of not less than 12 months from the date of filing of the declaration, or the date the notice of intent was given, whichever occurs later. For all other households, eviction shall be delayed beyond the term of the existing lease for a period of not less than 6 months from the date of filing of the declaration, or the date the notice of intent was given, whichever occurs later. 
(2)  Right of tenant to terminate lease. Any tenant with more than 30 days remaining on a lease who receives a notice of an intent to convert shall at any time after receipt of such notice have the right to terminate such lease with 30 days' written notice to the landlord. Such termination shall be without penalty or other termination charge to the tenant. 
(3)  Tenant's right of first refusal. Each tenant in a conversion project shall receive a copy of the property report. For a period of 30 days following the date the tenant receives a copy of the property report, such tenant shall have the right of first refusal on the unit the tenant occupies. This provision shall not reduce the rights provided for under State statute. 
(4)  Required provisions of contract; cooling-off period. 
a.  The developer in a condominium conversion shall include in the contract of sale for each condominium unit a clause which shall read as follows: 
Seller hereby grants to any purchaser who is an existing tenant at time of notice of conversion a period of 15 days within which to review the condominium documents made available to the purchaser pursuant to Chapter 34, Article II, of the Skokie Village Code. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this agreement, if the tenant-purchaser is not satisfied with the said condominium documents, the tenant-purchaser may, at his election, by written notice to the seller at any time prior to midnight local time of the 15th day following the date the contract is signed by the tenant purchaser, terminate this agreement, and the tenant-purchaser's deposit shall be refunded and the parties thereto shall have no further rights or liabilities under the agreement. 
b.  The clause in the sales contract which provides for the 15-day cooling-off period must be located: 
1.  Either immediately above the purchaser's signature; or 
2.  Under a conspicuous caption entitled "Tenant purchaser's right to cancel." 
c.  The rights of tenant-purchasers under this section may not be waived in the contract of sale and any attempted waiver is void. 
(5)  Information to be furnished to Village. The developer in any condominium conversion which is subject to this article shall, before offering any unit for sale, supply the Village with a list of the names and apartment numbers of each occupant of the building. One week after the declaration of condominium has been filed, the developer shall notify the Village of the date of filing. 
(Code 1979, § 30.12)  
Sec. 34-45. - Discrimination in sale or leasing of units. 
No person shall be denied the right to purchase or lease a condominium unit because of race, religion, color, ancestry, age, sex, physical or mental disabilities, or marital status. 
(Code 1979, § 30.13)  
Sec. 34-46. - Rental arrangement if condominium project does not succeed or is delayed. 
(a)  Every contract of sale for each condominium unit shall contain a provision requiring that satisfactory rental arrangements will be afforded the prospective purchaser for a definite period of time in the eventuality that the condominium project does not succeed in anticipated sales. 
(b)  Every contract of sale for a condominium unit shall provide that in the eventuality the condominium project is not consummated within a reasonable period of time, the prospective purchaser or purchasers will be afforded rental arrangements for a reasonable period of time and that a specific portion of the rental payments will be applied to the condominium unit purchase price at settlement. 
(Code 1979, § 30.14)  
Sec. 34-47. - Exclusion of small developments. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to conversions of condominium projects containing 6 dwelling units or less; provided, however, that all conversions, regardless of the number of units contained therein, shall be subject to the Village inspections and reports outlined in Section 34-36. Moreover, nothing contained in this section shall exclude or exempt any condominium project from the requirements of State law. 
(Code 1979, § 30.15)  
Sec. 34-48. - Resale of previously inspected units. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the resale of any unit for which a certificate of inspection has been previously issued pursuant to the terms of this article, or to the sale or resale of any unit which was originally designed and sold under the Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq., if a certificate of occupancy has been issued with respect thereto. 
(b)  There shall be no clause in the sales contract between the developer and the prospective purchaser of a condominium unit that would create an exclusive sales agreement with a real estate agent as to the subsequent sale of the condominium unit. Any condominium owner shall have the right to decide what agent, if any, shall be used in the subsequent sale of a condominium unit. 
(Code 1979, § 30.16)  
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; fee for ambulance transportation by Village, § 46-36; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; law enforcement, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fee for automatic dialing devices connected to Police Department, § 46-35; permit fees for alarm systems and users, false alarm fees, § 46-74. 
State Law reference— Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, and Locksmith Act, 225 ILCS 446/1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm Contractor means a person or company, licensed by the State of Illinois, to engage in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, or responding to an emergency alarm system. 
Alarm Occurrence means the activation of an alarm system for or as a result of any reason whatsoever which notifies either the Police and/or the Fire Departments to respond to the premises on which the alarm system exists. 
Alarm Detection System means any assemblage of mechanical or electrical equipment or devices (or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a 110-volt AC line) arranged to signal the presence of a hazard, a fire, an occurrence of an unauthorized intrusion or other activity requiring urgent and immediate attention. The term "alarm detection system" shall include the terms "automatic holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "fire alarm system," and "holdup alarm system". The following alarm systems are specifically excluded from the provisions of this article: medical emergency alarms, motor vehicle alarm systems, alarm systems used solely to alert or signal persons within the premises, and alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or other conditions not directly related to a fire incident or the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into the premises or an attempted robbery or burglary at the premises. 
Alarm Monitoring System means a system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, and maintained. 
Alarm user means a person, firm, entity, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or state, or political subdivision thereof, in possession or control of any building, structure, facility or property in the Village wherein an alarm system is installed and maintained. 
Alarm user permit means a permit issued by the Village for the privilege and ability to operate an alarm system within the Village. 
Combined Communication Center, also known as CCC, means the location at which Alarm Monitoring System signals are received. 
False alarm means any alarm occurrence except when the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  Evidence of an actual intrusion or an obvious intrusion attempt. 
(2)  Evidence of an actual fire or other smoke, noxious gas or high temperatures on premises. 
(3)  Evidence of electrical utility outage conditions affecting a general neighborhood area. 
(4)  Evidence of violent and extreme conditions of nature or acts of God, including thunder, snow, ice and electrical storms. 
(5)  Alarm occurrences during the 30-day period following installation of an alarm system, at an address that did not previously have an alarm system. 
Holdup alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Fire Alarm System means a system or portion of a combination system that consists of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals. 
Village Alarm Administrator shall also be known as the Communications Coordinator whose responsibilities include coordination, administration and documentation of alarm and detection systems users in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 36.01; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-32. - Building Occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to occupy any building, structure or place which does not comply with the regulations set forth in Section 50-31(b) of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 36.10; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011)  
Sec. 38-33. - Approval of plans for Fire Alarm Systems. 
Two sets of plans showing the location and installation of the Fire Alarm Systems shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. One set shall be forwarded to the Fire Prevention Bureau for review. If approved, these plans shall be retained for the Fire Prevention Bureau. The second set of plans shall be returned to the submitter with comments regarding deficiencies or an indication of approval. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 7(36.13), 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, deleted the former § 38-33 which pertained to maintenance and installation of fire alarm systems and derived from Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 7(36.12), adopted Oct. 16, 2000; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 2004; and Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, adopted Apr. 20, 2011. Section 3 of said ordinance also renumbered §§ 38-34—38-41 as §§ 38-33—38-40 to read as set out herein.  
Sec. 38-34. - Delay mechanism required for burglar alarm systems. 
No alarm user permit shall be issued for any burglar alarm system that is not equipped with an alarm delay mechanism that allows for at least a 15-second delay before activation of the alarm. 
(Code 1979, § 36.03; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Sec. 38-35. - Outside alarm ringers. 
(a)  All hold up alarm systems with outside alarm ringers shall be equipped with a time-out switch that shall not allow the outside alarm to sound for more than 15 minutes. 
(b)  All hold up alarms which sound for more than 15 minutes shall be subject to the penalties provided for in this article, in addition to being declared a public nuisance in accordance with Chapter 42, Article II. 
(c)  No person shall allow or cause to exist an outside ringer, which emits an audible sound in any manner similar to emergency vehicles of the Village of Skokie. In addition, said sound shall also be distinguishable from any and all Village alert systems disseminated in an audible manner. 
(d)  It shall be the sole responsibility of the persons owning or operating an outside ringer to maintain the system at the sole expense of the owner or operator. 
(e)  In addition to any other remedies provided by ordinance, the Village Alarm Administrator, whenever he shall have knowledge of the misuse or improper maintenance of an outside ringer, may order the immediate suspension of the alarm permit and removal or deactivation of the system. Removal and deactivation will not apply to alarms mandated by Code. 
(Code 1979, § 36.04; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Sec. 38-36. - Automatic telephone alarms. 
Any automatic telephone alarm or device installed and operated that dials the Village emergency telephone lines to the Communications Center of the Police and Fire Departments is prohibited. No person shall install, or cause to be installed, or maintain or cause to be maintained, any automatic telephone alarm that dials the Village emergency telephone lines to the Communications Center, the only exception being elevator communication devices. 
(Code 1979, § 36.05; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Sec. 38-37. - False alarms. 
(a)  Authority to impose fees; notice to alarm user; fees. The Village Manager shall have the authority to impose fees, for an emergency response to a false alarm, pursuant to Section 46-74(2). The Village Manager or designee shall notify any alarm user after 2 false alarms occur for any alarm system in any calendar year, in writing, by first class mail, or by personal service, that additional false alarms may result in the imposition of the fees set forth in Section 46-74(2). The fees shall be due 30 days from the date of invoice. 
(b)  Request for waiver of fee. Any alarm user may request, in writing, to the Village Manager, that the fee for a false alarm be waived. The request shall be made within 10 days of the false alarm occurrence and shall specify the circumstances of the false alarm occurrence. The Village Manager or designee shall respond to such request within 10 days of receipt thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 36.06; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Sec. 38-38. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The Village assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any person associated with the installation, operation or maintenance of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any alarm subscriber, for the transmission or receipt of alarm signals or any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm from any source. If the Village finds it necessary to revoke an alarm subscriber permit or to otherwise provide for the disconnection of any alarm system, the Village shall have no liability for such action. No special duty other than that owed to the general public shall be created by virtue of the permit or the direct connection of the alarm system with the Center. The provisions of this section constitute a waiver of any and all potential future claims by the alarm users for all matters stated in this article, and the text of this section shall be included in the application for an alarm user permit. The alarm user's submission of the application and use of the alarm user permit shall constitute acceptance of this provision and a waiver of all potential claims against the Village or its personnel in connection with or arising out of the operation of or any response to an alarm system. 
(Code 1979, § 36.09; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Sec. 38-39. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this article, such person shall be served with a notice of violation providing for an opportunity to appear before either the Administrative Law Officer in an Administrative Hearing or the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Sec. 38-40. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 or any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 11-4-C-3829, § 1, 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 38-33.  
Secs. 38-41—38-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALARM USER PERMIT 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, entity or alarm user to maintain or operate an alarm system without a valid and effective alarm user permit. 
(Code 1979, § 36.02; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Sec. 38-62. - Application. 
Applications for alarm user permits shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 36.01; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Sec. 38-63. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke all permits issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation of a permit. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke the permit if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The permittee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The permittee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the permit. 
(3)  The permittee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties. 
(4)  More than 10 false alarms for 1 alarm system have occurred in any calendar year. 
(c)  Notice and hearing. The Village Manager or designee may revoke, suspend, or take other action with respect to a permit in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee shall send written notice of the intent to revoke or suspend a permit by certified mail or personal delivery, setting forth the reasons for revocation or suspension. 
(2)  The notice shall state that the effective date of the revocation or suspension shall be 30 days from the date of the notice, shall state the effective date, and shall inform the permit holder of the right to submit in writing within 15 days of the date of the notice either: 
a.  Documentation to explain the past occurrences stated in the notice and to propose corrective action to eliminate the violations; or 
b.  A request for hearing. 
(3)  If the Village Manager or designee accepts the corrective action proposed by the permit holder, the Manager or designee shall respond in writing, stating the conditions for continuing to hold the permit, and retracting or deferring the notice of intent to revoke or suspend the permit. 
(4)  If the permit holder requests a hearing, the Village Manager or designee shall hold a hearing within 30 days of the date of the original notice, at which hearing the permit holder and a Police Department representative, or Fire Department representative, other than the designee of the Village Manager conducting the hearing, shall have the right to present any evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
(5)  The Village Manager or designee conducting the hearing shall render a written decision within 7 days of the hearing, sent to the permit holder by certified mail or personal delivery, either: 
a.  Revoking or suspending the permit, stating the effective date of the action; or 
b.  Stating any conditions for continuing to hold the permit. 
(Code 1979, § 36.07; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Sec. 38-64. - Reinstatement of revoked or suspended permit. 
Any alarm user whose permit has been revoked or suspended pursuant to this article may request reinstatement of the permit. The request shall be made to the Village Manager in writing and shall include payment of the reinstatement fee established in Section 46-74 and full payment of all past due amounts. No permit shall be reinstated within the 6-month period following the effective date of the revocation. However, a permit may be reinstated within the 6-month period if sufficient evidence of future compliance with the provisions of this article is presented. 
(Code 1979, § 36.08; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Sec. 38-65. - Fees. 
Every alarm user shall pay an initial permit fee and annual fee as set forth in Section 46-74. The initial fee and the annual fee shall each be based upon the amount of money determined by the Mayor and Board of Trustees to be reasonable compensation for the services and liabilities assumed by the Village in responding to alarm occurrences. 
(Code 1979, § 36.02; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Sec. 38-66. - Term; renewal. 
Alarm user permits shall be valid for 1 year effective January 1st each year and expiring December 31st, and may be renewed for another year effective the next January 1st, upon the payment of the renewal fee referred to in this article and all other unpaid fees assessed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1979, § 36.01; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3306, § 1, 10-4-2004)  
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; community development, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 54; cleanup of deposits of hazardous materials, § 54-48; solid waste, ch. 86; hazardous wastes, § 86-11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 118. 
Federal law references— Hazardous substances, 15 U.S.C.A. § 1261 et seq.; water pollution prevention and control, 33 U.S.C.A. § 1251 et seq.; national environmental policy, 42 U.S.C.A. § 4321 et seq.; air pollution prevention and control 42 U.S.C.A. § 7401 et seq.; pollution prevention, 42 U.S.C.A. § 13101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Illinois Environmental Facilities Financing Act, 20 ILCS 3515/1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances by municipalities, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2; Soil and Water Conservation Districts Act, 70 ILCS 405/1 et seq.; Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Power of Director of Public Health to abate nuisances, § 2-295(4); animals, ch. 18; impoundment of nuisance animals, § 18-34; obstructing or polluting watercourse or source of water supply, § 54-3; vandalism, § 70-91 et seq.; offenses affecting public safety, § 70-151 et seq.; gambling places declared nuisance, § 70-277; unlawful deposit of waste, § 86-10; health and safety hazards relative to plumbing installations, § 110-37(b). 
State Law reference— Authority to abate nuisances, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2; Lewdness Public Nuisance Act, 740 ILCS 105/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 2(12.11), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 42-32. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this article, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 2(12.12), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 42-33. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 2(12.13), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 42-34. - General prohibition. 
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the Village or within the police jurisdiction of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 12.01)  
Sec. 42-35. - Enumeration. 
(a)  Generally. A public nuisance is an object, article, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to: 
(1)  Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; 
(2)  In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; 
(3)  Offend the public morals or decency; or 
(4)  Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way. 
(b)  Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public. 
(2)  Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death. 
(3)  Accumulations of litter, decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, appliances, tires, landscape waste, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed or which create a fire hazard or which constitutes potential nuisance. 
(4)  All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply. 
(5)  Garbage carts which are not flytight. 
(6)  The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the Village limits in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities, or any act in violation of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
(7)  The pollution of any public or private well, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances, or any act in violation of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
(8)  Any use of property, substances or things within the Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the Village. 
(9)  All abandoned wells not sealed in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Public Health as required by the Illinois Water Well Construction Code, 415 ILCS 30/1 et seq. 
(10)  Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals. 
(11)  Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or ravine. 
(12)  The deposit of garbage, rubbish, or any offensive substance in any municipal sewer, on any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as may be permitted by ordinance. 
(13)  Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by the Illinois Noxious Weed Law, 505 ILCS 100/1 et seq. 
(14)  The throwing or deposit of grass clippings, leaves and debris of any type in any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, sewer, ditch or open pit area, or upon vacant lots, whereby such material is likely to become nauseous, foul, putrid or offensive in odor or a haven for rodents, vermin or insects or obstruct the flow of stormwater. 
(15)  Dumping, depositing, or placing any junk, salvage materials, building or excavating equipment, abandoned vehicles, garbage, litter, trash or similar substances upon real property owned by another without the consent of the owner or person in possession of such real property or upon any public property within the Village limits where not otherwise permitted by law. 
(16)  Permitting, on any required off-street parking facilities which are held open for use to the public, the accumulation of litter, trash or other materials which are unsightly or may be blown about by the wind. The owner or person in control of the premises shall be held liable jointly and severally for violation of these provisions. 
(17)  Permitting light to fall on residences from a commercial enterprise that provides a disabling glare from the illumination or when intensities of 0.3 horizontal footcandle and/or 0.7 vertical footcandle are exceeded beyond the following limits: 
a.  Along a line parallel to and 90 feet from the street side lot line or lines of the commercial property, and at a height of 4 feet above the street side average elevation. 
b.  Along a line parallel to and 20 feet from interior and rear lot lines of the commercial property, and at a height of 4 feet above the interior and real line average elevation, measured separately for each lot line. 
(18)  Throwing, kicking or knocking any ball or playing ball in any manner upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way so as to endanger persons or property, obstruct or impede traffic, or endanger the comfort, convenience, health or safety of others within the Village. 
(19)  Permitting fluids, including but not limited to antifreeze/coolant, motor oil, transmission fluid, gasoline, diesel, fuel, etc., to leak or be deposited on any street, sidewalk or public place or on any private property in a manner causing environmental and/or public way maintenance concerns. 
(20)  Storing firewood less than 10 inches off the ground. 
(c)  Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, house of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling, except the State-authorized lottery. 
(2)  All gambling devices, slot machines and poker machines except as permitted by State gaming laws, 230 ILCS, Act 5 et seq. 
(3)  All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this Code. 
(4)  Any place or premises within the Village where ordinances or State laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated. 
(d)  Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the provisions of subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section: 
(1)  All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the Village relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures. 
(2)  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing. 
(3)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(4)  All limbs of trees, bushes and hedges which project over a public sidewalk less than 8 feet above the surface thereof or less than 10 feet above the surface of a public street. 
(5)  All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the Fireworks Regulation Act of Illinois, 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq. and Section 70-211 et seq. of this Code. 
(6)  All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use. 
(7)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground. 
(8)  All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind. 
(9)  All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks, except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village, or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished. 
(10)  All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(11)  All abandoned refrigerators or other appliances from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small child. 
(12)  Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(13)  Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence, sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the owner thereof. 
(14)  Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than 8 feet above the sidewalk surface. 
(15)  Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire. 
(16)  Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or Village codes or ordinances, or under the common law. 
(17)  Any vehicle or building alarm or security system which has an outside ringer system that sounds continuously for 15 minutes. The declaration of a sounding of an alarm or security system as a public nuisance under this article shall be in addition to the enforcement and penalties as provided for in Chapter 38, Article II. 
(18)  The using or operating of or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, stereo, amplifier, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the occupants of the neighboring properties. The operation, use or playing of any such equipment in a manner as to be audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from the property line where the sound originates is declared a nuisance. However, the utilization of lawn care or construction equipment or the sounding of horns or whistles on locomotives as provided for in this section, the placement of air conditioner units in accordance with applicable Village codes and standards, or the utilization of an amplifier for which a Village permit has been issued shall not be considered a violation of this subsection. 
(19)  Sales of goods or materials from the street or right-of-way whether in the open or from a vehicle with a license. 
(20)  A property wherein a lessee, owner or occupant uses or permits the use of the premises for the commission of a criminal offense that would constitute a felony. 
(21)  A property wherein a lessee, owner or occupant uses or permits the use of the premises for the commission of criminal offenses that would constitute a Class A misdemeanor on two or more occasions within a 12-month period. 
(22)  A property wherein the Village has responded to an unreasonably high number of calls, or initiated an unreasonably high number of contacts based upon information and belief of a need, for: (i) police service; (ii) health inspectors or other health personnel regarding a public health concern; (iii) firefighters or fire inspectors concerning the safety of the property; and/or (iv) property standard inspectors or other Community Development staff concerning the condition of the property or the use of it by its occupants. The determination of whether the Village has responded to an unreasonably high number of calls, or initiated an unreasonably high number of contacts, will be made by the Village's Nuisance Intervention and Prevention ("NIP") Committee, as provided in subsection (e). The NIP Committee will compare the number and character of calls or initiated contacts at a property to other properties of a similar type, that reasonably indicate that the activity at this property is out of character for that type of property and is impacting the quality of life in the area or Village. 
For the purposes of clauses (20), (21) and (22), the term property shall mean any parcel of real property, or part thereof, and may include any building and structure which is situated on the property. In the event a property includes more than one dwelling or residential unit, or one or more spaces available for occupation by a nonresidential use, then for the purposes of a determination as provided for in clause (22), above, all calls or initiated contacts, collectively made to the property, may be considered. Any activity or conduct occurring on a public way that abuts a property may be considered in the determination of whether a public nuisance is occurring, or has occurred, on the property. 
(e)  Property owner or occupant responsibility for certain nuisances. It is a violation of the Code for any person that owns, manages, occupies, or controls property (hereinafter the "Responsible Party") to create, encourage, permit or allow a public nuisance to occur on the property owned, managed, controlled or occupied by them. For purposes of the section, a person shall have the same meaning as Section 1-2 of the Code. A Responsible Party may be subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  The Village Manager shall appoint a five-person committee, comprised of one appointee from each of the following: Community Development Department, Police Department, Health Department, Human Services Division and the Manager's Office. The committee shall be known as the Nuisance Intervention and Prevention ("NIP") Committee. The NIP Committee may consult with other Village personnel as needed. 
(2)  Whenever any information is made available to a Village employee indicating that a property may constitute a public nuisance based upon activities or omissions described in clauses (20), (21) and (22) of subsection (d), above, then that employee shall refer the matter to the NIP Committee. The NIP Committee shall convene and review all facts and information in relation to the referral. If the NIP Committee reasonably believes that the activity constitutes a public nuisance, it may authorize and initiate any actions permitted by the Code or State law. 
(3)  In addition to taking any other action, the NIP Committee may initiate a "nuisance avoidance" meeting with the responsible party. The NIP Committee shall establish a nuisance avoidance meeting with the Responsible Party by giving them any type of notice that is reasonable based upon the circumstances, including, but not limited to, written notice via first class mail or telephonic or personal notice if the circumstances require expedient action. 
(4)  The purpose of the nuisance avoidance meeting between the NIP Committee and the responsible party is to discuss the facts and information and allow the responsible party to provide additional information. It is a violation of the Code for a responsible party to fail to appear at a nuisance avoidance meeting. The NIP Committee may decide to require the responsible party to take reasonable and warranted actions to correct or prevent the activity or omission that is a violation of the Code. Such decision shall be provided in writing. It is a violation of the Code for a responsible party not to implement the corrective or preventative actions. 
(5)  The corrective or preventative actions may require the responsible party to take such actions reasonably calculated to correct, or prevent the occurrence of, a public nuisance. In ordering such actions, the NIP Committee shall consider the magnitude of the harm caused by the activities or omissions, the value of the property, the impact on residents, property owners and businesses in the area or Village and other relevant circumstances. Such actions may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Making improvements to the premises requested by the Village. 
b.  Installing alarms, lighting or other measures to enhance security. 
c.  Hiring of licensed and insured security personnel. 
d.  Hiring a third-party to take the corrective or preventative actions. 
e.  The initiation and execution of eviction proceedings against certain tenants. 
f.  Correction of a Code violation. 
(6)  The NIP Committee may recommend that the Village initiate the filing of a cause of action in the Circuit Court or a violation citation for administrative adjudication. Nothing in this Section will preclude the Village from initiating a cause of action in Circuit Court or issuing a violation notice for administrative adjudication without action or recommendation by the NIP Committee. 
(7)  Each day that a violation of this Section continues shall be a separate and distinct violation. The Village may enforce this Section through its administrative adjudication program, to the extent permitted by law, or through an action initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction. The Village Manager is authorized to conduct hearings to determine whether any license, permit or certificate of occupancy held by the Responsible Party, or issued in connection within any property, should be revoked or suspended. 
(8)  No person evicted in relation to nuisance preventative or corrective actions shall receive relocation assistance from the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 12.02; Ord. No. 09-4-C-3671, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016)  
Sec. 42-36. - Abatement procedure. 
(a)  Inspections. Whenever the Village Manager has reason to believe that a public nuisance exists, or has existed, within the Village, the Manager shall cause an inspection to be made. 
(b)  Summary abatement. 
(1)  Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village Manager may direct the Chief of Police, or another employee of the Village, to serve a notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance, and to post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that, unless such nuisance is so abated, the Village will cause the nuisance to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be. 
(2)  Abatement by Village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, Village Manager or designee shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance. 
(c)  Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the inspecting officer shall file a written report of the officer's findings with the Village Manager, who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 12.03)  
Sec. 42-37. - Collection of costs of abatement by Village. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes. 
(Code 1979, § 12.04)  
Sec. 42-38. - Dead or diseased trees. 
(a)  Declaration of nuisance. 
(1)  All tree species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or sub-infected with the fungus known as the Dutch elm disease (Certosomella ulmi) or other disease or infestation as determined by laboratory analysis by the Section of Applied Botany and Plant Pathology, Illinois Natural History Survey, Urbana, Illinois, or other certified lab are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(2)  All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially dead and all dead elm wood to which the bark is still attached, which, because of their condition, may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle (Scolytus multistriatus) or other diseased or infested trees, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Removal required. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the Village to permit or maintain on any such lot or land any elm tree, dead elm wood, or diseased or infested tree which is declared a public nuisance by this section, and it shall be the duty of any such owner promptly to remove and properly dispose of any such tree or dead wood under the supervision and direction of the Village Manager or designee or duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Right of entry for purpose of inspection. In order to carry out the purposes of this section and to implement the enforcement thereof, the Village Manager or designee, or duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or land in the Village at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting any diseased or infested trees or dead wood situated thereon and may remove such specimens from any such tree as are required for the purpose of laboratory analysis or to determine whether such tree is diseased or infested. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the Village Manager or designee, or duly authorized representative, from entering on any lot or land in the Village for the purpose of such inspection, or to interfere with the Village Manager or designee, or such representative, in the performance of any of the duties provided for in this section. 
(d)  Notice to abate; abatement by Village. 
(1)  If on laboratory analysis of specimens removed from any tree by the Village Manager or designee it is determined that such tree is a public nuisance as provided in this section, or if the Village Manager or designee determines that any dead or substantially dead tree or dead wood is a public nuisance, the Village Manager or designee shall serve or cause to be served upon the person, firm or corporation that is owner of the lot or land on which such tree or dead wood is located a written notice requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this section. If the person upon whom such notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to remove and destroy in a proper manner such tree or dead wood within 10 days after service of such notice, the Village Manager or designee, or duly authorized representative, may proceed to remove and dispose of such tree or dead wood in a proper manner and assess the cost thereof against the owner of such lot or land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to the Village. 
(2)  Service of notice provided for in this subsection shall be by mail or personal service if the owner is a resident of the Village. If such owner cannot be found in the Village, or is a nonresident, written notice shall be served by registered mail, addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address, and by publication at least 1 time in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. 
(e)  Costs of abatement by Village additional to penalties. If the Village removes from any lot or land in the Village any infected tree which is a public nuisance, or any dead or substantially dead tree or dead wood which is a public nuisance, the costs of the work done by the Village assessed against the owner of the lot or land involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed in this section for any violation of or noncompliance with any provision of this section. 
(f)  Trees on Village property. Any tree or dead wood on property owned by the Village which is a public nuisance shall promptly be removed and disposed of properly under the supervision of the Village Manager or designee or representative at the expense of the Village. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section by failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of any notice provided for in this section within 10 days after the service thereof, or who shall resist or obstruct the Village Manager or designee or authorized representative in carrying out the provisions of this section, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 12.05) 
State Law reference— Dutch elm disease, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-11 et seq.  
Sec. 42-39. - Weeds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parkway means that strip of land situated between the property line and curbline, or that strip of land situated in the center of a street within the inside lateral lines of the paved portions of the street, and in either instance such strip of land shall be construed to be that part of the street used exclusively as an ornamental strip for the planting of grass, shade trees and flowers. 
Weeds means any annual or perennial herbaceous plant of volunteer growth, not cultivated or useful for human food or enjoyment, and which, when in blossom, exhales an unpleasant or noxious odor or gives off pollen irritating to human tissue; and also any high or bank vegetable growth that may conceal debris or filthy deposits or constitute a fire hazard when dry. The term "weeds" shall include grass which is permitted to attain a growth of more than 6 inches. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. Any weeds are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person owning or in control of any plot of ground to permit the growth of weeds thereon. All persons owning or in control of property located within the Village shall keep their front and rear yards, the parkway in front of or adjacent to their premises and property adjacent to public rights-of-way in alleys free from weeds. 
(c)  Notice of violation; abatement by Village. If an owner or one in control of a plot of ground violates any part of this section, the Village Manager or designee shall send, by certified mail, personal service or posting notice on the subject property, a notice of such violation to such person, informing the person of the violation and requesting that such violation be abated within 5 days from the time of mailing, posting or serving the notice. If the violation is not abated within the 5-day period, the Village, through its agent, shall enter upon the property where the weeds are growing and shall proceed to destroy the weeds thereon causing the violation, and any expense incurred by the Village in so doing shall be a charge against the owner or person in control so failing, and such charge may be recovered in an appropriate action in law instituted by the Corporation Counsel. In addition thereto, the Village may create a lien against the property involved. 
(d)  Lien for costs incurred by Village. 
(1)  Any costs incurred by the Village, or its duly appointed officers or agents, in removing weeds from any property, shall be a lien upon the real estate so affected, and the lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, provided that, within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the Village, or person performing the service by authority of the Village, in its or such person's own name, files notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (i) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, (ii) the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and (iii) the date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by the Village or one acting under its direction and authority. However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed cutting and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to the affected real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(2)  The cost of the cutting of weeds shall not be a lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or sent after the cutting of weeds on the property. The notice shall contain a copy of this section and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, and shall identify the affected real estate, by common description and the location of the weeds. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 12.06; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 2, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 42-40. - Abandoned or inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means all motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition, or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for 7 consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of 14 days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. Inoperable motor vehicles shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. 
Private property means any real property within the Village which is not a street or a highway or owned by the Village and used for public purposes. 
Public property means any street or highway or other real property within the Village which is owned by the Village and used for public purposes. 
Street and highway mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also include the term "alley" within their meaning. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. 
(1)  Abandoned vehicles on street, highway or public property. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any street or highway or public property within the Village is unlawful and hereby declared a nuisance. 
(2)  Abandoned vehicles on private property. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or any part thereof on private property anywhere within the Village is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or any other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal with the written consent of the property owner and only after 14 days have expired. 
(3)  Inoperable vehicles on public or private property. All inoperable vehicles, whether on public or private property, in view of the general public are hereby declared a nuisance. However, nothing in this subsection (3) shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Removal. 
(1)  Abandoned vehicles. The procedure for removal and disposition of abandoned automobiles shall be in compliance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq. 
(2)  Inoperable vehicles. The removal-disposition of inoperable vehicles shall be in compliance with 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3 and 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq. 
(d)  Recovery of impounded vehicle. Any person claiming an abandoned or inoperable vehicle after it has come into custody of the Police Department shall first pay all towing and storage charges before the vehicle shall be released. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who violates or aids and abets in a violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 12.07) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.; inoperable vehicles, 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3, 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.  
Sec. 42-41. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
Felt tip marker means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than 1/8 inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid which is not water soluble. 
Graffiti means any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface by, but not limited to, any of the following: felt tip marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, or graffiti implement, to the extent that such marking was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed by the Board of Trustees to be a public nuisance. 
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching tool, or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete or wood or any other surface. 
Moveable property means any property which can be moved. Moveable property shall include but shall not be limited to vehicles, dumpsters and vending machines. 
Paint stick and graffiti stick mean any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and, upon application, of leaving a mark at least 1/8 inch in width. 
Property means any public or private real or personal property within the Village, and shall include but shall not be limited to any sign, building, structure, equipment, appurtenances, wall, fence, other building or structure, sidewalk, pavement, post, stone, tree, house, garage, bridge, gate, monument, motor vehicle, underpass or retaining wall, or other manmade or natural object. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. The existence of graffiti on any public or private property is expressly declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person owning or in control of property to permit the existence of graffiti thereon. All persons owning or in control of property shall at all times keep the property free and clear of graffiti. 
(c)  Notice of violation; abatement by Village. If an owner or a person in control or possession of property violates any part of this section, the Village Manager or designee shall send, by certified mail, personal service or posting notice on the subject property, a notice of such violation to the person, informing the person of the violation and requesting that such violation be abated within 10 days from the time of mailing, posting or serving the notice. If the violation is not abated within 10-day period, the Village, through its agent, shall enter upon the property where the graffiti exists and shall proceed to remove the graffiti causing the violation, and any expense incurred by the Village in so doing shall be a charge against the owner or person in control or possession so failing, and such charge may be recovered in an appropriate action in law instituted by the Corporation Counsel. In addition thereto, the Village may create a lien against the property involved. 
(d)  Lien for costs of abatement by Village. 
(1)  Any costs incurred by the Village, or its duly appointed officers or agents, in removing graffiti from any property shall be a lien upon the real estate so affected, and the lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, provided that, within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the Village, or person performing the service by authority of the Village, in its or such person's own name, files notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (i) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, (ii) the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and (iii) the date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by the Village or one acting under its direction and authority. However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the removal of the graffiti and prior to the filing of such notice of lien, and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to the affected real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice of lien. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(2)  The cost of the removal of the graffiti shall not be a lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is personally served on or sent by certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or sent after the graffiti is removed from the property. 
(e)  Right of Village to relocate moveable property. 
(1)  Whenever the owner or person in possession or control of moveable property or the owner or person in possession or control of real property where moveable property is located is given notice in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the Village Manager or designee shall have the defaced property declared a public nuisance and removed. 
(2)  The owner or person in possession or control of moveable property or the owner or person in possession or control of the real property from which the moveable property was removed shall be responsible for the costs of the removal and storage. 
(f)  Applying graffiti or defacing property prohibited. No person shall, or cause another person to, deface or apply graffiti to any property located within the Village, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(g)  Duty of parents regarding violations by minors. In accordance with Chapter 70, Article III, Division 2, of this Code, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.3 and 740 ILCS 115/1 et seq., the parent or guardian of any minor shall have responsibility regarding such minor's activities relating to applying graffiti or defacing property or structures. 
(h)  Possession of graffiti implements prohibited in designated public places. It is unlawful for any person to have in their possession any graffiti implement which in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, or recreational facility, or while in or within 100 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may be authorized by the Village. 
(i)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 12.09) 
Cross reference— Vandalism, § 70-91 et seq.  
Sec. 42-42. - Shopping carts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Establishment's property means the premises belonging to a business, which includes its buildings, structures, adjacent outside premises and parking lot. 
Shopping cart means a lightweight wheeled container provided by an establishment for the purpose of transporting consumer goods. 
Storage rack means a fixture for the placement of shopping carts. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. The existence of a shopping cart(s) on public property or private property where the property owner is not the owner of the shopping cart is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(c)  Unlawful removal. 
(1)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause the removal of a shopping cart from an establishment's property. 
(2)  Notice of violation. Whenever any person removes a shopping cart from an establishment's property in violation of the provisions of subsection (c)(1) of this section, any police officer or inspector observing such violation may serve the person with a notice of violation, requiring that the person appear at the Village Hall and request a court date or make payment. 
(3)  Stipulated settlement. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of subsection (c)(1) of this section and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for this subsection shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(d)  Storage racks. Any establishment which provides shopping carts must provide a minimum of 1 outside storage rack on the establishment's property. The actual number of necessary outside storage racks shall be determined by the Village Manager or designee. In determining the number of storage racks, the Village Manager or designee shall consider the following: 
(1)  Property size. 
(2)  Building size. 
(3)  Parking lot size and layout. 
(4)  Traffic patterns. 
(5)  Number of parking spaces. 
(6)  Number of customers/patrons. 
(7)  Other pertinent factors. 
If a determination is made by the Village Manager or designee that no space exists upon the establishment's property for an outside storage rack, the store manager shall present a plan for the collection and storage of carts to be reviewed and approved by the Village. 
(e)  Posting of sign. In every establishment providing shopping carts there shall be displayed at all times, in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village and which shall read substantially as follows: 
PURSUANT TO SECTION 42-42 OF THE SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE IT IS UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE A SHOPPING CART FROM THIS ESTABLISHMENT'S PROPERTY. THE REMOVAL OF A SHOPPING CART IN VIOLATION OF THE SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE SUBJECTS YOU TO A FINE OR PENALTY. IT IS NOT UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE A SHOPPING CART TO THE PARKING LOT. 
(f)  Cart identification. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of an establishment to have all shopping carts identified with the establishment's name. 
(g)  Cart collection by owner. All shopping carts left in an establishment's parking lot, on the adjacent sidewalk or in any other location within the Village shall be collected at regular intervals throughout the day and at closing by the establishment's personnel. Shopping carts shall be stored either inside the building or in an outside storage rack. 
(h)  Retrieval of carts by Village authorized; fee. A shopping cart remaining in any location other than the respective establishment's property may be collected by the Village and stored for a period of 7 days. A retrieval and storage fee, as set forth in Section 46-42, shall be charged for each cart collected by the Village. 
(i)  Notice of retrieval of cart by Village. Upon the Village's collection of a cart, the Village shall send notice to the manager. 
(j)  Abandonment. All carts retrieved and stored by the Village and not claimed for a period of 7 days shall be considered abandoned and become the property of the Village. All carts not having cart identification as required in subsection (f) of this section shall be considered abandoned and become the property of the Village. 
(k)  Authority to establish additional regulations. The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this section. 
(l)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 12.10)  
Sec. 42-43. - Crime Free Lease Addendum; Obligations of Owners and Tenants to commit to crime free tenancies. 
(a)  The definitions contained in Article IX, Section 22-500 of the Skokie Village Code shall be incorporated by reference to this Section and shall apply as fully set forth. 
(b)  Any Owner that leases property to another Person shall utilize a "Crime Free" Lease Addendum. The addendum is to make the occupancy of a leased premises by an individual engaged in violent or drug-related crimes or the use of a leased premises in the commission of a crime, or in furtherance of the commission of certain criminal activity, by a Tenant, a Tenant's invitee or other Person authorized or allowed by the Tenant or the Tenant's family to be on the leased premises, a lease violation. The language for a Crime Free Lease Addendum is in subsection (h), below. 
(c)  In the event that criminal activity occurs in a leased premises that constitutes (i) any class of felony, or (ii) a Class A misdemeanor at least twice in one year, then an Owner, or authorized agent, shall initiate eviction proceedings against the Tenant participating in the criminal activity as specified in the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/9-101 et seq. For the purposes of this Section, a Tenant that was a non-culpable victim or was not participating in criminal activity shall not be evicted for the reason of the criminal activity. This Section shall also not apply to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault or stalking for any violation of the Crime Free Lease Addendum. In the event the Owner, authorized agent, or Tenant believes that the circumstances are such that eviction should not be undertaken, then they shall file a written request detailing the circumstances with the Nuisance Intervention and Prevention Committee, (hereinafter "NIP Committee") and request a determination of whether eviction is inappropriate. The NIP Committee may, at its discretion, meet with the Owner, authorized agent, and any other Person, including the Tenant, that may have relevant information regarding the circumstances. The NIP Committee shall render a written determination on the question of whether eviction is inappropriate and may deliver it via first class mail. The NIP Committee may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors: 
1.  The activity itself, 
2.  The age of the participants involved in the activity, 
3.  Whether the Tenant was a non-culpable victim of the activity, or 
4.  Any other factors the NIP Committee deems relevant. 
(d)  When the provisions of paragraph (c) require the Owner to initiate eviction proceedings, the Owner, or authorized agent, shall initiate action to evict a Tenant within fifteen (15) days of the date: (i) the Owner, or authorized agent becomes aware or should have become aware that criminal activity warranting eviction took place, or (ii) that a written determination is delivered to the Owner by the NIP Committee pursuant to paragraph (c). An Owner may include language in the lease that authorizes eviction for more minor offenses than indicated in paragraph (h). In the event criminal activity occurs that is not a felony, or a Class A misdemeanor twice within twelve months, then the decision to initiate eviction proceedings is discretionary for the Owner. 
(e)  Whenever an Owner is proceeding with an eviction pursuant to paragraph (h), the Owner may request that the Village of Skokie Corporation Counsel or designee appear before the court or prepare a written submission when there is a hearing on the eviction, not to represent the Owner, but to support the eviction proceeding pursuant to the terms of this Code. The decision to appear is at the discretion of the Corporation Counsel. 
(f)  It is a violation of the Code for an Owner to not include a Crime Free Lease Addendum in a written lease affecting property in the Village. If the leasing of a property is an oral arrangement, then the Owner must notify the Tenant in writing that the Crime Free Lease Addendum is a condition of the lease and the Tenant is obligated to adhere to its language. The Owner, or authorized agent, must keep sufficient records to demonstrate that such notice is provided. It is a violation of the Code for an Owner to not enforce the Crime Free Lease Addendum. 
(g)  The Village may conduct "Crime Free Property" seminars from time to time. Any Owner, agent of an owner, or Tenant may be required to attend the Village's Crime Free Property seminars at the request of the Village Manager based on the following considerations: 
(1)  If the property rented or leased by the Owner is a nuisance property as defined in this Section 42-35; 
(2)  Criminal activity occurred on the property; or 
(3)  Upon the recommendation of the NIP Committee. 
(h)  Crime Free Lease Addendum. Every lease in the Village of Skokie shall include language requiring the Owner and Tenant to agree to the following provisions and shall execute the Crime Free Lease Addendum found at the end of this section: 
(1)  Tenant, any member of the Tenant's leasehold, a guest or invitee of the Tenant, or a Person that Tenant knows, or should reasonably know, is present, including, but not limited to, any person invited in any way, or allowed to be present, on the leased premises or the common grounds, shall not engage, or in any way be involved in, any criminal activity, on or near the leased premises. For the purposes of this lease, criminal activity shall mean any criminal offense which would constitute a felony or Class A misdemeanor. This prohibition is applicable to all public ways abutting the leased premises or common grounds. 
(2)  Tenant, any member of the Tenant's leasehold, a guest or invitee of the Tenant or a member of Tenant's leasehold, including, but not limited to, a Person that Tenant knows or should reasonably know, is present at the leased premises or on the common grounds shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate or that does facilitate criminal activity, including, but not limited to, drug-related offenses. 
(3)  Tenant, or any member of the Tenant's leasehold, shall not engage, or in any way be involved in any violent criminal activity or illegal drug activity anywhere in or outside of the Village of Skokie. For purposes of this lease, violent criminal activity or illegal drug activity shall mean any arrest and charge of a felony offense concerning violent acts or drugs. 
(4)  Tenant, and any member of Tenant's leasehold, shall not permit the leased premises or common grounds to be used for, or to facilitate, criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the leasehold, a guest or invitee, and regardless of whether the Tenant is at home during any such activity. 
(5)  Tenant, any member of the Tenant's leasehold, a guest or invitee of the leased premises or the common grounds, including, but not limited to, any Person invited in any way, or allowed to be present, by Tenant or a member of Tenant's leasehold, shall not engage in the unlawful manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping, or giving of a controlled substance, or cannabis, at any location whether in, at, on, or near the property. 
(6)  Tenant, any members of the Tenant's leasehold, a guest or invitee of the Tenant, or a Person that Tenant knows, or should reasonably know, is present on the leased premises, including, but not limited to, any Person invited in any way, or allowed to be present, by Tenant or a member of Tenant's leasehold, shall not engage in any prostitution, criminal street gang activity, threatening or intimidating conduct, or assault, all as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or unlawful discharge of firearms, on or near the leased premises or common grounds. 
(7)  Tenant and Tenant's occupants, whether on or off the premises, shall not engage in any violent crime. 
CRIME FREE LEASE ADDENDUM 
As part of the consideration for this Lease, Tenant agrees as follows: 
1.  Tenant and Tenant's occupants, guests and invitees, whether on or near the leased premises as well as on all public ways abutting the leased premises and common grounds, are prohibited from: 
a.  Engaging, or in any way being involved in, any criminal activity. For the purposes of this lease, criminal activity shall mean any criminal offense which would constitute a felony or Class A misdemeanor. 
b.  Engaging in any act intended to facilitate or that does facilitate criminal activity including, but not limited to, drug-related offenses. 
c.  Permitting the premises to be used for, or to facilitate, criminal activity. 
d.  Engaging in the unlawful manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping or giving of a controlled substance or cannabis, at any location whether in, at, on or near the property. 
e.  Engaging in any prostitution, criminal street gang activity, threatening or intimidating conduct or assault, all as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or unlawful discharge of firearms. 
2.  Tenant, or any member of the Tenant's leasehold, shall not engage, or in any way be involved in any violent criminal activity or illegal drug activity anywhere in or outside of the Village of Skokie. For purposes of this lease, violent criminal activity or illegal drug activity shall mean any arrest and charge of a felony offense concerning violent acts or drugs. 
3.  VIOLATION OF ANY OF THE ABOVE PROVISIONS SHALL BE A MATERIAL AND IRREPARABLE VIOLATION OF THE LEASE AND GOOD CAUSE FOR TERMINATION OF THE TENANCY. A single violation of any of the provisions of this addendum shall be deemed a serious violation and material non-compliance with the lease. It is understood and agreed that a violation shall be good cause for immediate termination of the lease. Unless otherwise provided by law, proof of violation shall not require criminal conviction, but shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. Tenant consents to venue in Cook County. 
4.  Tenant agrees that service of process of any legal proceeding, including but not limited to, a special detainer or forcible detainer action, or service of any notice to Tenant, shall be effective and sufficient for the purposes of providing legal service and conferring personal jurisdiction upon any Illinois court as to any Tenant, co-signor, occupant or guarantor, notwithstanding the fact that a Tenant, co-signor, occupant or guarantor may reside at a different location other than the property address described in the lease agreement. This agreement regarding service is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any manner of service authorized under Illinois law or rule. By signing this lease the undersigned hereby waives any objection to service carried out under the terms of this agreement. This provision shall be effective for any extension, renewal or modification of the initial lease. 
5.  Tenant hereby authorizes property management/Owner to use police generated reports against Tenant for any such violation as reliable direct evidence, and/or as business records as a hearsay exemption, in all eviction hearings. 
6.  Tenant also agrees to be responsible for the actions of Tenant's occupants, Tenant's guests and invitees, and Tenant's occupant's guests and invitees, regardless of whether Tenant knew or should have known about any such actions. A guest or invitee shall be anyone who Tenant or Tenant's occupant gives access to or allows on the premises or in the rental unit. 
7.  In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any other provision of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall govern. 
8.  This lease addendum is incorporated into the lease executed or renewed this day between the Owner and Tenant. 
___________ 
Tenant Signature 	_______ 
Date 
___________ 
Tenant Signature 	_______ 
Date 
___________ 
Property Owner/Manager Signature 	_______ 
Date 
___________ 
Address of Rental Property 
 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3671, § 2, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 3, 1-6-2014)  
Secs. 42-44—42-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Noisy animals, § 18-8; disturbing noises from dog services, § 26-384; sound amplifiers, § 26-1321 et seq.; use of loud noises or speaking devices by transient merchants, § 26-1375; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
Federal law reference— Noise control, 42 U.S.C.A. § 4901 et seq. 
State Law reference— Noise, 415 ILCS 5/23 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction means on-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration, demolition or removal of any structure, facility or addition thereto, including all related activities, including but not restricted to clearing land, earthmoving, blasting and landscaping. 
Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger. 
Exhaust system means the system composed of a combination of components which provides for the enclosed flow of exhaust gas from engine parts to the atmosphere. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle (including motorcycles) which is self-propelled, and any combination of vehicles which are propelled or drawn by a vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Muffler means a device for abating the sounds of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
Noise pollution means the emission of sound that unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or with any lawful business or activity. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency, political subdivision of this State, any other state or political subdivision or agency thereof or any legal successor, representative, agent or agency of the foregoing. 
(Code 1979, § 55.191) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-72. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 55.196; Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.38), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 42-73. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this article, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.38), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 42-74. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.38), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 42-75. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any emission of noises from any source in violation of this article shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to Sections 42-36 and 42-37. 
(Code 1979, § 55.195)  
Sec. 42-76. - Standards for determination of violation. 
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of this article exists shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise. 
(2)  The intensity of the noise. 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. 
(5)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(6)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(7)  The time of day or night the noise occurs. 
(Code 1979, § 55.194)  
Sec. 42-77. - Prohibited noise generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, except as a danger warning signal, or in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, any excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, convenience, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 55.19)  
Sec. 42-78. - Specific noises prohibited. 
The following are hereby declared to be excessive, loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article; however, this shall not be construed to exclude other noises coming within the definition of this article: 
(1)  Building or construction operations. The use of any pile driver, shovel, hammer derrick, hoist tractor roller or other mechanical apparatus operated by fuel or electric power in building or construction operations other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with written permission from the Village Manager or designee, which permission may be granted for a period not to exceed 3 days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of 3 days or less while the emergency continues, provided the Village Manager or designee should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by such acts. Within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., if the Manager shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the Manager may grant permission for such acts to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made. 
(2)  Lawn care equipment. The use of any lawn care equipment, other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays, and between 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays and holidays. 
(3)  Horns or signaling devices of vehicles. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the Village, except as a warning signal. 
(4)  Noisy animals or birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Radios, stereos, amplifiers, phonographs, etc. The using or operating of or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, stereo, amplifier, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the occupants of the neighboring properties. The operation, use or playing of any such equipment in a manner as to be audible at a distance of 25 feet from the property line where the sound originates shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. However, the utilization of lawn care or construction equipment or the sounding of horns or whistles on locomotives as provided for in this section, the placement of air conditioner units in accordance with applicable Village codes and standards or the utilization of an amplifier for which a Village permit has been issued shall not be considered a violation of this subsection. 
(Code 1979, § 55.192; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 2, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 42-79. - Motor vehicle equipment and operation. 
(a)  Exhaust system. No person shall operate or cause or allow the operation of a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way unless it is at all times equipped with an adequate muffler or other dissipative device which is in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise, free from defects which affect sound reduction, and not modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such muffler or other sound dissipative device above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle so as to produce excessive or unusually disturbing or loud noise. 
(b)  Tires. No person shall operate or cause or allow the operation of a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching, or other such noise from the tires in contact with the ground because of rapid acceleration or excessive speed around corners or other such reason; however, such noise resulting from emergency operation to avoid imminent danger shall be exempted. 
(c)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise is prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 55.193) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Adequate mufflers, 625 ILCS 5/12-602.  
Sec. 42-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2011, deleted § 42-80, which pertained to sounding of horns or whistles of locomotives and derived from the Code of 1979, § 55.30.  
Secs. 42-81—42-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SITE GRADING, DRAINAGE AND SOIL EROSION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Soil and Water Conservation Districts Act, 70 ILCS 405/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-101. - Compliance with article. 
Prior to any work being conducted on any properties within the Village, there shall be compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 20.01; Ord. No. 01-11-C-3045, § 1(20.01), 11-19-2001)  
Sec. 42-102. - Excavation and Grading permit. 
No excavation, grading or other work that disturbs the ground cover or topsoil shall be performed at a site that alters existing land grade, drainage pattern, or increases impervious surface without first obtaining an Excavation and Grading permit. 
(1)  Engineering site plan. Prior to a permit being issued in accordance with any provision of this Code, the applicant shall submit an engineering site plan in the form required by this article. No permit shall be approved without the prior approval of the engineering site plan by the Village Manager or designee. 
(2)  Waiver of permit. No permit shall be approved without the prior approval of the engineering site plan by the Village Manager or designee. However, the Village Manager or designee may waive the requirement for a grade alteration permit, as required by this subsection, upon a determination that the proposed alteration will not adversely affect surface water drainage onto or off of the property and will not increase soil erosion on or near the property. 
(3)  Standards for permit approval. A permit required under the provisions of this article or any other provision of this Code shall be issued by the Village Manager or designee only if there is a determination that the proposed work will not cause surface water to be unreasonably diverted onto or detained on abutting or nearby property, unreasonably alter natural or existing drainage patterns, unreasonably increase or concentrate runoff of stormwater onto abutting or nearby property, or potentially cause the redistribution of contaminated soil brought up from the subsurface. 
(4)  Material stockpile. Soil, dirt or debris, including but not limited to stumps, logs, concrete, gravel, dirt or asphalt or any other material, resulting from excavation or any other construction activities, shall be completely removed and legally disposed of offsite during or at the completion of the project. A grade alteration permit may be obtained for the temporary stockpiling, for a time period not to exceed l year, or as determined by a geotechnical report, if used for soil consolidation or as determined by the Village. Temporary erosion control measures are to be implemented. Erosion control and stabilization measures must be maintained for the duration of the stockpile to minimize wind and runoff erosion. 
(Code 1979, § 20.02; Ord. No. 01-11-C-3045, § 1(20.02), 11-19-2001; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 3, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 42-103. - Engineering site plan. 
(a)  Information required. The engineering site plan as required in this article shall include the following as well as any reasonable and related information requested by the Village Manager or designee: 
(1)  All plans submitted under this article shall be drawn to a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet; however, a smaller scale may be used in plans for larger parcels. All plans shall not be smaller than 8 ½ inches by 11 inches and not larger than 30 inches by 42 inches in size. 
(2)  All plans submitted under this article shall be on media and in a form specified and approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
(3)  A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) is required if the site is greater than one acre. 
(4)  The plan shall specify the location of drainage courses to an approved discharge location, building and structure locations, water bodies, paved areas and other significant natural or manmade features, including but not limited to fences, trees or shrubs, and historical monuments or artifacts, on the property and adjacent and within 50 feet of the boundary. All elevations provided under this article shall be based on the United States Geodetic Survey (USGS) datum, and all benchmarks shall be indicated. 
(5)  The plan shall specify existing and proposed contours, spot elevations of all critical locations for management of water runoff, spot elevations at lot corners and at 25-foot intervals along the property lines or the perimeter of the area to be regraded or landscaped, and spot elevations at 50-foot intervals on adjacent properties to clearly establish existing drainage patterns. 
(6)  The plan shall specify the elevations, location and cross section of drainage courses, ditches or conduits when they intersect the property lines. 
(7)  The plan shall specify existing and proposed contours for the entire property on 1-foot contour intervals. 
(8)  The plan shall specify proposed driveway pavement type, widths and gradients. 
(9)  The plan shall specify locations of all public and private utility mains, services, conduits and cables. 
(10)  The plan shall specify locations of all downspouts, footing drain and sump pump discharges, and disposition of discharge therefrom. 
(11)  The plan shall specify all proposed connections to water supplies and public and private sanitary and storm sewers, including invert elevations, size location and material type of such sewers and mains. 
(12)  The plan shall specify elevations of any existing and proposed buildings, principal or accessory, and structures, including top of foundation and garage slab and elevations of proposed finished ground grade at all significant points around the proposed building or structure, including window wells, patios and swimming pools. 
(13)  The plan shall specify the footprints for all existing/proposed structures, driveways, service walks, patios, decks, fences and other surface structures. 
(14)  The plan shall specify the proposed impervious surface coverage calculations for the entire lot and front yard (that portion of lot between the front property line and the required front or corner side yard setback line); and, if the project is an improvement to an existing structure, the net impervious coverage. 
(15)  The plan shall specify sufficient soil erosion control notes and details to ensure no adverse impacts to the subject and adjacent properties. 
(16)  The plan shall specify proposed landscaping, including berms, irrigation systems, trees and other vegetation, and other erosion control measures, and a schedule if the work will be performed over more than one construction season. 
(17)  The plan shall specify runoff control measures to be taken during construction, maintenance, or other activity that disturbs the ground cover or topsoil until a final grading plan is implemented. 
(18)  The plan shall specify what materials will be stored on site for future use and what materials will be disposed of off-site. A schedule shall be presented for the removal of stockpiled materials. 
(b)  Submission; copy of plan to be kept at site. The engineering site plans shall be signed, dated and submitted in quadruplicate. The applicant shall retain a reproducible copy of the original plans. A copy of the plan as approved shall be maintained at all times by the permit holder at the site where the work covered in the plans is being performed. 
(c)  Certification of work. A licensed civil engineer, landscape architect, land surveyor or architect, hired by the property owner, shall inspect and certify that the work was completed in compliance with approved plans. 
(Code 1979, § 20.03; Ord. No. 01-11-C-3045, § 1(20.03), 11-19-2001; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 42-104. - Other runoff control methods. 
(a)  New construction, ground level building additions and other increases in impermeable surface over 400 square feet or 10 percent of the existing impermeable lot coverage regulations in a zoning district, where no open and improved public alley exists or the alley is at an elevation where positive drainage will not occur, shall be required to provide 1 or more of the following drainage control systems, as determined by the Village Manager or designee: 
(1)  A dry well system designed to collect and direct water to the front of a lot to drain to the street. This system shall be designed to work with the approved engineering site plan. 
(2)  Roof drainage shall discharge to the front of the lot to drain to the street. 
(b)  Where the existing roof of a building discharges to the rear of a property and no open and improved public alley exists or the alley is at an elevation where positive drainage will not occur, credit can be given to the new addition or increase of impermeable surface within the zoning requirements of the district, on a 1 to 1 basis, for each square foot of existing roof surface runoff that is directed to a street. 
(c)  All new accessory structures with a floor area over 400 square feet shall have gutters directed to the front of the lot to drain to the street, a dry well system, or an open and improved public alley with positive drainage. 
(Ord. No. 01-11-C-3045, § 1(20.04), 11-19-2001)  
Chapter 46 - FEES FOR LICENSES, SERVICES AND PERMITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; businesses, ch. 26; taxation, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Scope of chapter. 
This chapter sets forth the fees that are to be paid to the Village for various licenses, permits, inspections, applications and services of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 7.01)  
Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Copies of documents. 
Service charges for copies of documents shall be as follows: 
(1)  Police Department. 
a.  Report ..... $5.00 
b.  Photographs ..... 5.00 
(2)  Fire report (including ambulance calls) ..... 5.00 
(3)  Engineering Division. 
Blueprints, per page ..... 2.00 
(4)  Health Department. 
a.  Birth certificates: 
First copy ..... 10.00 
Each additional copy ..... 5.00 
b.  Death certificates: 
First certified copy ..... 10.00 
Each additional copy ..... 5.00 
(5)  All departments. 
Photocopy ..... 0.20 
(Code 1979, § 7.02; Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 01-9-C-3033, § 1, 9-20-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3660, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-32. - Fee for tendering payment to Village via means that proves to be uncollectible. 
The fee for tendering payment to Village via means that proves to be uncollectible, as provided in Section 70-66, is $10.00 plus any amount charged to the Village by a third party. 
(Code 1979, § 55.36; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-33. - Economic development bond fees and deposit. 
(a)  Financing fee. The financing fee for issuance of bonds for economic development projects pursuant to Section 30-43 is $5.00 per $1,000.00 of bonds. 
(b)  Application fee and deposit. The application charge for persons requesting issuance of economic development bonds pursuant to Section 30-44 is $5,000.00. The amount of the deposit required by Section 30-44 is $5,000.00. 
(Code 1979, §§ 3.2413, 3.2414)  
Sec. 46-34. - Fee for exempt transactions under economic development tax provisions. 
The fee for exempt transactions under economic development tax provisions pursuant to Section 98-81 is $25.00. 
(Code 1979, § 10.08; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 46-35. - Automatic dialing devices connected to Police Department. 
The fee for an automatic dialing device to the Police Department is $25.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.02) 
Cross reference— Burglar alarm systems, § 38-31 et seq.  
Sec. 46-36. - Fire Department Service Fees. 
(a)  Ambulance Transportation. Each person that receives ambulance transportation or emergency medical services from the Village shall be charged a user fee for such ambulance transportation and emergency medical services performed by the Village on behalf of such person. 
(b)  Emergency Incident Cost Recovery Fees. Each property owner or vehicle owner that receives any of the following emergency services from the Village shall be charged the corresponding recovery fee for such services: 
1.  Fire Department response to a motor vehicle accident shall be charged a fee of $550.00; 
2.  Fire Department response to a vehicle fire shall be charged $605.00; 
3.  Fire Department response to structure fire shall be charged $500.00; 
4.  Fire Department response to an incident involving hazardous conditions, excluding hazardous materials, shall be charged $700.00; and 
5.  Fire Department response to an incident requiring a special rescue, including but not limited to: industrial or vehicle extrication, above & below grade, confined space, structural and/or trench collapse incidents shall be charged a fee of $400.00. 
(c)  Billing. The Village Manager or designee shall cause a bill to be issued and sent to the appropriate entity or person responsible for payment for said person having been transported by ambulance, having received emergency medical services or Fire Department Response specified in this section. The Village Manager shall, with the consultation of the Fire Chief and the Director of Finance, establish a schedule of the applicable fees for all services received by a person with regard to ambulance transportation and emergency medical services, including fees for multiple responses as specified in subsection (e) of this section. The Village Manager is authorized to modify or change the fees that may be charged from time to time after consideration of certain factors. Such factors that may be considered by the Village Manager include, but are not limited to, applicable Medicare rates, reimbursement rates, cost standards in the insurance or health care industry, and actual cost of services and supplies. The Village Manager shall cause such schedule of fees to be printed and made available to the public. 
(d)  The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized to accept payment from Medicare, Medicaid, any Federal health care program, insurers or other third party payers for any fee charged under this section. The fees that are to be charged to persons shall differentiate between nonresidents and residents. 
(1)  In relation to residents, the Village will charge and collect only those amounts that are covered by Federal health care programs, including but not limited to Medicare and Medicaid, insurers or any other third party payers. Such bills will be sent directly to the third parties, with a statement to the resident indicating that the Village will accept the payment by the third party as payment in full. Any and all payments made by the aforesaid third parties for residents, will be accepted by the Village as paid in full and the resident will have no obligation to make any additional payment as a co-payment, deductible or otherwise. 
(2)  In relation to nonresidents, the nonresident shall be liable and responsible for full payment of the transportation and services provided. 
(3)  All fees collected in conformance with this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the Village. 
(e)  Multiple response to person. In the event the Skokie Fire Department responds to the same person more than three (3) times in one (1) calendar year, without ambulance transport to a hospital or another location for treatment but medical treatment and supplies have been dispensed, the Village Manager or designee shall cause a bill to be issued, for fees in accordance with subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(f)  Authority to establish additional rules and regulations. The Village Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 7.21; Ord. No. 03-6-C-3172, § 1, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 19-7-C-4472, § 1, 7-15-2019) 
Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 38.  
Sec. 46-37. - Dogs and cats. 
The following fees shall be paid to the Village for services rendered with respect to dogs and cats: 
(1)  Annual license fee: 
a.  Unaltered dog or cat ..... $25.00 
b.  Altered dog or cat ..... 10.00 
c.  License fee for any animal declared Dangerous ..... 150.00 
d.  License fee for any animal declared Vicious ..... 250.00 
e.  Individual breeder license fee ..... 250.00 
(2)  Replacement of lost license tag for dog or cat ..... 0.50 
(3)  Redemption of an impounded dog or cat: 
a.  If licensed ..... 15.00 
Plus cost of keeping dog or cat in pound. 
b.  If unlicensed ..... 20.00 
Plus cost of keeping dog or cat in pound. 
(Code 1979, § 7.08; Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 3, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 14-1-C-4032, § 2, 1-21-2014) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18.  
Sec. 46-38. - Farmers' market. 
Rental fees for farmers' market spaces shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum rental space per permittee. Three market spaces may be rented by any 1 permittee. (Each market space constitutes approximately 2 spaces.) 
(2)  Permanent spaces. The fee for a permanent space on the same site at the market for the entire season shall be $150.00 per space. The fee shall be appropriately discounted if the space is purchased later in the season. 
(3)  Space for 1 day. The fee for space rented for the day on a first come, first served basis until the market is filled shall be $10.00 per space. 
(4)  Collection of fee; transfer of permit; refunds. Fees will be collected by the Village Manager or designee at the market site, in advance of occupancy. Season permits are not transferable and no refunds will be given. 
(5)  Cleanup deposit. The cleanup deposit shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.09; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009) 
Cross reference— Farmers' market, § 26-631 et seq.  
Sec. 46-39. - Fireworks permit. 
The permit fee for a public display of fireworks pursuant to Section 70-214 is $10.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.06) 
Cross reference— Fireworks, § 70-211 et seq.  
Sec. 46-40. - Garage sale permit. 
The fee for a garage sale permit is $10.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.10; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009) 
Cross reference— Garage sales, § 26-711 et seq.  
Sec. 46-41. - Handbill removal fee. 
The fee for removal of handbills posted under a special permit pursuant to Section 6-35 is $1.00 per item. 
(Code 1979, § 44.13)  
Sec. 46-42. - Shopping cart retrieval and storage fee. 
The fees for retrieval and storage of shopping carts by the Village as provided in Section 42-42 are as follows: 
(1)  Retrieval fee, per cart ..... $75.00 
(2)  Storage fee, per cart, per day ..... 10.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.25)  
Sec. 46-43. - Appearance and Arts Fee. 
An Appearance and Arts Fee is hereby established at 0.1 percent, calculated for each permit and based upon the construction valuation, provided the valuation of construction meets or exceeds $10,000.00. There is no fee for construction valuation of $9,999.99 and below. Said fees shall be collected by the Community Development Department at the time of permit issuance, and the fees to be placed in a segregated account for the exclusive purpose of providing funding for the Public Arts Program outlined in Section 2-1084 and for the maintenance of buildings and land owned or controlled by the Village of Skokie used for the display of art or for the performing arts. The Village Manager or his designee shall determine the allocation of funds to allowable uses. 
(Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, deleted the former § 46-43, and enacted a new § 46-43 as set out herein. The former § 46-43 pertained weights and measures inspection and testing and derived from the Code of 1979, § 7.19; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009.  
Sec. 46-44. - Public Sidewalk Installation and Repair Fee. 
A Public Sidewalk Installation and Repair Fee is hereby established at 0.2 percent (.002) of the construction value for any permit that equals or exceeds $10,000.00. There is no fee for construction value of $9,999.99 and below. Said fee is due at the time of permit issuance and placed in a segregated account for the exclusive purpose of providing funding for the Public Sidewalk Installation and Repair Program outlined in Sections 2-1231 through 2-1233. 
(Ord. No. 12-5-C-3905, § 2, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 3, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-45. - Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Fee. 
A Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Fee is hereby established at 0.2 percent (.002) of the construction value for any permit that equals or exceeds $10,000.00. There is no fee for construction value of $9,999.99 and below. Said fee is due at the time of permit issuance and placed in a segregated account for the exclusive purpose of providing funding for the Utility Relocation and Undergrounding Program outlined in Sections 2-1234 through 2-1236. 
(Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 3, 2-19-2019)  
Secs. 46-46—46-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 26; day care homes, § 54-161 et seq.; longterm care facilities, § 54-221 et seq.; food service establishments, § 54-291; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 78; private solid waste collectors, § 86-41 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 4, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, deleted § 46-71 in its entirety. Former § 46-71 pertained to proration of fees; refund of fees and derived from Code 1979, § 7.03.  
Sec. 46-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 4, adopted Feb. 19, 2019, repealed § 46-72, which pertained to transfer of license and derived from Code 1979, § 7.03; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 2, adopted June 2, 2014.  
Sec. 46-73. - General license fee schedule. 
License fees for the following businesses and occupations shall be as provided in this section. No person shall engage in any such activity without a license therefore, or without paying the license fee prescribed. 
Fee   
Adult uses ..... $100.00 
Alarm users: See Section 46-74. 
Amusement device; mechanical, electronic, and/or computer game machines, consoles, and/or player-operated devices; billiard tables; pool tables; inflatable play equipment; trampolines: 
(1)  Per console, device, table, or equipment used ..... 125.00 
Athletic exhibitions: See Section 46-75. 
Auctioneers ..... 50.00 
Or, per day ..... 10.00 
Automatic coin-operated rides: See "Amusement device automatic." 
Body art establishment license, (annual) ..... 100.00 
Body artist permit, (annual) ..... 50.00 
Bowling, per alley ..... 125.00 
Carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements: See Section 46-76. 
Charitable soliciting: See Section 46-77. 
Cigarettes and tobacco products ..... 200.00 
Congregate living facility ..... 200.00 
Contractors' registration fees: See Section 46-135. 
Day care homes ..... 25.00 
Farmer's market fees: See Section 46-38. 
Firearms range license ..... 200.00 per lane; 5% of gross receipts. 
Fireworks permit: See Section 46-39. 
Food vending machines, per machine ..... 25.00 
Food establishments (Category III) ..... 250.00 
Food establishments (Category II) ..... 400.00 
Food establishments (Category I) ..... 550.00 
Foreign fire insurance companies: See Section 46-78. 
Garage sale permit: See Section 46-40. 
Handbill distributors and billposters: 
Per applicant, for 1 year ..... 75.00 
Per applicant, for 6 months ..... 50.00 
Per applicant, for 1 month ..... 25.00 
Hotels and motels, gross receipts tax: See Section 46-79. 
Itinerant Buyer (no fixed place of business) ..... 100.00 
Lawn care and landscape professionals ..... 50.00 
Liquor, retail: See Section 46-80. 
Massage services establishment ..... 100.00 
Mobile Food Vender: 
(1)  Ice cream truck, pert truck ..... 50.00 
(2)  Limited service food truck, per truck ..... 100.00 
(3)  Full service food truck, per truck ..... 200.00 
Music vending machines: See "Amusement device automatic." 
Skilled nursing facilities: 
Each facility ..... 100.00 
Additional, for each bed in excess of 20 beds (nonprofit skilled nursing facilities excluded) ..... 5.00 
Open Sales Lot, per event ..... 200.00 
Pawnbrokers ..... 100.00 
Precious Metals Dealers ..... 100.00 
Public passenger vehicles: See Section 46-229. 
Raffles, for each raffle, nonrefundable ..... 20.00 
No annual fee. 
Scavengers: 
(1)  Scavengers, private, per truck ..... 150.00 
(2)  Grease rendering services, per truck ..... 150.00 
(3)  Roll-off service, per truck ..... 150.00 
(4)  Roll-off service, monthly fee per dumpster in public right-of-way ..... 50.00 
The scavenger company must post an annual bond of $10,000.00 
Solicitation, Commercial, door to door, per solicitor ..... 20.00 
Sound amplifiers, per day ..... 5.00 
No annual fee. 
Theaters: 
1 to 600 seating capacity ..... 100.00 
601 to 1,200 seating capacity ..... 500.00 
Over 1,200 seating capacity ..... 1,000.00 
Drive-in theaters ..... 2,000.00 
Transient or itinerant merchants or vendors, per day ..... 25.00 
No annual fee. 
Initial license application fee ..... 25.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.02; Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 1, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-C-3019, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 03-12-C-3232, § 1, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 04-4-C-3265, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 5, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 2, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 2, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 3, 8-17-2015; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 4, 2-19-2019; Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 2, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 46-74. - Alarm systems and users. 
The following fees shall be paid to the Village for services rendered with respect to alarm systems and users: 
(1)  Base fees. 
a.  Original permit issuance fee ..... $ 25.00 
b.  Annual permit fee after first year ..... 20.00 
c.  Reinstatement fee ..... 50.00 
(2)  Fees for false alarms. 
a.  For each false alarm in a calendar year after 2 ..... 50.00 
b.  For each false alarm in a calendar year after 5 ..... 100.00 
c.  For each false alarm in a calendar year after 7 ..... 200.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.20; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009) 
Cross reference— Burglar alarm systems, § 38-31 et seq.  
Sec. 46-75. - Athletic exhibitions, gross receipts tax. 
Any person conducting an athletic contest or exhibition shall submit to the Village Manager or designee a statement of the gross receipts of each such race, game, contest or exhibition within 1 week after such exhibition. At the same time, the person conducting, operating or sponsoring such race, game, contest, or exhibition shall pay to the Village Manager or designee a sum equal to 3 percent of the gross receipts. 
(Code 1979, § 7.04) 
Cross reference— Athletic exhibitions, § 14-121 et seq.  
Sec. 46-76. - Carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements. 
The permit fee for conducting any carnival or other amusement described in Chapter 14, Article VII, is $75.00 for processing the permit application, plus the actual cost of inspection, which shall be determined by the Village Manager. In no event shall the permit fee exceed $300.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.06) 
Cross reference— Carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements, § 14-271 et seq.  
Sec. 46-77. - Charitable soliciting. 
(a)  At the time of filing an application for a permit for charitable soliciting, a fee of $25.00 shall be paid to cover the cost of investigating the application and issuing the permit. 
(b)  The Mayor and Board of Trustees, at any regular meeting, may, upon receipt of written request by an applicant, waive the requirement for the payment of the fee. 
(Code 1979, § 7.07) 
Cross reference— Charitable solicitations, § 78-91 et seq.  
Sec. 46-78. - Foreign fire insurance companies. 
Every corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of the State to engage in providing fire insurance or to transact any business of fire insurance in the Village shall pay to the Village a sum of money equal in amount to 2 percent per annum of the gross receipts received as premiums by any and all agents of any such corporation, company, or association upon fire insurance policies issued or to be issued on any property in the Village. Such payments shall be made by July 15 for the year ending July 1 each year. 
(Code 1979, § 34.08) 
Cross reference— Foreign fire insurance companies, § 50-40.  
Sec. 46-79. - Hotels and motels, gross receipts tax. 
For the use and privilege of renting of rooms in a hotel or motel in the Village, a tax is hereby levied at a rate of seven and ½ percent (7.5%) on the gross rental receipts. Renting a residence or room in a residence for a period of less than 30 days shall be subject to this tax. 
(Code 1979, § 7.11; Ord. No. 02-5-C-3079, § 1, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 14-7-C-4077, § 1, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 4, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference— Hotel-motel tax, § 98-141 et seq.  
Sec. 46-80. - Liquor licenses. 
(a)  The fees for Class A, Class B, Class BY, Class C, Class E, Class F, Class G, Class I, Class M, Class O, Class P, P-Right, and Class T, Class W, and B/W liquor licenses shall be as follows: 
License 	Issuance 	Annual Fee: 

1 Installment 	Annual Fee: 

2 Installments 

(payable May 1 

& November 1) 
A 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	$600.00 
B 	$200.00 	$200.00 	N/A 
B/W 	$4,500.00 	$600.00 	N/A 
BY 	$200.00 	$200.00 	N/A 
C 	$200.00 	$200.00 	N/A 
E 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	$600.00 
F 	$250.00 	$250.00 	N/A 
G 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
I 	$250.00 	$250.00 	N/A 
M 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
O 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
P-Right/P 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
T 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
W 	$10,000.00 	$1,000.00 	N/A 
 
(b)  Temporary permits. The standard fee for a temporary liquor permit shall be $20.00 per day, with a minimum fee of $40.00. The escalated fee for a temporary liquor permit shall be $500.00 per day. 
(Code 1979, § 7.12; Ord. No. 05-5-C-3358, § 3, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 07-6-C-3518, § 3, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 09-4-C-3672, § 2, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 11-1-C-3814, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 12-3-C-3890, § 2, 3-19-2012; Ord. No. 12-12-C-3958, § 3, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4035, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4152, § 2, 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 17-3-C-4280, § 2, 3-20-2017) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 10.  
Sec. 46-81. - Road material recycling fee. 
Every company that operates a facility that performs road material recycling shall pay a fee of $0.50 per ton for all materials or finished products that are exported or sold from the facility. 
(Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 4, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-82. - Cannabis dispensary licenses. 
The fees for operating a cannabis dispensary for the retail sale of cannabis shall be: 
$20,000.00 for the initial license and $5,000.00 for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 19-10-C-4489, § 1, 10-7-2019)  
Secs. 46-83—46-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING PERMITS AND RELATED FEES 
 
Sec. 46-111. - Generally. 
(a)  Building permit fees, inspection fees and bond amounts shall be in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Fees for street and sidewalk work are set forth in Article V of this chapter. Fees for water and sewer connections are set forth in Article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05)  
Sec. 46-112. - Determination of estimated cost of construction. 
The Village Manager or designee, at the Village Manager's or designee's discretion, may use any one or a combination of the following procedures in determining the estimated cost of construction for computing building permit fees: 
(1)  Accept an estimate furnished to the Village Manager or designee by the applicant for the permit. 
(2)  Require a certificate of such estimated cost from a licensed architect or a registered structural or professional engineer. 
(3)  Require an affidavit from the owner or the owner's agent setting forth the estimated cost of the proposed work. 
(4)  Preparation of an estimate of cost by the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(24); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 46-113. - Building permits, new construction and additions. 
(1)  Preliminary Plan Review 
Residential ..... $100.00 plus $50.00 per unit 
Other developments ..... $100.00 plus $50.00 per 1,000 square feet 
(2)  Preliminary Site Visit ..... $50.00 per inspector 
(3)  Plan review/permit fee 
Residential ..... $200.00* plus 1.15 percent of construction costs 
Other developments ..... $500.00* plus 1.15 percent of construction costs 
*Nonrefundable deposit 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(1); Ord. No. 00-7-C-2905, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4155, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 46-114. - Building permits for interior alterations. 
(1)  Plan review fees: 
Less than 2,500 square feet ..... $ 50.00 
2,500 to 9,999 square feet ..... $100.00 
10,000 to 49,999 square feet ..... $200.00 
50,000 and over ..... $500.00 
(2)  Permit fee ..... 1.15 percent 
of construction cost 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(2); Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4155, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 46-115. - Reinspection and missed inspection fees. 
(1)  There shall be a reinspection fee of $100.00 for each inspector's site visit after the scheduled final inspection. This fee will be applicable for any inspector or agent of the Village, regardless of Village department. 
(2)  A fee for a missed Certificate of Occupancy or final Building Permit inspection or failure to cancel a scheduled inspection within 24 hours prior to the inspection shall be $100.00 for each inspector from any Village department. 
(3)  A fee for a second reinspection because a violation has not been corrected shall be $100.00. This fee will be applicable for any inspector or agent of the Village, regardless of Village department. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(3); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-116. - Certificate of completion. 
The fee for a certificate of completion shall be as follows: 
(1)  Initial issuance ..... $25.00 
(2)  Duplicate copy ..... $25.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(4); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-117. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Fees for certificates of occupancy for new businesses or nonresidential uses and changes of business ownership shall be as follows: 
(1)  Initial certificate of occupancy ..... $200.00 
(2)  Southeast Industrial Area where a business street identification sign is provided by the Village … $200.00 plus the cost of the business street identification sign. 
(3)  The following fees shall be in addition to the initial certificate of occupancy fee, based upon building size: 
Size 	Fee 
Less than 1,000 sq. ft. 	$25.00 
1,001 to 3,000 sq. ft. 	$50.00 
3,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. 	$100.00 
10,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. 	$200.00 
Over 100,000 sq. ft. 	$500.00 
 
(b)  The annual certificate of occupancy renewal fee shall be as follows: 
Size 	Fee 
Less than 1,000 sq. ft. 	$50.00 
1,001 to 3,000 sq. ft. 	$75.00 
3,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. 	$100.00 
10,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. 	$200.00 
Over 100,000 sq. ft. 	$500.00 
 
(c)  The inspection fee for a vacant building or building space to obtain a Certificate of Compliance for which a Certificate of Occupancy is no longer active shall be as indicated in subsection (a)(1) and (3) for the initial inspection and subsection (b) for the annual inspection. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(5); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 6, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-118. - Illegal work or occupancy. 
a.  The fee for a permit obtained subsequent to work being started shall be double what the cost of the permit would have been. 
b.  The fee for a certificate of occupancy obtained subsequent to the occupancy shall be double what the cost of the certificate of occupancy would have been. 
c.  Any work started without a permit, an illegal occupancy of a structure or occupancy of a structure prior to final inspection and approval shall incur a penalty of $500.00, due prior to the issuance of any certificate, license, permit or final approval. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(6); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 05-10-C-3394, § 1, 10-27-2005; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-119. - Accessory building permit. 
(1)  Preliminary Plan Review ..... $75.00 
(2)  Preliminary site visit ..... $75.00 
(3)  Plan Review/Permit Fee: 
(a)  Accessory buildings less than 150 square feet ..... $50.00 
(b)  Accessory buildings 150 square feet or over ..... $200.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(8); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-120. - Fences and wood decks. 
Fees for fences and wood decks are as follows: 
(1)  Non masonry fence ..... $50.00 
(2)  Masonry fence ..... $100.00 
(3)  Wood decks ..... $150.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(9); Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-121. - Demolition. 
(1)  Fees for demolition of nonresidential buildings or structures ..... $500.00 
Plus $0.15 per square foot of floor area for each floor. 
(2)  Fees for demolition of residential buildings or structures ..... $600.00 
Plus $50.00 for each dwelling unit. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(10); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-122. - Swimming pools. 
Fees for swimming pools are as follows: 
(1)  Private below ground ..... $200.00 
(2)  Aboveground platform type ..... 50.00 
(3)  Aboveground regular pool, 4-foot maximum ..... 25.00 
(4)  Public pools ..... 400.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(11); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 46-123. - Signs and promotion/special displays. 
Permit fees. Fees for sign permits are as follows: 
(1)  Permanent signs ..... $75.00 
(2)  Temporary signs ..... $20.00 
(3)  Marquees ..... $100.00 
(4)  Canopies or awnings with signage ..... $75.00 
(5)  Promotional/special displays 
Each 14 day period ..... $70.00 
30 days ..... $150.00 
(6)  Sandwich signs ..... $20.00 
Impound fees shall be as follows: 
a.  First offense ..... $50.00 
b.  Second offense ..... $100.00 
c.  Third offense and thereafter ..... up to $750.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(12), (13); Ord. No. 00-7-C-2905, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 82.  
Sec. 46-124. - Condominiums. 
(a)  The inspection fees for condominiums (new or conversion) are as follows: 
Condominiums (New and Conversion) 
Buildings with 1 to 6 units ..... $300.00 + $50.00/unit 
Buildings with 7 or more units ..... 600.00 + $50.00/unit 
(b)  Issuance of a Certificate of Inspection ..... $100.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(14); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Cross reference— Condominiums, § 34-31 et seq.  
Sec. 46-125. - Parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, patio, or other impermeable surfaces not in the public right-of-way. 
(a)  Preliminary Plan Review ..... $75.00 
(b)  Preliminary Site Visit ..... $75.00 
(c)  Cash bonds: 
1.  Cash bond for any project under 1,000 square feet ..... $250.00 
2.  Cash bond for any project 1,000—5,000 square feet ..... $500.00 
3.  Cash bond for any project greater than 5,000 square feet ..... $750.00 
(d)  Permit and inspection fees: 
1.  Driveway, sidewalk, patio, or other impermeable surface ..... $75.00 
plus $0.10 per square foot 
2.  Grinding and replacement of top layer of existing asphalt only or asphalt overlay ..... $50.00 
plus $0.05 per square foot 
3.  Reconstruction or replacement of an existing curb ..... $100.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(15); Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference— Fees for street and sidewalk work, § 46-161 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, § 90-31 et seq.  
Sec. 46-126. - Cash permit bonds. 
The amount of cash permit bonds (refundable less penalties) shall be as follows: 
(1)  All other construction (gross square footage of building or addition): 
0 to 2,500 square feet ..... $500.00 
2,501 to 5,000 square feet ..... 1,000.00 
5,001 to 10,000 square feet ..... 2,000.00 
10,001 to 50,000 square feet ..... 3,500.00 
50,001 to 100,000 square feet ..... 5,000.00 
Over 100,000 square feet ..... 10,000.00 
(2)  Street opening ..... 5,000.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(16); Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-127. - Plumbing permit fees. 
The fees for plumbing permits are as follows: 
(1)  Fees for water taps, water connections and water meters are set forth in Article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Additional plumbing fees are as follows: 
a.  The base permit fee shall be ..... $75.00 
b.  Supply installation, per fixture .....  10.00 
"Fixture" shall be defined as any device having either a water supply or drain connected to the plumbing system. 
c.  Hot water heater .....  50.00 
d.  Water or sewer service repair ..... 100.00 
e.  Lawn sprinklers ..... 100.00 
f.  Backflow prevention devices and assemblies installation inspection .....  50.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(18); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-11-C-4014, § 1, 11-4-2013; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-128. - Mechanical permits fees. 
Fees for mechanical permits are as follows: 
(a)  The base permit fee shall be ..... $75.00 
(b)  Heating Equipment Installation ..... $50.00 
(c)  Cooling and Refrigeration Equipment Installation ..... $50.00 
(d)  Boilers ..... $50.00 
(e)  Mechanical Exhaust ..... $10.00 
(f)  Type 1 Exhaust Hoods ..... $100.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(19); Ord. No. 00-7-C-2905, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-129. - Tank permits. 
Fee for tank permits (liquids) are as follows: 
0 to 500 gallons ..... $100.00 
Each additional 100 gallons or less ..... 20.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(20); Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-130. - Fire prevention fees. 
The fees for fire prevention are as follows: 
(1)  Fire Alarm Systems: 
a.  Single Family Systems: 
1.  Plan review ..... $75.00 
2.  Acceptance test ..... $200.00 
b.  Other systems: 
1.  New system plan review ..... $100.00 
2.  Existing system alterations 1—5 devices ..... $75.00 
3.  Acceptance test ..... $200.00 
(2)  Water based suppression system fees: 
a.  Plan review: 
1.  Single family systems ..... $100.00 
2.  Other new systems up to 100 sprinkler heads ..... $150.00 
Each additional sprinkler head ..... $1.00 
3.  Existing system alterations up to 20 sprinkler heads ..... $75.00 
Each additional sprinkler head ..... $1.00 
b.  Tests and services: 
1.  Hydrant flow test observed ..... $150.00 
2.  Hydrant flow test performed ..... $200.00 
3.  Hydrostatic test 200 psi ..... $150.00 
4.  Water main flush for new sprinkler system ..... $150.00 
5.  Fire pump and water flow annual test observed ..... $150.00 
6.  Fire pump acceptance test ..... $200.00 
7.  First riser or standpipe test ..... $100.00 
8.  Each additional riser of standpipe test ..... $50.00 
(3)  Other suppression systems: 
a.  Hood and duct system: 
1.  Plan review ..... $100.00 
2.  Acceptance test ..... $150.00 
3.  Fire alarm system plan review ..... $100.00 
4.  Fire alarm acceptance test ..... $150.00 
b.  "Puff"/hydrostatic or leak test ..... $100.00 
(4)  Elevator fire service inspection fee for fire alarm and sprinkler control system ..... $200.00 
(5)  All fees listed in items 1 through 4 are doubled if inspections or tests are performed prior to 7:30 a.m. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(21); Ord. No. 00-7-C-2905, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-131. - Electrical permit fees. 
(a)  The term "circuit," as used in the National Electrical Code, shall mean any set of branch wiring conductors which have been extended from a distribution center, and which may be utilized for the transmission of electrical energy. 
(b)  In all buildings, the permit fee for each circuit, including fixtures, sockets, or receptacles, shall be as follows: 
1 to 10, per circuit ..... $10.00 
Each additional circuit ..... $5.00 
(c)  Fees for service inspection shall be as follows: 
100 amp or less ..... $75.00 
Each additional 100 amp ..... $50.00 
(d)  The base permit fee shall be $75.00. 
(e)  The fee for fire alarms shall be $100.00. 
(f)  The fee for burglar alarms shall be $100.00 plus $50 per year. 
(g)  Fees for elevators, escalators and other lifts shall be as follows: 
(1)  Initial fees: 
Elevators/escalators ..... $200.00 
Single-family ..... 75.00 
All other installations ..... 200.00 
(2)  Semiannual reinspections: 
Elevators ..... 55.00 
Escalators (for each story) ..... 55.00 
Dock lifts ..... 25.00 
Dumbwaiters ..... 25.00 
(h)  Other electrical permit fees: 
(1)  Generators, each ..... $100.00 
(2)  Solar Panels, each array ..... $75.00 
plus $10.00 per kilowatt 
(3)  Transformers, each ..... $25.00 
(4)  Wind Generator, each ..... $75.00 
plus $10.00 per kilowatt 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(22); Ord. No. 00-7-C-2905, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-132. - Property maintenance reinspection and missed inspection fee. 
(a)  There shall be a property maintenance reinspection fee in the amount of $100.00 for each inspector's site visit after the initial site visit and one follow-up inspection for deficiencies of code violations requiring correction. 
(b)  A fee for a missed inspection or failure to cancel a scheduled inspection within 24 hours of the inspection shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 2, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-133. - Commercial inspection fees. 
(a)  Massage license establishments ..... $100.00 
(b)  Congregate living facilities ..... 100.00 
(c)  Day care homes ..... 100.00 
(d)  Adult uses ..... 100.00 
(e)  Pawnbrokers ..... 100.00 
(f)  Firearms range ..... 100.00 
(g)  Precious metals dealers ..... 100.00 
(h)  Body art establishment ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 2, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-8-C-4079, § 2, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 19-3-C-4446, § 2, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 46-134. - Contractors' surety bonds and registration fees. 
A registration fee and surety bond is required in the amount required in this section, executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State as surety on the bond, with the applicant as principal on the bond, and the Village as obligee for its benefits, and consumers dealing with the applicant, conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully perform the duties and in all things comply with all regulations, codes and ordinances of the Village as may be amended from time to time pertaining to the license or permit applied for. The aggregate liability of the surety, regardless of the number of claims made against the bond or the number of years the bond remains in force, shall in no event exceed the amount of the bond. The bond may be terminated at any time by the surety upon sending notice in writing to the Village and to the principal, and, at the expiration of 30 days from the mailing of the notice, the bond shall terminate and the surety shall thereupon be relieved from any liability for any acts or omissions of the principal subsequent to that date. By requiring and issuing such license and permit bond, the Village is making no representation as to the quality of the contractor's work. The general contractor's bond shall cover the work of all sub contractors. If there is no general contractor on the permit application, each contractor performing work must pay the registration fee and obtain a bond. 
	Fee 	Bond 
General contractor 	$100.00 	$20,000.00 
Excavator 	50.00 	10,000.00 
Cement contractor 	50.00 	10,000.00 
Mason contractor 	50.00 	10,000.00 
Carpenter 	50.00 	10,000.00 
Heating contractor 	50.00 	10,000.00 
Plumbing contractor 	State license 	State bond 
Electrical contractor 	License from a testing community 	10,000.00 
 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(23); Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; electrical contractors, § 26-581 et seq.  
Sec. 46-135. - Residential rental unit registration. 
The registration fee for a Residential Rental Unit is $25.00 per Unit. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 4, 1-6-2014)  
Sec. 46-136. - Inspection upon sale. 
The fee for Inspection Upon Sale is $50.00 for each unit. 
(Ord. No. 14-1-C-4030, § 4, 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 5, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-137. - Window permits. 
Fee for new and replacement window installation: $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 16-12-C-4262, § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 46-138. - Small wireless facility fees. 
Fees for new small wireless facilities shall be as follows: 
(a)  An application fee of $650.00 to collocate each small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure. 
(b)  An application fee of $350.00 to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. 
(c)  An application fee of $1,000.00 for each small wireless facility to be located on a new utility pole or wireless support structure. 
(d)  A rate of $200.00 per year for each small wireless facility located on a Village owned utility pole or structure in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  A fee for construction in the public right-of-way as required by Sec. 46-164 for the installation of cables required to connect wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 18-7-C-4402, § 2, 7-16-2018) 
Cross reference— Small cell antennas, § 103-1 et seq.  
Sec. 46-139. - Mounted telecom or telephone cell antennae inspection fee. 
The annual inspection fee for each mounted telecom or cell phone antenna on a private structure or building shall be $1,200.00. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4448, § 2, 4-1-2019) 
Cross reference— Mounted telecom and/or cell phone antennae annual inspection, § 22-724 et seq.  
Secs. 46-140—46-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STREET, SIDEWALK, AND RIGHT-OF-WAY WORK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fees for construction of parking areas and driveways, § 46-125; streets and sidewalks, § 90-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-161. - Permit fees for work in public right-of-way. 
(a)  Generally. The following fees shall accompany an application for a permit for work in the public right-of-way not covered by the provisions of Section 90-87(f): 
(1)  Filing fee. 
a.  Curb cuts ..... $100.00 for each curb cut 
for the purposes of reconstructing, altering or repairing the curb. 
b.  Tunneling, opening or excavation ..... $200.00. 
c.  Simultaneous work. No additional fee and only 1 permit shall be required when streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs or curb cuts are to be simultaneously constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, laid or surfaced. 
d.  Parkway opening ..... $100.00 for each opening. 
e.  Street opening ..... $200.00 per opening 
(removed from 46-125 and added here). 
(2)  Inspection, supervision and engineering fee. 
a.  The Village shall charge a fee for inspection, supervision and engineering services performed and for other emergency and non-emergency responses by Village staff, pursuant to any permit for work done in the public right-of-way, by any entity or individual, other than the Village of Skokie. 
b.  The fee shall be calculated as follows: $0.60 per inch of the facility or improvement, that is being installed, repaired or maintained, multiplied by the number of linear feet of said facility or improvement. If it is the case that no such improvement/facility is being installed or repaired, or the excavation is two (2) feet wider or more than the facility, the fee shall be determined by $0.60 per inch of the widest diameter of the opening in the public right-of-way multiplied by the number of linear feet of the actual excavation in the public right-of-way. 
c.  Facilities are to be defined as set forth in Section 90-2 of the Code including but not limited to piping, cables and drains. 
d.  Driveways ..... $0.10 per square foot for each driveway. 
e.  Sidewalk ..... $50.00 plus $0.10 per square foot. 
(Code 1979, § 7.14; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 17-5-C-4285, § 1, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 46-162. - Cash bond for sidewalks. 
A cash bond shall be paid to insure the installation or replacement of a sidewalk. The amount shall be determined on a linear foot basis. The linear foot cost shall be determined by the Public Works Department based on the current cost of sidewalk construction or replacement. The bond, less penalties, shall be refunded if the sidewalk is installed or replaced in compliance with Village Code requirements. 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(17); Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 4, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 46-163. - Charge for placement of barricades by Village. 
The charge for placement of barricades by the Village at construction or excavation sites as described in Section 90-47 is $20.00 per day per barricade.  
Sec. 46-164. - Construction in the public right-of-way. 
An application for a permit for construction in the public right-of-way, as authorized pursuant to Section 90-87(f), shall be accompanied by a fee of $550.00. If subsequent to the initial inspections and review, the Village staff is of the opinion that additional review, inspections, and/or outside engineering or other services, should such be required, said costs shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant. This fee shall be in addition to any other fees or requirements required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-3-C-3606, § 1, 3-17-2008)  
Secs. 46-165—46-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WATER AND SEWER CHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 110. 
 
Sec. 46-191. - Temporary water hook-ups. 
Fees for temporary water hook-ups are as follows: 
(1)  Temporary water hook-up to hydrant, per day ..... $10.00 
(2)  Temporary or unmetered water connections ..... $100.00 per inch size 
of water service per month 
(Code 1979, § 7.05(7); Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-192. - Water and sewer service connections. 
(a)  Sewer or water main connection application ..... $100.00 
plus $0.50 per linear foot for each service line. 
(b)  In addition to all other fees and charges for a permit to connect to any water or sewer pipe not constructed and paid for under a special assessment proceeding by property owners owning a portion of the property benefited, the applicant for the permit to connect shall pay a prorated share of the cost of constructing the water main or sewer pipe. The amount of such proration shall be determined by the Village Manager or designee. 
(c)  Fees for water taps and meters are as follows: 
(1)  Water taps. 
a.  Inspections: 
1-inch ..... $150.00 
1½-inch ..... $200.00 
2-inch ..... $250.00 
4-inch ..... $300.00 
6-inch ..... $350.00 
8-inch ..... $400.00 
(2)  Water meters. The cost of water meters shall be determined on an annual basis by the Village Manager or designee. 
(3)  Water Tap/Connection. 
1-inch ..... $375.00 
1½-inch ..... $750.00 
2-inch ..... $1,200.00 
4-inch ..... $5,200.00 
6-inch ..... $10,500.00 
8-inch ..... $15,000.00 
(Code 1979, §§ 7.05(18), 7.17; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 3, 8-17-2015; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 6, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-193. - Water rates. 
Water rates for customers of the Village water service shall be as follows: 
(1)  For service within the Village of Skokie, $45.92 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in the month of July 2019. 
(2)  For service outside the Village of Skokie, $45.92 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in the month of July 2019. 
(3)  For service within the Village of Skokie, $46.26 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in the month of August 2019. 
(4)  For service outside the Village of Skokie, $46.26 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in the month of August 2019. 
(5)  For service within the Village of Skokie, $46.61 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in the month of September 2019. 
(6)  For service outside the Village of Skokie, $46.61 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in the month of September 2019. 
(7)  For service within the Village of Skokie, $47.30 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in and after the month of October 2019. 
(8)  For service outside the Village of Skokie, $47.30 per 1,000 cubic feet for water service billed in and after the month of October 2019. 
(9)  All service billed after October 31, 2019 will be at the rate of $47.30 per 1,000 cubic feet. 
(10)  The minimum quarterly charge shall be based upon the use of 1,000 cubic feet. 
(Code 1979, § 7.181; Ord. No. 02-5-C-3080, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 03-6-C-3171, § 1, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3270, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 05-6-C-3361, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 08-6-C-3622, § 1, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 09-6-C-3684, § 1, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 10-6-C-3770, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 12-7-C-3916, § 1, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-6-C-3983, § 1, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 14-7-C-4072, § 1, 7-7-2014; Ord. No. 15-7-C-4154, § 1, 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4235, § 1, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 17-8-C-4313, § 1, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 18-7-C-4394, § 1, 7-16-2018; Ord. No. 19-7-C-4473, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 46-194. - Sewer charges. 
Sewer charges for customers of the Village sewer facilities shall be as set forth in Section 110-53. Such sewer charges shall be included in the water charges as set forth in Section 46-193 and shall not be assessed separately. 
(Code 1979, § 7.182)  
Sec. 46-195. - Fee for turning on water after service has been shut off. 
Whenever water supply has been shut off in accordance with any provision of this Code, such water supply shall not be turned on except upon payment of a $50.00 fee for turning on the water before 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and a $50.00 fee for turning on the water after 5:00 p.m. on weekdays or on weekends and legal holidays. 
(Code 1979, § 7.183; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 46-196. - Charges for air conditioning equipment. 
The permit fee for installation of air conditioning equipment shall be $1.00 per ton of installed capacity of the system. The annual demand charge for any such air conditioning system of over 5 tons capacity installed prior to May 25, 1965, shall be $20.00 per ton of capacity for the total tons of capacity over and above 5 tons, unless the use of water from the Village mains for such system shall be limited to a maximum of 0.2 gallon per minute per ton of capacity. This demand charge is in addition to the regular charges for water use. 
(Code 1979, § 7.184)  
Secs. 46-197—46-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 106; vehicles for hire, ch. 114. 
 
Sec. 46-221. - Motor vehicle licenses. 
(a)  License fees. The annual fees for motor vehicle licenses issued under Article III of Chapter 106 shall be as follows: 
(1)  For any motor bicycle, motorscooter or motorcycle, or moped, the fee shall be $20.00. 
(2)  For any passenger automobile or any vehicle bearing the State classification of "RV," the fee shall be $40.00. 
(3)  For any trailer which is designed to be towed by a passenger vehicle, the fee shall be $20.00, which shall be paid by the owner thereof. 
(4)  For any motor vehicle licensed by the State under a dealer's registration plate and operating upon the public highways of this State, the fee shall be $40.00. 
(5)  For any vehicle or bus used in the transportation of persons for hire in the Village in regular scheduled service, or using any loading or unloading zone or space provided for the loading or unloading of persons within the Village, pursuant to a certificate of convenience and necessity granted by the Illinois Commerce Commission, under the jurisdiction of any nonresident transportation company, there shall be no license fee. 
(6)  For any motor vehicle owned and operated by any park, school district, educational institution or other municipal corporation within the Village, there shall be no license fee. 
(7)  For any motor bus or vehicle of a resident private carrier for hire, if used exclusively as a school bus for any school district, or religious, eleemosynary or denominational institution, which is neither owned nor operated by such district or institution, the fee shall be $1.00. 
(8)  Every motor truck, trailer or semi-trailer designed for the carrying of loads shall be classified as to gross, tare and net weights. Such classification shall be identified by the prefix letter on the plate furnished by the Illinois Secretary of State, and the license fees for such vehicles shall be as follows: 
SCHEDULE OF TRUCK FEES 
Classification 	Gross Weight, Including Vehicle and Maximum Load (pounds) 	Fee 
B 	8,000 and less 	$40.00 
D 	8,001 to 12,000 	$57.50 
F 	12,001 to 16,000 	$66.25 
H, TH, J, TJ, K, TK, L, TL, N, TN 	16,001 to 40,000 	$75.00 
P, TZ, Q, TQ, R, TR, S, TS, T, TT, V, TV, X, TX, Z, TZ 	40,001 to 80,000 	$105.00 
TA 	3,000 or less 	$31.25 
TB, TC, TD, TE 	3,001 to 14,000 	$35.00 
TG, TK, TL, TN 	14,001 to 46,000 	$60.00 
 
(9)  A self-propelled vehicle operated as a tractor and 1 semi-trailer shall be considered as 1 vehicle in computing the license fee under this section. Additional semi-trailers to be used with such tractor shall be licensed at an annual fee of $10.00. 
(10)  There shall be no vehicle license fee charged for any vehicle with respect to which the State has granted an absolute or partial exemption from the State license fee requirements. 
(11)  The fee for vehicles not specified in this section shall be $15.00. 
(12)  License fees shall be increased by 50% of the fee required for the applicable license if the license is purchased after August 31 as to annual fees, and after December 31 as to semiannual fees. There shall be no increase in the stipulated fees, however, if application for a license is made within 30 days after the applicant has acquired title to such vehicle. The payment of any fee shall not exempt any person from any other penalties imposed for the operation of a motor vehicle without the display of a proper license. 
(13)  All motor vehicle licenses purchased electronically, (either by the Village's website or through Village designated third party vendors, as maybe utilized from time to time), shall receive a discount of $5.00 if purchased prior to the date set forth in Section 106-157. 
(b)  Proration of fees. Except for motor bicycles, motorscooters, and motorcycles, vehicles of auto dealers and school buses, the annual license fee for a motor vehicle shall be reduced by 50 percent if the applicant became the owner of the motor vehicle or a resident of the Village after December 31 of any year. 
(c)  Transfer of license to newly acquired vehicle. When an owner disposes of a vehicle, the owner may transfer the license to a newly acquired vehicle upon payment of a $5.00 fee. 
(d)  New residents. Where an owner having a vehicle registered in another Illinois municipality becomes a resident of the Village, the owner may purchase a current vehicle license for a fee of $5.00. 
(e)  Duplicate license. A duplicate license to replace a lost or stolen license may be purchased for a fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.13; Ord. No. 06-4-C-3428, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4066, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 7, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicle licenses, § 106-151 et seq.  
Sec. 46-222. - Permit for excess size and weight. 
The permit fee under Section 106-54 for a permit to move a vehicle of excess size and weight is $10.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.163)  
Sec. 46-223. - Installation of signs for curb loading zones and no parking zones. 
The fee under Section 106-101 for the privilege of designating a curb loading zone or no parking zone on the street in front of any building is $30.00 per sign for the first year and $20.00 per sign for each year thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 7.162)  
Sec. 46-224. - Installation of signs for reserved parking for disabled persons. 
The fee for installation of signs designating reserved parking for disabled persons under Section 106-111 is $30.00 for each sign. The annual renewal fee is $20.00 for each sign. 
(Code 1979, § 7.164)  
Sec. 46-225. - Installation of fire lane signs. 
The installation fee for fire lane signs is $30.00 for each sign. The annual maintenance fee is $20.00 for each sign. 
(Code 1979, § 7.167; Ord. No. 01-7-C-3001, § 4, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 46-226. - Residential street parking permit fee. 
The fee for a residential street parking permit issued pursuant to Section 106-110 is $2.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.165)  
Sec. 46-227. - Residential parking lot permit fee. 
The parking lot permit fee under Section 106-103(h) shall be $120.00 for each vehicle, commencing May 1, 1990, annually, and the fee shall be payable in semiannual installments on January 1 and July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1979, § 7.166)  
Sec. 46-228. - Fee for parking in Skokie Swift parking lots. 
The fee for parking in the Skokie Swift parking lot which is contiguous to the Swift Station and south of Dempster Street (the "South Lot") under Section 106-103(g) is $3.00. The fee for parking in the Skokie Swift Lot north of Dempster Street (the "North Lot") under Section 106-103(g) is $2.00. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to promulgate rules with regard to these properties. 
(Code 1979, § 7.161; Ord. No. 03-7-C-3191, § 1, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3658, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 12-9-C-3936, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Sec. 46-229. - Public passenger vehicles. 
The following fees shall be paid to the Village with respect to public passenger vehicles: 
(1)  Application for certificate of public convenience and necessity, filing fee ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  Annual license fee: 
a.  Public passenger vehicle business license ..... 100.00 
b.  Public passenger vehicle license ..... 75.00 
(3)  Chauffeur's license: 
a.  Original application fee ..... 40.00 
b.  Annual fee, after first year ..... 40.00 
(Code 1979, § 7.15; Ord. No. 00-1-C-2872; Ord. No. 06-1-C-3407, § 1, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011) 
Cross reference— Public passenger vehicles, § 114-31 et seq.  
Sec. 46-230. - Vehicle immobilization administrative and removal fee. 
The fee for the administration and removal of a vehicle immobilization device under Section 106-138 or Section 106-158 is $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3103, § 1, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 1, 4-7-2008)  
Secs. 46-231—46-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNING AND ZONING FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 118. 
 
Sec. 46-251. - Plan Commission filing fees. 
The following fees shall be paid to the Village as filing fees with all applications filed with the Plan Commission: 
(1)  Special use permit: 
a.  Residential: 
1.  Day care homes ..... $100.00 
2.  All others ..... 250.00 
b.  Nonresidential ..... 400.00 
With a drive-through, for each lane ..... 400.00 
(2)  Zoning Chapter amendment ..... 400.00 
(3)  Rezoning ..... 400.00 
(4)  Subdivision or consolidation: 
a.  Residential: 
1.  Less than or equal to 5 lots, per lot ..... 100.00 
2.  More than 5 lots ..... 600.00 
b.  Nonresidential ..... 600.00 
(5)  Street or alley vacation: 
a.  Residential ..... 150.00 
Plus cost of appraisals. 
b.  Nonresidential ..... 300.00 
Plus cost of appraisals. 
(6)  Planned unit development or site plan approval in residential districts: 
a.  Residential: $2,500.00 plus $40.00 per unit. 
b.  Nonresidential: $2,500.00 plus $0.03 per square foot. 
(7)  Planned unit development or site plan approval in nonresidential districts: $2,500 + 0.03 per square foot. 
(8)  Each item of relief requested from zoning requirements of the Village Code on planned unit developments, site plan approval, or special use requests: $400.00 
(9)  Case continuation: 50% of original fee, if requested by or due to petitioner's lack of preparation. 
(10)  Parking determination: $400.00. 
(11)  Modified review procedure: $400.00. 
(12)  Transcript fee for all Plan Commission cases: Balance in excess of $100.00. 
(13)  18 month extension of special use permit or site plan approval in Section 118-32(d)(3): $400.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.23; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 8, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-252. - Zoning Board of Appeals filing fees. 
The following fees shall be paid to the Village as filing fees with all applications filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals: 
(1)  Variances: $400.00. 
(2)  Case continuation: 50% of original fee, if requested by or due to petitioner's lack of preparation. 
(3)  Transcript fee. The transcript fee for all Zoning Board of Appeals cases shall be based on the actual cost to the Village. The fee charged to the petitioner shall be the balance in excess of $100.00. 
(Code 1979, § 7.24; Ord. No. 06-6-C-3442, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 13-12-C-4024, § 1, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 8, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 46-253. - Miscellaneous fees. 
The following fees shall be paid to the Village: 
(1)  Appeals of interpretations and administrative decisions of the Zoning Official ..... $400.00 
(2)  Appeals of decisions of the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals ..... $400.00 
(3)  Zoning verification letter ..... $200.00 
(Ord. No. 09-11-C-2009, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-12-C-4024, § 1, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 8, 2-19-2019)  
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire Department, § 2-321 et seq.; compliance with building and fire codes for carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements, § 14-279; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; gasoline price signs, § 26-1430; emergency services, ch. 38; fireworks, § 70-211 et seq. 
Federal law references— Fire prevention and control, 15 U.S.C.A. § 2201 et seq.; hazardous substances, 15 U.S.C.A. § 1261 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal fire protection, 65 ILCS 5/11-6-1 et seq.; fire safety regulations, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-1 et seq.; Fire Protection District Act, 70 ILCS 705/0.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Damaging or interfering with Village equipment; taking saved property in possession of Fire Department. 
(a)  Damaging fire apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to willfully destroy, injure or deface any engine or other fire apparatus or equipment belonging to the Village. 
(b)  Taking saved property. It shall be unlawful for any person to take away any property in the possession of the Fire Department saved from any fire until proof of ownership shall be made to the satisfaction of the Village Manager or designee at the fire. 
(c)  Interference with alarm system. It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any emergency alarm pull box or call 911 for a purpose other than reporting an emergency matter to the Fire Department or Police Department, or break, cut, injure, deface, damage, or in any manner meddle or interfere with any emergency alarm box or any municipal electric wires, poles, conduits or apparatus whatever. 
(d)  Taking water from hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the members of the Fire Department for the uses and purposes of such Department, and those specially authorized by the Village Manager or designee, to open any public fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the any public fire hydrant. 
(e)  Damaging or interfering with hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure or interfere with any of the public fire hydrants in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 5.08) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage of firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.1.  
Sec. 50-2. - Entering fire station or other Fire Department facilities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter a Fire Department station or stations, or any place where the equipment and apparatus of the Fire Department are stored, at any time, except on business pertaining to the Fire Department or other Village business, unless authorized by the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 5.09)  
Sec. 50-3. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false alarm of fire or other emergency to any police or fire station or officer, or to the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 5.11) 
State Law reference— False alarm of fire, 720 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.  
Secs. 50-4—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 50-31. - International Fire Code (IFC) and National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code adopted. 
(a)  A fire prevention code is hereby established to provide the Village with rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire hazards, to regulate the installation, use, and maintenance of equipment, to regulate the use of structures, premises, and open areas, to provide for the abatement of fire hazards, to establish the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement, and to set the standards for compliance and achievement of these objectives. 
(b)  Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, hereinafter referred to as the "IFC" published and modified by the International Code Council (ICC), as the fire prevention code, excepting those provisions that are modified or deleted as provided in this Article. 
(c)  Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the Life Safety Code, 2012 edition, hereinafter referred to as the "LSC" published and modified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
(Code 1979, § 34.01; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3305, § 1, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3613, § 2, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 4, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 4, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, changed the title of § 50-31 from "NFPA Fire Prevention Code adopted" to read as set out herein. 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.; incorporation by reference of certain construction regulations, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.  
Sec. 50-32. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the Fire Chief and the Chief's subordinate officers. 
(b)  The Fire Chief shall detail such members of the Fire Department as fire inspectors as may be necessary. The Fire Chief may recommend to the Village Manager the employment of technical inspectors. 
(c)  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall mean the Village of Skokie. 
(Code 1979, § 34.02)  
Sec. 50-33. - District limits for bulk storage of flammable liquids or liquified petroleum gas. 
The fire prevention code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  The limits referred to in Standard 30, Chapter 4, of the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk plants where flammable liquids are stored are prohibited, are subject to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(2)  The limits referred to in Standard 58, Chapter 3, of the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of liquified petroleum gas is restricted, are subject to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(Code 1979, § 34.03; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3305, § 2, 10-4-2004)  
Sec. 50-34. - Appeals. 
(a)  If a person in good faith believes that any notice given by the Fire Chief as provided in this Code is without merit or if the Fire Chief shall disapprove an application for a license or permit, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongfully interpreted, the person aggrieved thereby may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief to the Mayor and Board of Trustees within 3 days from the date of such notice. 
(b)  The appeal shall be in the form of a written petition, an original and 3 copies of which shall be filed with the Village Manager, who shall notify the Mayor and the Board of Trustees thereof, and the Manager shall set the hearing of the appeal for the meeting date of the Mayor and Board of Trustees next following the receipt of the appeal. 
(c)  The appeal shall set forth in detail the nature of the petitioner's grievance and in what respect the notice, disapproval, or decision of the Fire Chief is without merit or erroneous, and it shall be verified upon the oath or affirmation of the petitioner. 
(d)  The appeal shall operate to stay all court proceedings pending the decision of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, which shall be rendered not later than the date of the next meeting of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, following the hearing of the appeal. 
(e)  The failure to appeal shall render the action of the Fire Chief as final. 
(Code 1979, § 34.04)  
Sec. 50-35. - Determination of new materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The Fire Chief shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in the Fire Chief's office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1979, § 34.05)  
Sec. 50-36. - Inspections for fire hazards. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief or a designated subordinate, upon the own initiative of the Fire Chief or designee, or when requested by any citizen, when it appears that there may exist in any building or place of employment a fire hazard or a condition which will impede escape from a fire or the prompt extinguishment of a fire, or any condition in violation of the fire prevention code, to make a personal examination of such building or place, and, if such condition or representation is found to be true, to give notice in writing personally or by registered U.S. mail to the owner or person in possession and control of such building or place to promptly make such changes, alterations or repairs as the public safety and ordinances of the Village may require. If no person is found upon the premises, the notice may be affixed in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance door to the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 34.15) 
Cross reference— Duty of Fire Chief to inspect for fire hazards, § 2-325(5).  
Sec. 50-37. - Penalty for failure to correct fire hazard. 
Any owner, or agent, employee or officer thereof, or person in possession or control of building or place mentioned in Section 50-36, who shall refuse or neglect to make such changes, alterations or repairs within a period of 5 days after the date of such notice, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 34.15)  
Sec. 50-38. - Standards for fire extinguishers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Service, where used in reference to fire extinguishers, means the inspection, repair, recharging or testing of fire extinguishers. 
Serviceperson means a person licensed by the Village to inspect, repair, recharge or test fire extinguishers. 
Standard fire extinguisher means a portable fire extinguisher which bears the label of approval of a national testing laboratory acceptable to the Fire Chief. 
(b)  Tags. Every standard fire extinguisher shall have attached thereto a tag or other label approved by the Fire Chief which clearly indicates the dates of inspection and recharging. The tag or label shall have clearly imprinted thereon in numerals no less than ½ inch in height the year for which it is issued. 
(c)  Servicing. Fire extinguishers more than 1 year past the service date are in violation of this section. Pressurized extinguishers must be hydrostratically tested as prescribed in current NFPA standards. 
(Code 1979, § 34.06)  
Sec. 50-39. - Fire extinguisher servicers. 
(a)  License required. No person shall engage in the business of servicing fire extinguishers unless having first obtained a license as provided in this section. 
(b)  Application for license. 
(1)  Applications for licenses under this section shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(2)  Every application shall be accompanied by 2 1-inch by 1-inch prints of a photograph of the applicant. 
(c)  Approval of applicant for license. The Village Manager or designee shall pass on the qualifications of applicants desiring to be licensed as fire extinguisher service persons. 
(d)  Issuance of license; insurance. A license shall be granted to all qualified applicants who shall have passed such examination and who shall have delivered evidence of the existence of a public liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company of national standing, insuring the public in an amount determined by the Village Manager or designee against property damage caused by the negligence of such applicant in servicing fire extinguishers. The insurance coverage shall include both manufacturers and contractors liability and products liability types. 
(e)  License fee; term. Upon payment of the license fee set forth in Section 46-73, a license shall be issued. Such license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(f)  Renewal of license. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year issued. Any such license may be renewed upon payment of the annual fee. Any change of address of the licensee shall be reported to the Village Manager or designee. 
(g)  Inspection of fire extinguishers; authority to establish additional regulations. The Fire Chief, in the discretion of the Fire Chief, may make or cause to be made an inspection of the contents and working condition of any fire extinguisher, and may promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations as deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 34.07) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26.  
Sec. 50-40. - Foreign fire insurance companies. 
(a)  Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of the State to engage in providing fire insurance or to transact any business of fire insurance in the Village without having fully complied with the provisions of this section; provided, however, that the failure to comply shall not relieve any insurer from the payment of any loss upon any risk that may be taken while in default or violation of this section. 
(b)  Fee imposed. Every such corporation, company, or association shall pay to the Village a fee as provided in Section 46-78. 
(c)  Report of premiums; payment of fee. Every person acting as a representative for or on behalf of any such corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the Village Manager or designee a full, true and just account, verified by oath, of all premiums which have been received by such person for and on behalf of the corporation, company, or association during each year ending the preceding July 1 on such fire insurance policies. Failure to furnish such account or pay the sum due by July 15 shall constitute a default of the provisions of this section, in consequence of which it shall be unlawful for any corporation, company, or association, so in default, to transact any business in the Village, directly or indirectly, until the account is furnished or the sum due is fully paid. The filing of reports and the payment of fees in accordance with this section may, at the direction or concurrence of the Village, be done by another agency, subject to all conditions and provisions of this section. 
(d)  Recovery of unpaid fees. The sum of money due shall be recoverable from the corporation, company, or association which owes it, or from its agent, by an action in the same name for the use of the Village, together with its costs in that behalf expended, as for money had and received. 
(e)  Penalty. In addition to any other remedy provided in this Code, if any corporation, company, or association required by this section fails to file a report as set forth in subsection (c) of this section by the specified date, or if the amount shown to be due by such report is unpaid after the day limited for the payment thereof as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, every such defaulting or delinquent corporation, company, or association shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1979, § 34.08) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; foreign fire insurance company fees, § 46-78. 
State Law reference— Foreign fire insurance company fees, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 50-41. - Automobile service stations. 
(a)  License. It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate an automobile service station in the Village without a license therefor. The license fee shall be as set forth in Section 46-3. No such license shall be issued unless the location and equipment to be used fully comply with the ordinances of the Village. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile service station means a building or premises used for the storage and sale at retail of motor vehicle fuels, lubricating oil and grease, tires, batteries and similar automobile accessories and parts. Automobile service, including minor repairs and adjustments, shall be permitted within closed premises. 
(c)  Non-business filling stations. Any person maintaining or operating any storage tank for gasoline for the use of the automobiles of the owner, lessee, employees or agents of such person shall comply with all of the provisions of this section, other than the requirement for the payment of a fee. 
(d)  Bulk sale prohibited. No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any service station except into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, when such tanks are connected with the carburetion systems of such vehicles. However, individual sales up to 5 gallons may be made in metal receptacles when painted red and labeled in full conformity with the Illinois Red Can Gasoline Law, 430 ILCS 20/1, such individual sales to be limited to 5 gallons to any 1 person. 
(e)  Operation and safety requirements. 
(1)  No fuel tank of any motor vehicle shall be serviced until the motor and ignition have been shut off. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lit cigarette, cigar or pipe on the premises at any time except as follows: The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's authorized subordinate shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure or place, in which smoking may be permitted. The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's authorized subordinate is empowered to order the owner or occupant to post no smoking signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to refuse to install any legally required no smoking signs or for any person to remove such signs. 
(3)  No open lights or flame shall be permitted except within a stove within the station building. 
(4)  Premises shall be kept clean and neat, free from litter or trash. Covered receptacles for litter and trash shall be provided and maintained on pump islands and in accessible points on the premises. 
(5)  Cleaning with gasoline, naphtha or other highly flammable liquids of Class I and Class II shall not be permitted in or around a service station. 
(6)  Waste oil or other flammable liquids shall be stored in tanks approved by the Fire Chief pending removal from the premises. No such waste shall be permitted to drain into any sewer or drainage system. Rags and soiled waste shall be kept in approved metal containers with self-closing covers. 
(7)  No wrecked, junked or stripped vehicles, or vehicles without current license plates, or vehicles for sale, shall be maintained or stored on the premises. 
(8)  Motor rebuilding, body repairs and painting are not permitted on service station premises. All major repairs shall be effected within an enclosure approved by the Fire Chief or designee provided within the service station building. Vehicles, preparatory to being serviced as set forth in this subsection, shall not be permitted to be left standing upon any public highway or sidewalk or other area not within the legal confines of the service station. 
(9)  Restrooms shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition subject to recurring inspection and approval by a Village inspector. 
(10)  Each service station shall be equipped with at least 1 fire extinguisher suitable for oil and gasoline fires. 
(f)  Regulations adopted. The rules and regulations relating to service stations (revised March 6, 1963) adopted by the Department of Public Safety are incorporated in this section by reference, and such provisions shall be controlling where the subject matter is not otherwise dealt with in this Code. 
(g)  Approval of plans. Drawings or blueprints, made to scale, shall be submitted in triplicate to the Village Manager or designee before any new construction, addition or remodeling is undertaken. Drawings shall carry the name of the person proposing the installation, and the location, and shall, in addition, show and conform to the following: 
(1)  The plot to be utilized, and its immediate surroundings on all sides, shall be shown. All property lines shall be designated and adjacent streets and highways shall be named. 
(2)  The complete installation as proposed, including tanks and their capacity, pumps, buildings, drivers and all equipment, shall be shown. 
(3)  Clearance from tanks to property lines shall be shown. 
(4)  The type of construction of the service station building or buildings shall be shown, with a clear drawing or blueprint showing that there will be no basement, cellar, or excavation under any portion. 
(5)  The location of basements, cellars or pits of other buildings on the property, or on adjacent property, and the location of tanks with reference thereto, as provided in this section, shall be shown. If a building has no basement, cellar, or pit, a note shall be made to that effect. 
(6)  The location of sewers, manholes, catchbasins, cesspools, septic tanks, wells or cisterns (whether on the property, or adjacent property, or in adjoining streets, highways or alleys), and the location of tanks with reference thereto, shall be shown. If there is no sewer, manhole or catchbasin in a street or alley, or no sewer, manhole, or cesspool, septic tank, well or cistern on the property, a notation shall be made to that effect in the proper place. 
(7)  The location of vent pipe outlets and the location of fill pipes shall be shown. 
(8)  The ventilation of greasing pits, if the greasing pit is located within a building or enclosure, shall be shown. 
(9)  Drawings shall be accompanied by an application made available by the Village. 
(10)  Drawings shall be approved by the State Fire Marshal before being considered by the Village. 
(11)  The location and type of light fixture and height of any light fixture to be used for illuminating any outside area shall be shown. 
(Code 1979, § 34.09; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; gasoline price signs, § 26-1430.  
Sec. 50-42. - Underground tanks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proper disposal of underground tanks. If a tank is to be disposed of as junk, it shall be retested for flammable vapors, and, if necessary, rendered gas-free (so that vapors from the combustible or flammable liquid from the tank are not present in a concentration sufficient to support combustion). After junking and before releasing to a junk dealer, a sufficient number of holes or openings (at least 2 percent of the total surface area of the tank) should be made in it to render it unfit for further use. NFPA 327, Standard Procedures for Cleaning or Safeguarding Small Tanks and Containers, provides information on safe procedures for such operation. 
Proper removal of an underground tank means that: 
(1)  All flammable or combustible liquids from the tank and from connecting lines are removed. 
(2)  Piping is disconnected at all tank openings. 
(3)  Sections of connecting lines which are not to be used further are removed, and all tank openings are capped or plugged. 
(4)  Tanks are removed from the ground. 
(5)  After removal, the tank shall be gas-free (so that vapors from the combustible or flammable liquid from the tank are not present in a concentration sufficient to support combustion) on the premises as required by NFPA 327, or the tank may be transported to an area not accessible to the public and the gas-freeing completed at that location. 
(6)  Adherence to the regulations of the Office of the State Fire Marshal, Title 41, Chapter 430, Act 15/2, Regulation of Tanks, as well as any other applicable State and federal regulations, is required. 
Properly safeguarding an underground tank means that: 
(1)  All products are removed. 
(2)  The tank is filled with a solution of water and inerting chemicals to reduce the oxygen content in the enclosed space to a concentration at which combustion cannot take place. 
(3)  All fill, gauge, suction or other lines, except vents, are capped. 
(4)  Adherence to the regulations of the Office of the State Fire Marshal, Title 41, Chapter 430, Act 15/2, Regulation of Tanks, as well as any other applicable State and federal regulations, is required. 
Underground tanks means underground storage tanks which are used for the storage of motor fuel or other combustible or flammable liquids. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance. 
(1)  Any underground tanks which are out of service for 180 days and have not been properly safeguarded are considered dangerous and unsafe and are hereby declared a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit such tanks thereon. 
(2)  Any out-of-service underground storage tanks which were previously filled with an inert solid material shall be removed as part of any new construction or substantial remodeling. 
(c)  Notice of violation; abatement by Village. If a property owner violates any part of this section, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's agent shall send by certified mail a notice of such violation to such person, informing the person of the violation and that such violation must be abated within 10 days from the time of mailing the notice. If the violation is not abated within the 10-day period, the Village, through its agent, shall enter upon the property where the underground tanks are located and shall proceed to properly safeguard the underground tanks with an inert solid material. Any expense incurred by the Village in safeguarding the tanks shall be a charge against the property owner, and such charge may be recovered in an appropriate action in law instituted by the Corporation Counsel. In addition thereto, the Village may create a lien against the property involved. 
(d)  Lien for costs of abatement by Village. Any costs incurred by the Village or its duly appointed officers or agents in safeguarding underground tanks shall be a lien upon the real estate so affected, and the lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, provided that, within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the Village, or the person performing the service by authority of the Village, in its or such person's own name, files notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (i) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, (ii) the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and (iii) the date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by the Village or one acting under its direction and authority. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(Code 1979, § 34.10) 
State Law reference— Gasoline Storage Act, 430 ILCS 15/1 et seq.  
Sec. 50-43. - Bonfires; Prairie burns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire anywhere in the Village except, a bonfire that is: 
(1)  Performed in connection with an event sponsored by a governmental entity, or a unit thereof; and 
(2)  Approved by the Village Manager or his designee; and 
(3)  Complies with all rules and regulations of the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board; and 
(4)  Is conducted under the supervision of the Fire Chief or designee. 
(b)  Controlled prairie burns, for environmental restoration or remediation is permitted in the Village, only if; 
(1)  Authorization is granted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, in accordance with its rules and regulations; and 
(2)  Approval is granted by the Village Manager or designee and is conducted under the supervision of the Fire Chief or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 34.11; Ord. No. 03-12-C-3238, § 1, 12-15-2003)  
Sec. 50-44. - Open burning prohibited; Exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to burn or cause the burning at any location within the Village, of any paper, cardboard, leaves, twigs, branches, wood, grass, grass clippings, landscape waste, or other combustible materials of any nature whatsoever, except the following: 
(a)  Burning any combustible materials wholly within a building, in a designated fireplace or facility designed and constructed for such purpose, provided that any refuse burning incinerator installed in any residence building shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Burning is permitted in an outdoor fireplace or cooking unit, only if: 
1.  The fuel used is charcoal, propane gas, dry, seasoned firewood or commercial fire logs; and 
2.  The fireplace or cooking unit is raised above ground level; and 
3.  The fireplace or cooking unit, is constructed of noncombustible brick, stone, or metal materials, and is commercially designed for outdoor fire or cooking and is maintained is good working order; and 
4.  The fireplace or cooking unit, if moveable, is placed on a noncombustible surface during use and is maintained at a safe and reasonable distance from any combustible material; and 
5.  The fireplace or cooking unit is directly attended by and under the supervision of an adult, at all times during use; and 
6.  The fire shall be entirely extinguished prior to leaving the fireplace or cooking unit unattended. 
(Code 1979, § 34.12; Ord. No. 03-12-C-3238, § 2, 2003) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86.  
Sec. 50-45. - Storage of combustible refuse. 
It is unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard. 
(Code 1979, § 34.13)  
Sec. 50-46. - Negligently setting fire in hotel or other place of abode. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any hotel, roominghouse, motel, nursing home, hospital, child care facility, or similar place of abode, through carelessness or negligence, to set fire to, or cause the burning of, any bedding, furniture, rug, curtain, drape, or other house or household furnishings or fittings or any other part of such hotel, roominghouse, motel, nursing home, hospital, child care facility, or similar place of abode, in such manner as to endanger the safety of any person or property. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any such place to place a printed copy of this section in a prominent place in each room of such place. 
(Code 1979, § 34.14)  
Sec. 50-47. - Lock box system. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous substance means a substance for which an occupational safety and health standard has been adopted under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 84 Stat. 1590, 29 U.S.C.A. § 651, as amended, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto; or a mixture of substances that contains any substance listed in such Act in a quantity that constitutes more than 1 percent of the composition or volume of the mixture. 
Lock box means heavy steel box fitted with a Level 3 locking device that requires a key that cannot be duplicated by a locksmith. 
(b)  Lock box system required for certain buildings. All premises required by the Village Code to provide fire detection or fire extinguishing systems, with the exception of residential property, or premises in which hazardous substances are used or stored, shall be required to have a lock box installed on the premises. 
(c)  Lock box authorized for residential units. Lock boxes are authorized, but not required for any legal residential unit in the Village. Property management companies and property owners of multifamily properties shall not prohibit or deter the use of Lock boxes. Condominium Associations shall allow the use and installation of Lock boxes if so desired by the individual unit owner or tenant. 
(1)  Residential Lock boxes are to be installed on the front door of an individual residential unit to provide access during an emergency response by the Skokie Fire Department. 
(2)  The Lock box shall contain a key to the door upon which it is mounted. 
(d)  Authorization of installation; waiver and indemnification agreement. 
(1)  Prior to the installation of any lock box, approval for the location and utilization must be obtained from the Village Manager or designee. The owner or occupant of the premises must provide the Village Manager or designee with a completed application including authorization form for the Village's utilization of the lock box. 
(2)  An executed waiver and indemnification agreement, on a form provided by the Village shall be submitted with the authorization form by the owner or occupant. 
(e)  Contents of lock boxes referred to in Section 50-47(b) shall include the following as appropriate: 
(1)  Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings. 
(2)  Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms. 
(3)  Keys to locked electrical rooms. 
(4)  Keys to elevator controls. 
(5)  Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Official. 
(6)  A list of all hazardous substances and information sheets on these substances. 
(7)  Any other valuable information such as floor plans, protection systems, HVAC drawings, utilities access, etc., which could be requested by the Fire Department for its overall approach to a fire emergency. 
(f)  Access to lock box. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises to keep the contents of the lock box required in subsection (e) of this section up to date. If it is necessary for the owner or occupant of the premises to access the lock box for the purpose of updating its contents, the owner or occupant shall contact the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee shall have the only key to access the lock box and shall be present when the lock box is accessed. 
(g)  Authority to establish additional regulations. The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 34.16; Ord. No. 04-10-C-3305, § 3, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 10-12-C-3806, § 1, 12-6-2010) 
Federal law reference— Hazardous Substances Act, 15 U.S.C.A. § 1261 et seq. 
State Law reference— Uniform Hazardous Substances Act, 430 ILCS 35/1 et seq.  
Sec. 50-48. - Cleanup of deposits of hazardous materials. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous materials means any substance or material in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's authorized representative, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include but not be limited to such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables or corrosives. 
(b)  Cleanup and abatement authorized. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to order the cleanup, or abatement of the effects, of any hazardous materials. 
(c)  Liability for costs of cleanup or abatement. Any person or persons who intentionally or negligently cause such deposits shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred as a result of such cleanup or abatement, including but not limited to actual labor costs of Village personnel (including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead), costs of equipment operation and materials obtained directly by the Village, and other costs, including attorneys' fees, incurred as a result of a contract by the Village for labor, material and removal. However, the authority to recover costs under this section shall not include costs of actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the Fire Department. 
(d)  Lien for costs incurred by Village. 
(1)  Any costs incurred by the Village, or its duly appointed officers or agents, in cleaning up or abating the effects of such deposits pursuant to this section shall be a lien upon the real estate so affected, and the lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, provided that, within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the Village, or person performing the service by authority of the Village, in its or such person's own name, files notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (i) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, (ii) the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and (iii) the date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by the Village or one acting under its direction and authority. However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to such cleanup or abatement and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to the affected real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(2)  The cost of the cleanup and abatement shall not be a lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or sent after the cleanup or abatement of such deposits on the property. The notice shall contain a copy of this section and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, and shall identify the affected real estate, by common description and the location of the hazardous materials. 
(e)  Remedies additional to other remedies and penalties. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by law. 
(Code 1979, § 34.17) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42. 
Federal law reference— Hazardous Substances Act, 15 U.S.C.A. § 1261 et seq. 
State Law reference— Uniform Hazardous Substances Act, 430 ILCS 35/1 et seq.  
Sec. 50-49. - Privately owned fire hydrants. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful to have a privately owned fire hydrant which is in violation of this section. 
(b)  Application for approval. All owners of private fire hydrants shall apply to the Village Manager or designee for installation approval and inspections of the fire hydrant. Applications shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. In every application for a privately owned fire hydrant, the applicant shall agree to the following: 
(1)  That any and all costs related to the installation and maintenance or removal of the privately owned fire hydrant shall be incurred by the applicant. 
(2)  That the privileges granted to the applicant are nontransferable and shall only apply to the fire hydrant specified in the respective application. 
(3)  That the applicant shall name the Village as an additional insured from any loss or claim for personal injury or property damage alleged against the Village or the applicant, arising out of the installation, removal, existence, use or maintenance of the fire hydrant. 
(4)  That the applicant agrees and covenants to forever hold harmless and indemnify the Village and its officers, employees and agents, and to save them from and indemnify for all costs, claims, suits, demands, and actions arising out of the installation, removal, existence, use or maintenance of the fire hydrant. 
The applicant shall provide the Village Fire Department, Fire Prevention Bureau, with current contact names, addresses, and phone numbers of parties responsible for hydrant maintenance. 
(c)  Standards. All privately owned fire hydrants shall be acceptable to the Village Manager or designee and contain 2 4½-inch National Standard Thread (NST) ports. Manufacturers acceptable to the Fire Chief include Mueller and Waterous. 
(d)  Installation. The Village Manager or designee shall approve the location of all privately owned hydrants, including orientation of the ports, proximity to buildings and roadways, and any other pertinent criteria. Installation shall be in compliance with NFPA standards and the Illinois Plumbing Code, as may be amended from time to time. The Village Manager or designee shall inspect privately owned fire hydrants for proper materials and workmanship. 
(e)  Labeling and numbering. The Village Manager or designee shall issue specifications for labeling private hydrants. Every privately owned fire hydrant shall have a label clearly imprinted thereon in compliance with Village standards. The Village Manager or designee shall issue a hydrant inventory number for all approved privately owned fire hydrants. 
(f)  Maintenance. Private water mains and fire hydrants are the responsibility of the property owners. NFPA standards require them to be inspected and maintained in proper working order. Repairs and maintenance include operation, appearance, protection from traffic, clearance from obstructions, and any other items impacting the hydrant operation. Hydrants must be painted every 5 years with paint approved by, and to the color scheme 
specified by, the Village Manager or designee. A licensed plumbing contractor, bonded for work in the Village, shall obtain necessary permits to make repairs to hydrants and associated plumbing. 
(g)  Village inspections. The Village Manager or designee shall inspect and flow privately owned hydrants. 
(h)  Notification of repairs. The Village shall forward any repair or maintenance discrepancies to the designated contact person for correction. Notification of completion of any repair shall be made to the Village Manager or designee for the purpose of inspection and acceptance. Repairs are to be completed in a timely manner. 
(i)  Time limit for completing repairs. Property owners have 10 days from notification to effect repairs or to request a time extension from the Village Manager or designee. Failure to make necessary repairs or to request an extension shall result in water to the property being shut off after 20 days of noncompliance. Notification of initiation and completion of any repair, regardless of whether it is in response to a Village-initiated notification, shall be made to the Village Manager or designee for the purpose of notification, inspection and acceptance. 
(Code 1979, § 34.18) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hydrants, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-10.  
Sec. 50-50. - Obstructing hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in manner to obstruct the use of any public fire hydrant, or place any material or vehicle in front thereof, or within 15 feet thereof at any curb, such distance to be measured from that point on the curb perpendicular to the exact location of the public fire hydrant. Any material or any vehicle found to be such an obstruction or within such 15 feet may be immediately removed by the Village, at the risk, cost, and expense of the owner or claimant thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 34.20) 
Cross reference— Parking near fire hydrant, § 106-103(a)(7). 
State Law reference— Obstacles hiding or impeding use, 425 ILCS 20/1 et seq.; parking vehicle near fire hydrant, 625 ILCS 5/11-1303.  
Sec. 50-51. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of either the International Fire Code of the International Code Council, as adopted in this Article, or the Life Safety Code, 2012 edition, published and modified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village, then the code, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village shall prevail and the conflicting provision of the International Fire Code of the International Code Council or the Life Safety Code of the National Fire Protection Association shall have no force or effect. If any provision of either the International Fire Code of the International Code Council, as adopted in this Article, or the Life Safety Code 2012 edition, published and modified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) is in conflict, the Fire Chief or designee shall be considered the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) and shall have the authority to make the final code compliance determination. 
(Ord. No. 04-10-C-3305, § 4, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 4, 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 50-52. - Amendments to International Fire Code. 
The International Fire Code adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  109.4 Violation Penalties. Replace existing text with the following: 
Penalty for failure to correct fire hazard. Any owner, or agent, employee or officer thereof, or person in possession or control of building or place mentioned in Section 50-36, who shall refuse or neglect to make such changes, alterations or repairs within a period of five (5) days after the date of such notice, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for; Skokie Village Ordinance Sec. 50-37 (Code 1979, § 34.15). 
(2)  Sec. 404.5 Availability. Add the following subsection: 
404.5.1.2 Pre-Plan Drawings. To assist the fire department to develop pre-plans for fire emergencies, all new and altered buildings (except single-family detached dwellings) are required to present as-build drawings prior to certificate of occupancy. Drawings shall indicate a full site plan and a complete interior floor plan (building foot print). Where practical the drawings shall be in an electronic media format, but in all cases in a format approved by the AHJ. 
(3)  Sec. 510 Radio Amplification system. Delete text and replace with: 
510.1 General. This Section covers radio amplification systems, which are bi-directional amplifier systems, or similar systems needed to meet the threshold radio communication standards for the Village of Skokie's public safety communications network. For the purpose of this section all such systems shall be referred to as a radio amplification system. 
510.2 When required. A radio amplification system shall be installed at no cost to the Village, in any building or structure, other than single-family residential, following a determination by a qualified third party, that such a system is needed to provide adequate radio coverage in areas requiring amplification when: 
1.  New buildings or structures greater than 50,000 square feet in area are constructed. 
2.  New buildings or structures greater than 10,000 square feet in area with sub-grade mechanical areas or parking are constructed. 
3.  Existing building or structures greater than 50,000 square feet in area are modified, altered or repaired in such a way that increases existing building or structure value by fifty percent (50%) or the floor area by 50%, within any twelve (12) month period. 
510.3 Adequate minimum coverage. For purposes of this Section, adequate radio coverage shall be accomplished (satisfied) when each floor of a structure attains ninety-five percent (95%) radio communications reliability 95% of the time with a minimum signal capacity of Delivered Audio Quality 3 (DAQ3 - Speech understandable with slight effort. Requires occasional repetition due to noise or distortion). The following rooms/areas shall have complete radio coverage with signal capacity DAQ3: 
1.  Fire command rooms 
2.  Fire pump rooms 
3.  Mechanical rooms 
4.  Rooms/areas that contain hazardous materials 
5.  Computer rooms 
510.4 System requirements. The radio amplifications system shall be developed in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this Section. 
510.4.1 Type. Buildings and structures may be equipped with any of the following in order to achieve adequate radio coverage: 
1.  An internal radio amplification system as needed to encompass the frequency range specified by the Fire Department. 
2.  A system that has been approved by the Fire Department as being capable of providing amplification to meet the requirements of this Section. 
510.4.2 Power back-up. The radio amplification system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least twelve (12) hours without external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of external power input. There shall be no connection between the radio amplification system and the fire alarm system. 
510.5 Evaluation. The evaluation process for determining the need for in-building amplification is conducted in a minimum of three phases: pre-construction, construction, and acceptance/implementation. 
510.5.1 Pre-construction base submittals. Before the beginning of construction, basic information must be submitted to the Fire Department to begin the process of determining the need, type and actual implementation or augmentation to the radio system. These submittal requirements include: 
1.  The number of stories and square footage of the building. 
2.  Orientation of building above/below ground shown in cross section drawings. 
3.  Construction materials type of the outer and inner walls. 
4.  The location of proposed equipment areas such as equipment rooms, cableways, and conduits and rooms requiring complete radio coverage in Section 510.3. 
5.  Location of the building on a site plan. 
6.  Building blueprints or drawings. 
510.5.2 Construction phase. During construction phase, a needs determination must be completed. 
510.5.3 Acceptance testing. Acceptance testing for an in building or in structure radio amplification system is required upon completion of the installation of the of the radio amplification system. 
510.5.3.1 Acceptance testing responsibility. It is the building owner's responsibility to have the radio amplification system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building attains ninety-five percent (95%) radio communications reliability 95% of the time with a minimum signal capacity of Delivered Audio Quality 3 (DAQ3). 
510.5.3.2 Testing procedure. The testing company/person shall submit a description of the testing procedures for review and approval to the Fire Chief or designee. 
510.5.3.3 Results maintenance. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept on file with the building/structure owner so that measurements can be verified each year during the annual test. In the event that this information is lost the building/structure owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values. 
510.6 Annual test. When an in-building/structure radio amplification system is installed, the building/structure owner shall test all active components of the radio amplification system including, but not limited to the amplifier, the power supplies and the back-up batteries, a minimum of once every twelve (12) months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance of the radio amplification system. Back-up batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of two (2) hours to verify that they will operate during an actual power outage. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer's specification for the intended purpose. 
510.7 Five-Year test. In addition to the annual test in Subsection 510.6, the building/structure owner shall perform a radio coverage test at least once every five (5) years to ensure that the radio amplification system continues to meet the requirement of this Section. The acceptance test procedures, set forth above in Subsection 510.5.3, shall apply to such tests. 
510.8 Inadequate radio coverage. When a building or structure with a radio amplification system fails to support adequate radio coverage tests required in Subsection 510.6 and 510.7, the owner shall have the system repaired as required in Section 510.11. However, if major components of the system are in need of replacement or the entire system is obsolete the building/structure owner must present a compliance plan to the Fire Chief or designee, within fourteen (14) days after the discovery of said failure, to address the inadequate radio coverage. The owner of the building/structure shall, within forty-five (45) days of the approval of the compliance plan, have the approved plan enacted. Thirty (30) day extensions for the completion of the compliance plan may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee. 
510.9 Qualifications of testing personnel. All tests required by this Section shall be conducted, documented and signed by a person in possession of a current FCC general radio telephone operator license. All test records shall be retained at the inspected premises by the building/structure owner, with a copy thereof being submitted to the Village's Fire Chief within thirty (30) days of when the test has been conducted. In the even the test indicates a failure to comply with the requirement of this Section, appropriate repairs shall be made and additional tests conducted until the testing requirements of this Section are met. 
510.10 Inspections. Village personnel, or their agents after providing reasonable notice to the owner or owner's representative, shall have the right to enter any building/structure which is subject to the requirements of Section 510, to conduct field-testing to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present. 
510.11 Property owner maintenance responsibilities. Once a radio amplification system has been found to be in compliance with the requirement of this Section, the building/structure owner shall be responsible for maintaining said radio amplification system thereafter in full compliance with the provisions of said Section. A maintenance contract shall be provided to the Fire Chief or designee, with the name of the contractor who will supply a twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week emergency response, within two (2) hours after notification by either the Village or the building/structure owner. The maintenance contract shall contain contact information relative to the contractor including but not limited to phone numbers. The building/structure owner shall also submit contact information. Building/structure owner shall be responsible for making any repairs, replacements or upgrades to the radio amplification system, as directed by the Village should the radio amplification system fail to work properly. 
510.12 Permit required. A building permit shall be required for the installation of any radio amplification system. The fee for the permit shall be the minimum permit fee as established by the building permit fee schedule set forth in Chapter 46 of the Skokie Village Code 
(4)  511 Village Public Safety Communications Network. Add as follows: 
If the erection or construction of a structure interferes with the existing telecommunications system for public safety purposes, the developer and/or owner shall provide for appropriate easement, facilities and equipment to ensure the continued satisfactory operation of the public safety telecommunications system at no cost to the Village. Facilities and equipment needed to alleviate the concern shall become part of the Village of Skokie's communications network and shall be operated and maintained by the Village. In the event that the facilities and equipment cannot be located on the proposed structure, or their location on the structure will not provide satisfactory operation of the public safely telecommunications system, the development shall pay the cost of equipment, installation and easement to locate the equipment at an alternative location determined by the Village to provide proper communications. 
(5)  Sec. 903.1.2 Equipment-Fire Alarm Control Panels. Add as follows: 
New fire alarm control panels shall be addressable. The equipment shall be capable of having the audio signal silenced without using a pass code, key or resetting the fire alarm control panel. All new fire alarm control panels shall be connected via radio to Skokie Communication Center. All fire alarm control panels or full function annunciator panels shall be installed within ten (10) feet of the main entrance or in a location approved by the AHJ. 
(6)  Sec. 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Delete Text and replace with language as follows: 
A complete automatic fire alarm system may be installed throughout the building in lieu of automatic sprinkler system in the basement where the following exits: 
1.  Use Groups B or M; 
2.  Building is a single story having basement compartments with one (1) hour fire protective rating no larger than 2,500 square feet, with basement use limited to storage of dry goods, merchandise and food products, not needing specialized fire protection, ventilation or handling, with access to basements limited to employees or employee agents only and not for public use with no production work or continuous operations; 
3.  The area in the basement shall be signed as directed by the Fire Chief or designee with a twenty-four (24) inch square sign, or multiple signs if determined appropriate, with the following text in red two (2) inch letters on white background: "Limited Access Basement Area for Employees Only - No Production or Continuous Operation in this Basement"; 
4.  Exiting from the basement is otherwise provided in compliance with the Building Code; 
5.  A sprinkler system is not required by other portions of the Building Code. 
(7)  Sec. 903.2.13 Nonresidential zoning districts. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all occupancies that are in nonresidential zoning districts that are not covered under site plan or special use provisions when the building area, without regard to fire walls, is equal to or exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
(8)  Sec. 903.4.2 Alarms. Add as first sentence to paragraph: 
An exterior weather proof visual device (clear lens) and ten (10) inch bell shall be located over the fire department connection or shall be approved by the AHJ. 
(9)  Sec. 903.4.2 Alarms. Add as follows: 
Sec. 903.4.2.1 Alarm Notification for One and Two Family Dwellings. A weather proof audio visual device shall be installed on the exterior of the structure as part of the fire suppression system so that the operation of the fire sprinkler suppression system will cause audio visual device to be seen from the fronting street. A minimum six (6) inch bell shall be installed in the interior of the structure, and shall be mounted, if possible on the HVAC return air system, to reverberate the sound of bell throughout the entire structure to signal that there is an activation of water flow to the sprinkler system. The bell, A/V, and water flow switch shall be wired into a shared basement electrical circuit (such as sump pump, basement lights, etc.) this to prevent accidental disruption of the alarm notification system. 
(10)  Sec. 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Add as follows: 
Sec. 903.4.3.1 Multi-tenant occupancy. When an automatic fire suppression system is installed in a new/existing multi-tenant building, each tenant shall have its own sprinkler supply line off the sprinkler main or riser with its own water flow switch and control valve. A weather proof horn/strobe shall be mounted on the exterior front of that tenant space and as indicated in Section 903.4.2. The horn/strobe device shall activate upon water flow and/or fire alarm activation within that individual unit. 
(11)  Sec.904.3.5 Monitoring. Delete text and replace with: Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by a building fire alarm system which is maintained and operated in accordance with NFPA 72. 
(12)  Sec. 905.4.3 Warehouse. Add as follows: 
In all warehouse storage areas exceeding 50,000 square feet, and where storage heights exceed twelve (12) feet, provide inside 2-1/2 inch fire hose valves. Locate the valves at each exterior access/egress door to the warehouse and/or storage area. Provide additional 2-1/2 inch fire hose valves so that no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is 200 feet maximum travel distance to a fire hose valve. The fire hose valve system piping shall be: 
a.  The 2-1/2 inch valve shall be supplied by a minimum of four (4) inch pipe with 2-1/2 inch drops to each valve. 
(13)  Sec. 907.1.3 Equipment. Add as follows: 
The fire alarm system shall be addressable as required by the Fire Prevention Bureau by floor and/or area. All required Fire Alarm Systems, excluding one-and two-family residential buildings shall be provided with a full function annunciator panel at the entrance of the building, unless the control panel is located at the main entrance of the building. 
(14)  Sec. 907.6.5 Monitoring. Delete text and replace with: 
All fire alarm subscribers, all required new or significantly modified Fire Alarm Systems, excluding systems in one-and two-family residential buildings and those existing systems that do not require modification but have experienced an increase in risk or life safety, shall have a direct connection to the Combined Communications Center (CCC). This connection shall be made and operational before occupancy of the building will be approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. The Fire Chief, or designee, shall make the determination of whether a system has been significantly modified or potential for a higher loss of life or hazard classification has increased. Any waiver or modification of this connection requirement may only be authorized by the Village Manager or designee. Any significantly modified fire alarm system that is under contract to transmit its emergency signal to a remote monitoring station rather than to the CCC prior to submittal of alarm system improvement plans shall be allowed to remain under such contract until the end of the current term of the contract or until the contract is terminated, whichever occurs first. Upon expiration or termination of said contract, the alarm shall be converted to an alarm that transmits its emergency signal via a Village-owned radio transmitter directly to the CCC. 
(15)  Section 907.8.2 Add as follows: 
A service agreement with an Alarm Contractor must be maintained. A current copy of a service agreement for each alarm system shall be provided to the Fire Prevention Bureau. A copy of annual testing and inspection reports for each fire alarm system, excluding systems in one-and two-family residential buildings, shall be provided to the Fire Prevention Bureau. 
(16)  Section 907.8.5 Add as follows: 
Section 907.8.5.1 Alarm Out of Service 
If at any time coverage or protection provided by a fire alarm system, excluding systems in one-and two-family residential buildings, decreases or ceases, the following shall occur: 
1.  The alarm user shall notify the CCC anytime a system is removed from service due to maintenance, mechanical problems, or any other condition in which the system will not transmit an activated alarm to the CCC. 
2.  The alarm user shall provide notice to all tenants/occupants in the building that the fire alarm system is out of service, and that it will be necessary to notify the fire department by calling 9-1-1 of any fires or similar hazardous conditions. 
3.  If, at the discretion of the fire chief or designee, a system is anticipated to remain out of service for more than four (4) hours, a fire watch at the property owner's expense, may be required. 
4.  Upon restoration of the fire alarm system to normal operating conditions, the property owner shall notify the CCC and any affected tenant or occupant. 
5.  Any and all corrective actions necessary to restore the system to a normal operating condition shall be taken by the alarm user or their agent to place the alarm back in full service within seventy-two (72) hours after the initial out of service report to the CCC. 
(17)  Section 912.1. Add as follows: 
Section 912.1.1 Exterior fire department connection visual indicator. When a fire sprinkler system is required to have a fire department connection in accordance with Section 912.1, a visual indicator shall be installed directly above the fire department connection in a location approved by the AHJ. In those cases where architectural design visually obscures the visual indicator from being seen from the primary roadway in front of the building and/or structure that is protected by the fire sprinkler system, the AHJ shall determine and alternate location of placement of the visual indicator on the front of the building/or structure. The visual indicator shall be weather proof and activate on water flow alarms only. 
(18)  Add Sec. 1106 Fire Protection Requirements: Additions, Alterations, and Hazard Classification Changes to Existing Structures. 
Additions - Any existing structure that is adding an addition will have fire protection as indicated based on the following: 
1.  Fire Protection Sprinkler System will be provided as the fire protection. 
If the resultant size of the structure is equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet and the Hazard Classification is increased based on evaluation by the AHJ. 
2.  Fire Detection System will be provided as the fire protection. 
a.  If the resultant size of the structure is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
b.  If the resultant size of the structure is less than 2,500 square feet and the Hazard Classification is increased based on evaluation by the AHJ. 
Existing Structure being reoccupied will have fire protection as indicated based on the following: 
1.  Fire Protection Sprinkler System will be provided as the fire protection. If the resultant size of the structure is equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet and the Hazard Classification is increased based on evaluation by the AHJ. 
2.  Fire Detection System will be provided as the fire protection. 
a.  If the resultant size of the structure is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
b.  If the resultant size of the structure is less than 2,500 square feet and the Hazard Classification is increased based on evaluation by the AHJ. 
Alterations - Existing structures undergoing alterations that include a work area for the alteration of fifty percent (50%) of the aggregate area of the building will have fire protection as indicated based on the following: 
1.  Fire Protection Sprinkler System will be provided as the fire protection. 
If the resultant size of the structure is equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet and the Hazard Classification is increased based on evaluation by the AHJ. 
2.  Fire Detection System will be provided as the fire protection. 
a.  If the resultant size of the structure is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
b.  If the resultant size of the structure is less than 2,500 square feet and the Hazard Classification is increased based on evaluation by the AHJ. 
(Ord. No. 04-10-C-3305, § 5, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3613, § 2, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 4, 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-8-C-4167, § 4, adopted Aug. 3, 2015, changed the title of § 50-52 from "Amendments" to read as set out herein.  
Secs. 50-53—50-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD 
 
Sec. 50-60. - Creation and purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Foreign Fire Insurance Board of the Village of Skokie, hereafter known as "the FFI Board," to receive and expend Foreign Fire Insurance Tax funds, hereafter known as "Tax Funds," for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Village of Skokie Fire Department, in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes. All Tax Funds received by the Village are public funds and shall be deposited in the General Fund, but shall be earmarked for the purposes stated herein and be assigned a separate account number. The Tax Funds shall be subject to appropriation by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees during the usual budget cycle and subject to the same procedures, except as specified herein, as all other Village revenues and receipts. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009)  
Sec. 50-61. - Definition. 
(a)  "Members of the Department" for purpose of this Article shall include all members of the Fire Department, including sworn and non-sworn members. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-62. - Organization. 
(a)  The FFI Board shall consist of members as described in Section 11-10-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2. 
(b)  The Village Finance Director, or designee, shall serve as an ex-officio member of the FFI Board. The Village Finance Director is entitled to all notices of all meetings and has the right to participate in the meetings; however, he or she shall not be entitled to vote. 
(c)  At the first meeting of the FFI Board and annually thereafter, the FFI Board members shall select officers as required by Section 11-10-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-63. - Term of office. 
(a)  Elected FFI Board members shall serve a two (2) year term. The terms will be staggered with three Board members being elected in even numbered years and the other three elected in odd numbered years. 
(b)  In the event no successor FFI Board member assumes office prior to the expiration of the two (2) year term, then the FFI Board member shall serve until a successor FFI Board member assumes office. The initial terms of office of the FFI Board members shall begin thirty (30) days after completion of the election. Each FFI Board member shall hold office during his/her term unless the member resigns from the department, retires from the department, or is discharged from the department. If any of these three (3) events occur, the FFI Board member shall automatically be removed from the FFI Board and the position shall be deemed vacant. 
(c)  Vacancies in the FFI Board shall be filled as described in Section 50-64(d) herein below. Any person elected to fill a FFI Board position vacancy shall assume office immediately upon completion of the election. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-64. - Election procedures. 
(a)  The election of members to the FFI Board shall be conducted by the FFI Board. 
(b)  Nomination of members shall commence on the third Monday of February and the period of time for making nominations shall remain open until 5:00 p.m. on the third Monday of March. The period of time for casting of ballots shall commence no later than 5:00 p.m. on the day following the third Monday in March and shall remain open until 4:00 p.m. on the third Monday of April. 
(c)  Elections shall be by secret ballot collected in a secured ballot box located in the Secretary of the Fire Chief's office. No voting by proxy or write in candidates shall be accepted. 
(d)  When a FFI Board member position becomes unexpectedly vacant, and the balance of the unexpired term is greater than six months, a special election may be held to fill that position for the unexpired term. When a FFI Board member position becomes unexpectedly vacant, and the balance of the term is less than six months, the FFI Board may appoint a member to fill the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-65. - Duties of officers. 
(a)  The Chairperson shall preside over meetings of the FFI Board. He/she shall be the executive head of the FFI Board and an ex-officio member of all committees. He/she shall appoint such committees as may be provided for in this Article and any special committees as may be from time to time established by the FFI Board to carry out specific tasks. The Chairperson shall have general supervision of the activities of committees created in accordance with this Article. 
(b)  The Vice Chairperson, if the position is created, shall assist the Chairperson in any such manner as the Chairperson may determine. In the absence of the Chairperson, he/she shall preside at the meetings of the FFI Board. If the office of the Chairperson becomes vacated, the Vice-Chairperson shall be acting Chairperson until the office of Chairperson is filled. 
(c)  The Secretary, if the position is created, shall be custodian of all documents, records, books and papers belonging to the FFI Board. He/she shall keep an accurate record of the meetings of the FFI Board and of the various committees of which he/she shall be the Secretary. He/she shall conduct correspondence of the FFI Board promptly. If the position of Secretary is not created, then all duties shall be performed by the Treasurer in addition to the duties of the Treasurer specified in paragraph (d) of this Section. 
(d)  The Treasurer shall be charged with the responsibility of monitoring the expenditures of all monies. He/she shall work closely with the Village's Finance Director with regard to the account balances and financial transactions affecting the account. He/she shall maintain a current ledger showing the starting account balance and subsequent debits for items purchased. He/she shall present a financial statement at all regular business meetings. 
(e)  The officers of the FFI Board shall serve without compensation. Officer vacancies will be filled as needed by FFI Board selection. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-66. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The FFI Board shall make all necessary rules and regulations with respect to the Foreign Fire Insurance Board and/or the decision making process for selection of expenditures. No expenditures or transfers shall be made without a majority approval of the FFI Board. The FFI Board shall coordinate its activities and decisions relating to expenditures or transfers with the Chief of the Fire Department during the Village budget cycle to ensure maximum effectiveness and reduce redundancy. 
(b)  The FFI Board shall develop and maintain a listing of those items that it determines are appropriate expenditures for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. 
(c)  The expenditures and transfers made by the FFI Board shall be annually reviewed as part of the Village audit. The audit shall verify that expenditures and transfers made by the FFI Board are for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department, as described in Section 50-67 herein below. 
(d)  The Village Finance Director shall receive the Tax Funds paid to the FFI Board and shall pay out such monies and/or otherwise make expenditures upon the order of the FFI Board. Any expenditure made by the Village Finance Director or designee, pursuant to the order of the FFI Board, shall be solely for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department, as described in Section 50-67 herein below. 
(e)  The Director of Finance of the Village shall: 
1.  Have charge and custody of and be responsible for all Tax Funds collected by the Village from the FFI Board; 
2.  Deposit all such monies for the FFI Board in such banks, savings and loan associations, or other depositories as shall be authorized by the Village Board; 
3.  Invest such Tax Funds as are not immediately required in such securities consistent with policies and practice in place, while collecting all interest earned and depositing such interest to the benefit of the account; 
4.  Maintain the financial books and records of the account; 
5.  Provide the FFI Board a quarterly accounting of receipts and expenditures of the account; 
6.  Pay the service charge levied by the Illinois Municipal League for the collection of the Foreign Fire Insurance Tax from the proceeds of the Foreign Fire Insurance Tax provided that the service charge has not already been retained by the Illinois Municipal League prior to disbursement of the Tax Funds. 
(f)  The FFI Board members, being employees of the Village, shall be subject to the Code of Ethics applicable to employees as set forth in Article V, Chapter 2, of the Skokie Village Code and Section 1.2 of the Village of Skokie Personnel Policy Manual. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-67. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Tax Funds received by the FFI Board shall be used solely for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. Upon the purchase of any approved items, title shall be placed in the name of the Village. 
(b)  The FFI Board reserves the right, after full review of a written proposal for expenditure from a member of the department, to approve or reject by majority vote any request for proposed expenditure. A majority vote shall be defined as one (1) vote more than fifty (50) percent of those present and voting. A tie vote shall be considered a rejected request. 
(c)  By October 1 st of each year the FFI Board shall provide the Fire Chief a proposed budget for the expenditure of the Tax Funds. 
(d)  In furtherance of his duties, as specified in Section 2-235 (1) and (2) of Chapter 2 of the Skokie Village Code, the Fire Chief shall review the proposed budget and has the absolute right to prohibit any item and/or service to be located or conducted in any fire station. If the Fire Chief decides to allow any such item(s) and/or service(s) into any fire station, the Fire Chief shall also have the absolute right to prohibit the FFI Board's proposed physical location of any such item(s) or rendering of service in any fire station. The Fire Chief must respond in writing to the FFI Board regarding the proposed budget within 30 days from his receipt of the proposed budget. The Fire Chief must explain the basis for his decision(s). 
(e)  The FFI Board may appeal, in writing, any decision of the Fire Chief rendered pursuant to paragraph (d) of this Section, within 21 days of the decision. The appeal shall be to the Village Manager who shall issue his decision in writing within 21 days of his receipt of the FFI Board's written appeal. The decision of the Village Manager shall be final. 
(f)  The approved budget shall be submitted to the Village Board with the Fire Department budget. The approved budget may be amended at any time by a majority vote of the officers of the FFI Board and the approval of the Fire Chief; any amendment shall be subject to approval of the Village Board. Expenditures shall be made only for items specifically described in the approved budget as originally adopted or subsequently amended by the FFI Board and approved by the Village Board. 
(g)  The FFI Board shall have the power to approve the expenditure of money for items specifically described in the approved budget. 
(h)  Any expenditure made from the Tax Funds account shall be made in accordance with Village rules, regulations, practices and ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, which govern the procurement of goods and services. All expenditures must be coordinated with the purchasing agent to ensure compliance with purchasing requirements. 
(i)  Money received from the Foreign Fire Insurance account may be used solely for the purchase of goods and services for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the fire department. Any items or services purchased with money from the account shall thereupon become the property of the Village. Money from the account shall not be used for: (i) the personal benefit of any person; (ii) any person, use, or function not directly related to the Fire Department; (iii) food or beverages; (iv) any recreational or entertainment equipment or activity; (v) any litigation; (vi) the benefit of any private for-profit or not-for-profit entity; or (vii) legislative activity. The FFI Board, being an agency of the Village, shall not enter into any contract or agreement without the approval of the Village Manager, or if legally required, the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The FFI Board shall not make, or obligate, expenditures from the account in excess of the amount of money currently on deposit in and currently available for use from the account. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-3-C-3744, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 50-68. - Meetings—Quorum, special meetings. 
The FFI Board shall, in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, establish a regular time and place for its meetings and publish notices of those meetings. The FFI Board shall be subject to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meeting Act. Four (4) FFI Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Chairperson may call a special meeting at any time. A special meeting may also be called upon the written notice of four (4) FFI Board members. Such notice shall be in writing, duly signed by the FFI Board members, describing, in brief, the nature or object of the special meeting. All special meetings require a minimum of 48 hours written notice in advance of the meeting. Any person shall be entitled to attend any FFI Board meeting. Minutes of all FFI Board meetings shall be filed with the Village Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009)  
Sec. 50-69. - Rules and regulations. 
The FFI Board may promulgate written rules and regulations governing FFI Board matters so long as such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with law. All rules and regulations promulgated by the FFI Board must be approved by the Village Manager. All rules and regulations shall be available in each fire station, the Village Hall, and the Village Clerk. Before any rule or regulation shall become effective, such rule or regulation shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall be made available for public inspection. The FFI Board secretary shall maintain a record of all FFI Board rules and regulations, which shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009)  
Sec. 50-70. - Limited function of board. 
The FFI Board shall be limited in function to the purposes stated in Sections 11-10-1 and 11-10-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.) and the Skokie Village Code. Nothing in this article shall give the FFI Board any function or authority for any other purpose. At no time shall the actions of the FFI Board interfere with the duties, responsibilities and rights of the Fire Chief, the Village Manager, the Village Board, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, nor shall its actions in any way impede the ordinary, usual and customary operation of the Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-2-C-3663, § 1, 2-2-2009)  
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Department of Public Health, § 2-291 et seq.; animals, ch. 18; dangerous animals, rabies control, § 18-61 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 110. 
Federal law references— Hazardous substances, 15 U.S.C.A. § 1261 et seq.; federal food, drug and cosmetic act, 21 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.; public health service, 42 U.S.C.A. § 201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Territorial jurisdiction for enforcement of health and quarantine ordinances and regulations, 65 ILCS 5/7-4-1; municipal health regulations, 65 ILCS 5/11-16-1 et seq.; public health, 410 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Failure to correct violation; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to correct or remedy any condition which is found by the Village Manager or designee to be unsafe, unhealthy or unwholesome or to endanger, impair or jeopardize the public health or safety. Every person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Village Manager may suspend or revoke one's business license for any violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 11.16)  
Sec. 54-2. - Prosecution of violations. 
Violations of this chapter or other health regulations of the Village not corrected or remedied within the period of time required by the Village Manager or designee shall be referred to the office of the Corporation Counsel for prosecution. 
(Code 1979, § 11.15)  
Sec. 54-3. - Obstructing or polluting watercourse or source of water supply. 
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 11.10) 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water pollution, 415 ILCS 5/11 et seq.  
Sec. 54-4. - Cemeteries and burials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery or to bury any person within the Village limits except in an established cemetery. 
(Code 1979, § 11.11) 
State Law reference— Burial of Dead Bodies Act, 410 ILCS 5/1 et seq.; Cemetery Association Act, 805 ILCS 320/1 et seq.  
Sec. 54-5. - Public drinking cups. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup or cups, dipper or other similar utensil for the use of more than 1 person in any public hall, theater, store or other place frequented by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 11.12)  
Sec. 54-6. - Spitting in public place. 
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public vehicle or other place frequented by the public or to which the public is invited. 
(Code 1979, § 11.13) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Secs. 54-7—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VITAL STATISTICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Vital Records Act, 410 ILCS 535/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Registrar of Vital Statistics. 
The Director of Public Health shall be and is hereby made Registrar of Vital Statistics of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 11.081)  
Sec. 54-32. - Reports of births and deaths. 
A report of all births, still births and deaths shall be made to the local Registrar of Vital Statistics, which report shall contain all information required by law. 
(Code 1979, § 11.082)  
Sec. 54-33. - Records of births and deaths. 
(a)  The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall keep a record showing all births, still births and deaths occurring within the Village, which record shall include the information required to be kept by statute. 
(b)  Copies of such birth and death certificates shall be available for the fee provided in Section 46-31. 
(Code 1979, § 11.083)  
Sec. 54-34. - Conformance with State law. 
The provisions of the statutes relative to vital statistics shall be fully complied with by the Director of Public Health in connection with vital statistics report. 
(Code 1979, § 11.084)  
Sec. 54-35. - Disposition of fees paid by State. 
Fees due the local Registrar of Vital Statistics of the Village from the State, pursuant to Illinois Vital Records Act, 410 ILCS 535/1 et seq., are to be paid to the Village and deposited in the appropriate Village account in accordance with established Village procedures and practices. 
(Code 1979, § 11.085)  
Secs. 54-36—54-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 2008, repealed and deleted the former Art. III, §§ 54-61—54-75, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1979, §§ 55.271—55.274, 55.276; Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.38), adopted Oct. 16, 2000; Ord. No. 03-7-C-3188, § 2, adopted July 7, 2003; Ord. No. 04-7-C-3289, § 1, adopted July 19, 2004. 
Cross reference— Smoking in places of amusement, § 14-38; sale of tobacco products to underage persons, § 26-276; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Clean Indoor Air Act, 410 ILCS 80/1 et seq.; Smoke Free Illinois Act, 30 ILCS 805/8.31. 
 
Sec. 54-61. - Definitions. 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets. 
Electronic cigarette shall mean an electronic or battery-operated device that delivers vapors for inhalation. This term shall include every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor. 
E-liquid shall mean any liquid product composed either in whole or part of nicotine, propylene glycol, polyethylene glycol, glycerin and/or other similar substances and manufactured for use with an electronic cigarette to be converted into gas for inhaling. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with (i) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or (ii) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors. 
Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arena means any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events. 
Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities. 
Place of employment means: any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment". 
Private club means a not-for-profit association that (1) has been in active and continuous existence for at least 3 years prior to the effective date Public Act 95-0017, whether incorporated or not, (2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, (3) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and (4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both, to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501. 
Private residence means the part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation, a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence. 
Public place means that portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the State or State subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences. 
Restaurant means (i) an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and (ii) a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail establishment that derives more than 80% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, e-liquid, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. 
Smoke or smoking means the carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, e-liquid, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008; Ord. No. 15-4-C-4136, § 2, 4-20-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-62. - Smoking in public places, places of employment, and governmental vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the State or a political subdivision of the State. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by Section 54-66 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-63. - Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Act by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this Act shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this Act by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-64. - Smoking prohibited in student dormitories. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-65. - Designation of other nonsmoking areas. 
Any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsections (a) and (b) of Section 54-63 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-66. - Exemptions. 
Smoking is not prohibited in the following areas: 
(1)  Private residence, except when used as a home-based business open to the public. 
(2)  A retail tobacco store that legally allowed smoking prior to March 1, 2011. Any retail tobacco store that begins operations subsequent to February 28, 2011, shall not permit smoking on its premises. Any retail tobacco store that commenced operations prior to March 1, 2011, and did not allow smoking on its premises, shall not allow smoking on its premises. A retail tobacco store that allows smoking is required to annually file with the Illinois Department of Public Health by January 31st an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. A copy of such affidavit shall be filed on the same date with the Village of Skokie Department of Public Health. 
(3)  Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing home. 
(4)  Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3825, § 1, 3-7-2011)  
Sec. 54-67. - Violations. 
(a)  A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates Section 54-62 of this Article shall be fined. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
(b)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under Section 54-62 of this Article shall be fined in an amount that is not less than $100 and not more than $250. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates Section 62 of this Article shall be fined (i) not less than $250 for the first violation, (ii) not less than $500 for the second violation within one year after the first violation, and (iii) not less than $2,500 for each additional violation within one year after the first violation. 
(c)  A fine imposed under this Section shall be allocated as follows: 
(1)  One-half of the fine shall be distributed to the Illinois Department of Public Health; and 
(2)  One-half of the fine shall be distributed to the Village of Skokie. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-68. - Injunctions. 
The Village may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-69. - Discrimination prohibited. 
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-70. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause or paragraph of this Article shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such validity shall not affect the other provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Sec. 54-71. - Entrances, exits, windows, and ventilation intakes. 
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this Article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3595, § 1, 1-4-2008)  
Secs. 54-72—54-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNICABLE DISEASES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Communicable Disease Prevention Act, 410 ILCS 315/0.01 et seq.; Communicable Disease Report Act, 745 ILCS 45/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-91. - Report required. 
Every person, including physicians, having knowledge of a known or suspected case or carrier of communicable disease or communicable disease death shall report such occurrences to the Department of Public Health as required by statute. 
(Code 1979, § 11.101)  
Sec. 54-92. - Quarantine (Reserved). 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2009, deleted § 54-92. Former § 54-92 pertained to quarantine and derived from Code 1979, § 11.92.  
Sec. 54-93. - Investigate to Protect Public Health. 
The Department shall investigate the causes of dangerously contagious or infectious diseases, especially when existing in epidemic form, and take means to restrict and suppress the same. Whenever such disease becomes, or threatens to become epidemic, the Department may enforce such measures as it deems necessary to protect the public health. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54-94. - Powers and Authority to Quarantine or Isolate. 
(a)  To prevent the probable spread of a dangerously contagious or infectious disease, including, but not limited to, non-compliant tuberculosis patients, the Department may order a person or group of persons to be quarantined or isolated, or a place to be closed and made off limits to the public, until such time as the condition can be corrected or the danger to the public health eliminated or reduced in such a manner that no substantial danger to the public's health any longer exists. Orders for isolation of a person or quarantine of a place to prevent the probable spread of a sexually transmissible disease shall be governed by the provisions of Section 7 of the Illinois Sexually Transmissible Disease Control Act. 
(b)  Except when immediate action is required pursuant to Section 54-96, below, no person or a group of persons may be ordered to be quarantined or isolated and no place may be ordered closed and made off limits to the public unless the person or owner of the place consents to the order. In the event emergency action is not being taken pursuant to Section 54-96 and the person or owner of the place does not consent to the aforementioned order, then the Department must obtain a court order prior to the taking the appropriate action to quarantine or isolate the person or closing a place and making it off limits to the public. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54-95. - Other Powers. 
(a)  The Department shall have the following powers and authority. In order to prevent the probable spread of a dangerously contagious or infectious disease, the Department may order: 
(1)  physical examinations and tests and collect laboratory specimens as necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of individuals. Physical examinations, tests, or collection of laboratory specimens must not be such as are reasonably likely to lead to serious harm to the affected individual; 
(2)  the administration of vaccines, medications, or other treatments to persons as necessary. A vaccine, medication, or other treatment to be administered must not be such as is reasonably likely to lead to serious harm to the affected individual; and 
(3)  observation and monitoring of persons. 
(b)  Except when immediate action is required pursuant to Section 54-96, below, no person shall be ordered to be (i) subjected to physical examinations, tests and the collection of laboratory specimens, (ii) administered vaccines, medications, or other treatments, or (iii) placed under observation and monitoring unless that person consents to the order. In the event emergency action is not being taken pursuant to Section 54-96 and the person does not consent to the aforementioned order, then the Department must obtain a court order prior to the taking the appropriate action to quarantine or isolate the person or closing a place and making it off limits to the public. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54-96. - Emergency Actions. 
(a)  The Department may order a person or a group of persons to be quarantined or isolated or may order a place to be closed and made off limits to the public on an immediate basis without prior consent or court order if, in the reasonable judgment of the Director of the Department, immediate action is required to protect the public from a dangerously contagious or infectious disease. In the event of an immediate order issued without prior consent or court order, the Department shall, as soon as practical, within 48 hours after issuing the order, obtain the consent of the person, or owner, or file a petition requesting a court order authorizing the isolation or quarantine or closure. When exigent circumstances exist that cause the court system to be unavailable or that make it impossible to obtain consent or file a petition within 48 hours after issuance of an immediate order, the Department must obtain consent or file a petition requesting a court order as soon as reasonably possible. 
(b)  To obtain a court order, the Department must prove that: 
(1)  the public's health and welfare are significantly endangered by: (A) a person or group of persons that (i) has, (ii) is suspected of having, (iii) has been exposed to, or (iv) is reasonably believed to have been exposed to, a dangerously contagious or infectious disease including, but not limited to, non-compliant tuberculosis patients; or (B) a place where there is a significant amount of activity likely to spread a dangerously contagious or infectious disease. 
(2)  All other reasonable means of correcting the problem have been exhausted and no less restrictive alternative exists. For purposes of determining whether no less restrictive alternative exists, the court shall consider evidence showing that quarantine or isolation is the measure provided for in a rule of the Department or in guidelines issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the World Health Organization. 
(c)  Persons who are or are about to be ordered to be isolated or quarantined and owners of places that are or are about to be closed and made off limits to the public shall have the right to counsel. 
(d)  Persons who are ordered to be isolated or quarantined or who are owners of places that are ordered to be closed and made off limits to the public, shall be given a written notice of such order. The written notice shall additionally include the following: (1) notice of the right to counsel; (2) notice of the reason for the order for isolation, quarantine, or closure; (3) notice of whether the order is an immediate order, and if so, the time frame for the Department to seek consent or to file a petition requesting a court order as set out in this subsection; and (4) notice of the anticipated duration of the isolation, quarantine, or closure. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54-97. - Isolation and Quarantine for Refusing Appropriate Order. 
To prevent the spread of a dangerously contagious or infectious disease, the Department may order the isolation or quarantine of any person whose refusal to submit to any of the orders authorized in Section 54-95(a)(1), (2) and (3) (hereinafter "Appropriate Order"), if the refusal and the circumstances result in uncertainty regarding whether the person has been exposed to or is infected with a dangerously contagious or infectious disease or otherwise poses a danger to the public's health. A person that refuses to consent to any Appropriate Order shall be given a written notice that shall include the following: (i) that the person may refuse to consent to the actions required by the Appropriate Order, however, the refusal to consent may result in uncertainty regarding whether the person has been exposed to or is infected with a dangerously contagious or infectious disease or otherwise poses a danger to public health and that the person may be subjected to isolation or quarantine pursuant to the requirements of Section 54-96; or (ii) that if the person consents to the actions required by the Appropriate Order, the results of the actions required by the Appropriate Order may subject the person to isolation or quarantine pursuant to the provisions of Section 54-96. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54.98. - Compliance with State Regulations. Adoption of Village Regulations. 
The Department shall comply with TITLE 77, PUBLIC HEALTH CHAPTER I, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH SUBCHAPTER k: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL AND IMMUNIZATIONS, PART 690: CONTROL OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES CODE, SUBPART H: ISOLATION, QUARANTINE, AND CLOSURE. 
The Director is authorized to develop rules and regulations for the implementation of the powers and authority granted in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54-99. - Destruction of Animals and Property. 
To prevent the spread of a dangerously contagious or infectious disease among humans, the Department may examine, test, disinfect, seize, or destroy animals or other related property believed to be sources of infection. An owner of such animal or other related property shall be given written notice regarding such examination, testing, disinfection, seizure, or destruction. The owner or the Department shall immediately destroy the animals by "humane euthanasia" as that term is defined in Section 2.09 of the Humane Care for Animals Act. Dogs and cats, however, shall be euthanized pursuant to the provisions of the Humane Euthanasia in Animal Shelters Act. The owner or the Department shall additionally, dispose of the carcasses, and disinfect, change, or destroy the premises occupied by the animals, in accordance with rules prescribed by the Department governing such destruction and disinfection. Upon his or her failure so to do or to cooperate with the Department, the Department shall cause the animals or related property to be destroyed and disposed of in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Sec. 54-100. - Emergency Access to Medical and health Records. 
(a)  Pursuant to State law, to prevent the spread of a dangerously contagious or infectious disease, the Department shall have the right emergency access to medical or health information or records or data of any person, upon the condition that the Department shall protect the privacy and confidentiality of any medical or health information or records or data obtained pursuant to this Section in accordance with federal and State law. 
(b)  Any medical or health information or records or data obtained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this Section shall be exempt from inspection and copying under the Freedom of Information Act. 
(c)  Other than a hearing for the purpose of Sections 54-94 or 54-95, any information, records, reports, statements, notes, memoranda, or other data obtained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this Section in the possession of the Department shall not be admissible as evidence, nor discoverable in any action of any kind in any court or before any tribunal, board, agency, or person. 
(d)  The access to or disclosure of any information or data obtained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this Section by the Department, a local board of health, or a local public authority shall not waive or have any effect upon its non-discoverability or non-admissibility. 
(e)  Pursuant to State law: (i) any person, facility, institution, or agency that provides emergency access to health information and data pursuant to this Section shall have immunity from any civil or criminal liability, or any other type of liability that might otherwise result by reason of these actions except in the event of willful and wanton misconduct; and (ii) the privileged quality of communication between any professional person or any facility shall not constitute grounds for failure to provide emergency access. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sharing of information or data obtained with the Illinois Department of Public Health and other local public health authorities. 
(Ord. No. 09-10-C-3711, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
Secs. 54-101—54-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SCHOOLS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— School building code, 105 ILCS 5/2-3.12. 
 
Sec. 54-111. - Jurisdiction of Department of Public Health; report of conditions dangerous to health. 
(a)  The Department of Public Health of the Village shall have jurisdiction in all matters pertaining to the preservation of the health of those in attendance at the public and private schools in the Village. 
(b)  With the approval of the Village Manager or designee, written notification of any findings that the health or well-being of those in attendance at any school may be impaired or endangered, shall be made to the superintendent of the respective Board of Education and to the principal of the school. The written notification shall include instructions to correct or remedy the condition or conditions found that would endanger or impair the health or physical well-being of those in attendance. 
(Code 1979, § 11.05)  
Secs. 54-112—54-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DAY CARE CENTERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Child Care Act, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Day care center means any child care facility receiving 5 or more children for care during part or all of a day, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The term "day care center" includes facilities commonly called child care centers, play schools, day nurseries, nursery schools, kindergartens, play groups, and centers for mentally retarded, with or without stated educational purposes, but does not include: 
(1)  Bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools operating under the auspices of established public or private boards of education. 
(2)  Bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools approved by the Superintendent of Public Instruction of the State or the school districts in which such kindergartens or nursery schools are located. 
(3)  Those facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or shopping service where transient children are received while parents are shopping on the premises. 
(Code 1979, § 11.06-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-132. - Jurisdiction of Health Department. 
The Health Department for the Village shall have jurisdiction in matters pertaining to the health of children who are placed or kept in a day care center, to assure proper compliance with all applicable state and local statutes, codes, ordinances and rules and regulations, including but not limited to those rules and licensing schemes promulgated by the State Department of Children and Family Services. 
(Code 1979, § 11.06-1)  
Secs. 54-133—54-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DAY CARE HOMES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Child Care Act, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Caregiver means the person directly responsible for child care. 
Child means any person under 18 years of age. 
Day care home means a family home which receives more than 3 up to a maximum of 8 children for less than 24 hours per day. The maximum of 8 children includes the family's birth or adopted children and all other persons under the age of 12. 
Department means the Public Health Department of the Village. 
Inspection means the review of a day care home to determine compliance with the Child Care Act of 1969, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq., and the standards prescribed by the Village. The review shall consist of on-site visits, interviews and the collection and review of supporting documents. 
State license means a document issued by the Department of Children and Family Services which authorizes child care facilities to operate in accordance with applicable standards and the provisions of the Child Care Act of 1969, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq. 
Supervising agency means the Village Public Health Department. 
Village license means a document issued by the Village which authorizes child care facilities to operate in accordance with applicable standards and the provisions of the Child Care Act of 1969, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq., the State Department of Child and Family Services' Licensing Standards for Day Care Homes, the Life Safety Code, and any amendments prescribed to these standards and provisions. 
(Code 1979, § 18.03) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-162. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a day care home in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-32. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief. 
(Code 1979, § 18.07)  
Sec. 54-163. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee shall administer this article and may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its enforcement. 
(Code 1979, § 18.02) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 54-164. - Inspections. 
In addition to the inspection set forth in Section 54-188, all day care homes shall be subject to inspections every 6 months conducted by a Health Department nurse and/or sanitarian and the Village Fire Department. It is not required that prior notice of these inspections be given to the licensee. 
(Code 1979, § 18.06)  
Sec. 54-165. - Adoption of State regulations. 
The Village hereby adopts by reference the Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the Licensing of Day Care Homes prescribed and published by the State Department of Children and Family Services, pursuant to the Child Care Act of 1969, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq., and all rules, regulations and amendments thereto. A violation of any of such standards, rules and regulations as adopted by this article shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this article, provided that: 
(1)  Any reference in the rules and regulations to "Department" shall read as meaning the Department of Public Health of the Village. 
(2)  Any reference in the rules and regulations to the "Director" shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Health of the Village. 
(3)  One copy of the minimum standards, rules and regulations adopted by reference shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(4)  At least 1 copy of the minimum standards, rules and regulations of the National Fire Protection Association's Life Safety Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk. 
(Code 1979, § 18.01)  
Sec. 54-166. - Standards for operation and premises. 
All provisions contained in the publications entitled "Licensing Standards for Day Care Homes," as published in the State Department of Children and Family Services, and the "Life Safety Code," as published by the National Fire Protection Association, including all requirements therein for the proper licensing and regulation of short term child care in residential districts within the Village, are hereby adopted as the licensing standards for day care homes in the Village, except for the following, which shall supersede provisions in "Licensing Standards for Day Care Homes" as published by the State Department of Children and Family Service: 
(1)  Residence of caregiver. The address of the day care home provided on the Village licensing application shall be the caregiver's primary residence. It shall be illegal for a caregiver to rent or purchase residential space strictly for the purpose of providing a day care home. 
(2)  Swimming pools. All in-ground or aboveground swimming pools will be subject to regulations set forth in Chapter 22, Article VIII. 
(3)  Portable wading pools. The use of portable wading pools shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Hot and cold water. Hot and cold water shall be provided through mixed valves at an appropriate pressure. 
(5)  Certification of health of household pets. Before a day care home is allowed to operate in the Village, a licensed veterinarian shall certify that all household pets are free of diseases that could endanger the children's health, and that dogs and cats have been inoculated for rabies. This certification shall occur annually. 
(6)  Notification of injuries from pets. The Village Health Department shall be notified immediately of any injuries to children from household pets. 
(7)  Care of sick children. Whenever a child becomes ill or is suspected of having a contagious disease, that child shall be removed immediately from the general vicinity of other children. Provisions shall be made for isolating the child in a separate room. The child's parent(s) shall be notified immediately of the apparent illness. The child shall remain in isolation until the parent(s) can remove the child from the day care home. 
(8)  Floors. When used for child care, basement floors, play areas, dining areas and restrooms shall have protective and easily cleanable surfaces, such as but not limited to tile, linoleum and low-ply carpeting. Painted concrete is not considered to be a safe and protective surface covering. 
(9)  Outdoor equipment. Whenever equipment and materials for outdoor use exist, the following standards shall be adhered to: 
a.  Equipment and materials for outdoor use shall be appropriate to the age and development needs of the children served. Such equipment and materials for infants, toddlers and preschool children shall be provided in appropriate quantity and variety. 
b.  Outdoor equipment shall be placed so as to avoid collisions and accidents while still permitting freedom of action by the children. 
c.  Supports for climbing apparatus and large equipment shall be securely fastened to the ground. 
d.  There shall be a soft, resilient surface or pad under all permanently affixed outdoor recreational equipment from which children may jump or fall. 
e.  Sandboxes shall be covered when not in use and shall be cleaned daily. 
f.  Outdoor storage shall be available for equipment not permanently secured to the ground, unless indoor storage space is available. 
g.  Provisions shall be made so that access to outdoor play areas shall be physically restricted via a temporary enclosure or permanent fence to safely protect children from traffic and other hazards. 
(10)  Non-child-care activities. Operation of another business or any other activities on the premises must not interfere with the care or safety of children. 
(11)  Submission of court records; annual criminal records check. All court records referred to in the State Department of Children and Family Services' Licensing Standards for Day Care Homes shall be submitted to the Department for consideration prior to licensing approval. The Department, in conjunction with the Village Police Department, shall conduct an annual criminal record check of all day care home operators, family members, staff members, new employees and volunteers and report their findings to the Village Manager. If the Village Manager or designee finds that an individual should not be allowed in the day care home as an operator/owner, family member, employee or volunteer, the Village Manager or designee shall notify the applicant of this fact. 
(12)  Hours of operation; maximum time of care. Children served in a day care home shall not remain on the premises for more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period. The hours of operation for a day care home within the Village will be between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(13)  Screening of children for illness. The caregiver shall conduct a daily, pre-admissions screening to determine if the child has obvious symptoms of illness. If symptoms of illness are present, the caregiver shall determine whether to provide care for the child, depending upon the apparent degree of illness, other children present, and facilities available to provide care for the ill child. Whenever children are admitted into the day care home with a communicable illness or whenever a child develops a communicable illness while under the care of a day care home operator, the caregiver shall immediately notify the Department of all communicable illnesses present, as required in the State Rules and Regulations for the Control of Communicable Diseases. 
(14)  Storage of medication. All medication shall be stored in a locked cabinet or container. The storage area shall be well-lighted and inaccessible to children. 
(15)  Record of incidents or accidents. A complete written record will be maintained of any and all serious incidents or accidents involving a child or a group of children. This record shall include the date and time of the incident or accident and the action taken concerning the incident/accident. These incidents or accidents include all situations requiring the emergency and non-emergency medical services of a physician, a hospital, the Police Department and/or the Fire Department. The Village Health Department will be notified by telephone of all such incidents or accidents within 24 hours of their occurrence. In addition, a written copy of the record shall be sent to the Health Department within 7 days. 
(16)  Handwashing supplies; drinking cups. Each child shall be provided with an individually labeled towel, washcloth and drinking cup. Single-use disposable articles are acceptable. Provisions shall also be made for providing liquid dispensed soap, powdered soap or properly drained bar soap for appropriate handwashing by all children, caregivers, assistants and family members. 
(17)  Appropriate and safe design required. The materials and equipment and their arrangement and use must be appropriate to the development needs and of safe design for the children in care. 
(18)  Cleaning of materials and toys. Materials and toys shall be cleaned and sanitized as needed with a germicidal solution. Materials and toys shall also be kept orderly, attractive and accessible to children. 
(19)  Smoking disclosure. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee to disclose to the parent or guardian of the child being cared for whether any caregiver or other individual in the home smokes during the hours of operation. 
(20)  Construction requirements. Each building used as a family day care home must meet the requirements of the BOCA/National Existing Structures Code, as adopted by the Village. 
Cross reference— Existing structures code, § 22-181 et seq. 
(21)  Maximum occupancy. The occupant load shall be a minimum of 100 square feet per occupant. 
(22)  Exits. 
a.  Every room used for sleeping, living, or dining purposes shall have at least 2 means of egress, at least 1 of which shall be a door or stairway providing a means of unobstructed travel to the outside of the building at street or ground level. The second means of egress may be a window approved by the Village Manager or designee which can be opened from the inside by the caregiver or a member of the staff. No room or space shall be occupied for living or sleeping purposes which is accessible only by a ladder, by folding stairs, or through a trap door. 
b.  Where clients are located on a floor (basement) below the level of exit discharge, at least 1 means of egress shall be an exit discharging directly to the outside, and the vertical travel to ground level shall not exceed 8 feet. The second means of egress may be a window approved by the Village Manager or designee which can be opened from the inside by the caregiver or a member of the staff. No facility shall be located more than 1 story below the ground. 
c.  Travel distance to exits shall be no greater than 150 feet. 
d.  All exitways shall be lighted by normal sources. 
(23)  Stairs. Every stairway shall comply with the minimum requirements for stairs, which are 8-inch risers, 9-inch treads and 32-inch stair width. All stairs shall be maintained free of items of storage. 
(24)  Width of doors. Each exit door shall be a minimum of 32 inches wide. 
(25)  Closet latches. Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from inside the closet. 
(26)  Bathroom doors. Every bathroom door lock shall be designed to permit the opening of the locked door from the outside in an emergency. The opening device shall be readily accessible to the caregiver or a member of the staff. 
(27)  Interior finishes. The interior finish of all occupied spaces in the home shall be a minimum of Class C (76/200 flame spread rated). The Village Manager or designee shall have the authority to approve interior finishes. 
(28)  Electrical wiring. Electrical wiring shall meet the electrical code of the Village as contained in Chapter 22, Article IV. The Village Manager or designee shall have the authority to classify existing electrical services as complying with all applicable electrical codes. 
(29)  Heating equipment. Unvented fuel-fired room heaters shall not be permitted. Vented fuel-fired heaters or oil- or gas-fired room heaters shall be installed in accordance with the BOCA Mechanical Code, current edition, as adopted by the Village. A guard shall be provided to protect the children from hot surfaces and open flames. 
(Code 1979, § 18.05) 
Cross reference— Mechanical code, § 22-121 et seq.  
Secs. 54-167—54-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 54-181. - Required. 
No person may establish, operate, maintain, offer or advertise a day care home within the Village without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 18.04)  
Sec. 54-182. - Exemptions. 
A family home in which care is given to children from a single household or to relatives shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article. A family home which is licensed as a "foster family home" as defined in the Child Care Act of 1969, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 18.047)  
Sec. 54-183. - Application information. 
Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 18.04)  
Sec. 54-184. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
An applicant for a license under this division must comply with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(Code 1979, § 18.04)  
Sec. 54-185. - State certification required. 
Each applicant for a day care home license shall provide evidence of compliance with the State Department of Public Health certification requirements.  
Sec. 54-186. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application. 
(Code 1979, § 18.045)  
Sec. 54-187. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 54-188. - Inspection of facilities. 
After receipt and upon review of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall cause inspections to be made of the applicant's facilities. The Village Manager or designee shall, upon consideration of the application and reports of the inspecting departments, approve or reject the application. 
(Code 1979, § 18.043)  
Sec. 54-189. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 54-190. - Contents; term. 
Any license issued under this division shall state the date the license was issued and the expiration date. Such licenses shall be issued for a period of 1 year. 
(Code 1979, § 18.044)  
Sec. 54-191. - Renewal. 
At least 90 days but not more than 120 days prior to the expiration of a license issued under this division, the licensee shall submit an application for renewal. 
(Code 1979, § 18.042)  
Sec. 54-192. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties. 
(Code 1979, § 18.046)  
Sec. 54-193. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 54-194. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 54-193. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 54-195. - Fee. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 18.041)  
Sec. 54-196. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license. 
(Code 1979, § 18.044)  
Secs. 54-197—54-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LONGTERM CARE FACILITIES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.; Long-Term Care Peer Review and Quality Assessment and Assurance Protection Act, 745 ILCS 55/1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-221. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article and the policy of the Village to establish standards for the licensing and regulation of all intermediate care and skilled nursing care facilities within the Village and to require compliance with at least the minimum requirements of the Nursing Home Care Act of 1979, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq., including the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 1979, § 16.01)  
Sec. 54-222. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means a person who is charged with the general administration and supervision of a facility and licensed under the Nursing Home Administrators Licensing and Disciplinary Act, 225 ILCS 70/1 et seq. 
Applicant means any person making application for a license under this article. 
Department means the Public Health Department of the Village. 
Director means the Director of the Village Public Health Department. 
Facility means longterm care facility. 
Fire Chief means the Fire Chief of the Village Fire Department. 
Longterm care facility. 
(1)  The term "longterm care facility" means a private home, institution, building, residence, or any other place, whether operated for profit or not, which provides personal care and/or skilled nursing care on a 24-hour basis for 3 or more persons who, because of physical or mental incapacity, may be unable to provide for their own needs and safety without the assistance of another person. The term "longterm care facility," wherever used in this article, shall include only skilled nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities, those terms being defined as follows: 
a.  Intermediate care facility means a longterm care facility which provides basic nursing care and other restorative services under periodic medical direction. Such facilities are primarily for residents who have longterm illnesses or disabilities which may have reached a relatively stable plateau. 
b.  Skilled nursing facility means a longterm care facility which provides skilled nursing care, continuous skilled nursing observations, restorative nursing, and other services under professional direction with frequent medical supervision. Such facilities are primarily provided for patients who need the type of care and treatment required during the post-acute phase of illness or during reoccurrences of symptoms in longterm illness. 
(2)  This article does not apply to the following types of facilities: 
a.  Intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled, as defined in the Minimum Standards for the Licensing of Long-Term Care Facilities, 1980, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq. 
b.  Community living facilities, as defined in the Minimum Standards for Community Living Facilities, 1982, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq. 
Manager means the Village Manager. 
Neglect means a failure of a facility to provide adequate medical or personal care or maintenance, which failure may result in physical or mental injury to a resident or in the deterioration of a resident's physical or mental condition. 
Nurse means a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse, as defined in the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq. 
Owner means the individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other person who owns a facility. If a facility is operated by a person who leases the physical plant, which is owned by another person, the term "owner" means the person who operates the facility, except that, if the person who owns the physical plant is an affiliate of the person who operates the facility and has significant control over the day-to-day operations of the facility, the person who owns the physical plant shall incur jointly and severally with the owner all liabilities imposed on an owner under this article. 
Personal care means assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other personal needs or maintenance, or general supervision and oversight of the physical and mental well-being of an individual who is incapable of maintaining a private, independent residence or who is incapable of managing their person, whether or not a guardian has been appointed for such individual. 
(Code 1979, § 16.04) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-223. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a longterm care facility in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-32. The Manager may request, in addition to other remedies provided in Chapter 42, Article II, that the Corporation Counsel bring action for an injunction to enjoin the future operation or maintenance of any such longterm care facility. 
(Code 1979, § 16.09)  
Sec. 54-224. - Adoption of State regulations. 
(a)  The Village hereby adopts by reference the Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the Licensing of Long-Term Care Facilities prescribed and published by the State Department of Public Health pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act of 1979, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq., and all rules, regulations and amendments thereto. A violation of any of such standards, rules and regulations as adopted by this article shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any reference in the minimum standards, rules and regulations adopted by reference in this section to the "Department" shall read as meaning the Department of Public Health of the Village. 
(c)  Any reference in the minimum standards, rules and regulations adopted by reference in this section to the "Director" shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Health of the Village. 
(d)  One copy of the minimum standards, rules and regulations adopted by reference in this section shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and kept available for public use, inspection and examination. 
(e)  At least 1 copy of the minimum standards, rules, and regulations adopted by reference in this section shall be kept on file in the Department of Public Health of the Village for public inspection. 
(Code 1979, § 16.02)  
Sec. 54-225. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee shall administer this article and may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its enforcement. 
(Code 1979, § 16.03) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 54-226. - Inspections. 
Inspections of all longterm care facilities shall be made at least once every 60 days by a Department nurse and by a Sanitarian, either separately or concurrently. These inspections shall be conducted without prior notice to the longterm care facility. 
(Code 1979, § 16.07)  
Sec. 54-227. - Standards for operation and premises. 
(a)  Resident assessment and security. 
(1)  Within 5 days prior to or 72 hours after admittance to a longterm care facility, each resident shall be examined by a licensed physician. If, after examination of the resident and review of the resident's case history, the physician determines that 1 or more of the following conditions are present, the resident shall be referred to a certified psychiatrist or senior resident under the direction of a certified psychiatrist or a registered clinical psychologist for further evaluation: 
a.  Suffering from a mental deficiency diagnosed as moderate or mild or whose disability is attributable to mental retardation, autism, or other pathological conditions which generally originate before such individuals attain age 18, and which continue or can be expected to continue indefinitely and which constitute a substantial functioning handicap. 
b.  Suffering from mental illness diagnosed as psychosis or psychoneurosis which requires medical, surgical, or psychiatric management, excluding individuals suffering from senile dementia. 
c.  A history of aggressive, hostile, or homicidal behavior or a history of suicide attempts. 
d.  A history of or suffering from mental and/or physical illness or disorder related to or caused by chronic alcoholism or addiction to drugs. 
(2)  Upon completion of the examination, the physician shall fill out the resident assessment form provided by the Village, which shall become a part of the resident's permanent record. The form shall contain a diagnosis as well as any restrictions to be placed on the resident's movement and/or activities. 
(3)  All residents must use 1 entry/exit point in each facility except for emergencies. The entry/exit point must be monitored 24 hours each day by a staff member. The staff member must sign each resident in and out of the facility and must document the following information: 
a.  Resident's name. 
b.  Time of exiting the facility. 
c.  Destination. 
d.  Estimated time of return. 
e.  Actual time of return and who the resident was accompanied by. 
(4)  It is the responsibility of the staff to determine that any resident leaving the facility is in compliance with physicians' orders. If an alarm is present and activated at the entry/exit point a staff person is not required at the entry/exit point between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Review of resident care. Each longterm care facility shall establish a procedure for review of resident care based on the evaluation of a resident's immediate and longterm needs. Such review shall occur once every 6 months, or more frequently as needed. This procedure shall be the responsibility of a care review committee consisting of at least 1 supervisory nurse, 1 nurse's aide, 1 social worker and 1 activity worker. The resident's physician and/or psychiatrist shall also be included. In the absence of the resident's physician, a signed statement stating approval of the resident's care plan shall be included in the care review proceedings. Other persons shall be included where appropriate. The resident, when able, shall be encouraged to participate in the care review committee or, if not able, may be represented by a person of the resident's own choosing. 
(c)  Nursing care. The following personnel requirements shall apply in addition to the State personnel requirements under the Nursing Home Care Act of 1979, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.: 
(1)  In longterm care facilities, there shall be a full-time director of nurses licensed as a registered nurse in the State. The director of nurses shall be on duty a minimum of 40 hours per week. 
(2)  In facilities of 100 beds or more, there shall be an assistant director of nurses who shall be licensed as a registered nurse in the State. Either the assistant director or a supervising nurse, who shall also be a registered nurse and licensed in the State, shall be on duty on those days on which the director of nurses is not on duty. The assistant director of supervising nurses shall not be included in the staff/resident ratio calculations. 
(3)  In addition to the director of nurses and the assistant director of nurses, there shall be at least 1 registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in charge of each 8-hour shift who understands and speaks adequate English, regardless of the size of the longterm care facility. 
(4)  Within 6 months of August 15, 1983, and annually thereafter, each facility shall provide the nursing staff with a minimum of 18 continuing education units (CEU's) of formal restorative nursing training approved by the Department. Nurses receiving the training shall provide in-service training to all other nursing personnel. 
(5)  Medication shall not be given to any patient without the written order of the attending physician. All such medication shall be administered to the patient only by a physician, registered nurse, or licensed practical nurse who has successfully completed training in pharmacology and passed an examination approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health. 
(d)  Required services. 
(1)  All longterm care facilities shall provide the following services: 
a.  Food service. Every longterm care facility shall comply with Article IX of this chapter. 
b.  Social services. Every longterm care facility shall provide: 
1.  Referral to appropriate agencies where there are indicators that financial, psychiatric, rehabilitative, legal, or social service help will be needed that the longterm care facility cannot provide. 
2.  Assistance with the resident's adjustment to the longterm care facility and availability of continuing social services to residents of the facility, including the availability of contact with family members to keep them involved. 
3.  Assistance to staff and residents in discharge planning and its implementation. 
4.  Assistance in providing in-service training to longterm care facility staff directed toward understanding emotional problems and social problems of residents and assistance in solving these problems. 
5.  Assistance to staff and residents in using community resources. 
c.  Mental health services. All longterm care facilities with residents who have been discharged from psychiatric care within the last 3 years or with residents evidencing mental retardation or mental problems as determined by the resident's attending physician and/or psychiatrist shall meet the following staff requirements: 
1.  A psychiatrist licensed to practice in the State shall be under formal contract by the facility to provide psychiatric treatment as deemed necessary by the attending physician and/or the care review committee. 
2.  Social work shall be provided to individual residents defined in this subsection at the minimum rate of 30 minutes per week by a social worker who has either a master's in social work or a bachelor's degree from an undergraduate program accredited by the Council on Social Work Education. 
d.  Activity program. All longterm care facilities shall have an activity program directed by a full-time staff member who shall be qualified by training or experience to direct an activity program. Records of programming and patient participation shall be maintained and shall include program goals, attendance records and progress notes. The plan for activity programming shall incorporate community resources and shall include group activities to promote learning about interpersonal behavior. 
e.  Physical therapy. Each longterm care facility shall make available to its residents the services of a registered physical therapist currently licensed by the State and under formal contract to the longterm care facility, who shall, under physicians' orders, spend such time within the facility as such orders may require. 
f.  Occupational therapy/recreational therapy. All longterm care facilities shall make available the services of an occupational therapist who is registered by the American Occupational Therapy Association or a therapeutic recreation specialist who shall be under formal contract to or employed full-time by the longterm care facility. 
(2)  The determination as to which resident shall be taking part in any or all of the therapy programs provided for in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be made by the care review committee, in consultation with the resident's physician and/or psychiatrist and therapists, each of whom shall: 
a.  Complete an evaluation of each resident within 30 days of admission to the facility. The evaluation shall include an assessment of communication skills, mobility and physical strength and coordination and shall include recommendations for care and treatment needed to maintain or restore maximum functioning in such areas. The evaluation shall be utilized by the care review committee in the review of resident care required in subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  Conduct bimonthly in-service programs designed to assist staff in carrying out restorative procedures. 
c.  Consult with the activity director as needed to plan activities which are supportive of restorative care needs. 
(e)  Records. All longterm care facilities shall maintain the following records: 
(1)  Admission records. A medical history and interim psychosocial history of each resident shall be compiled within 72 hours of admission to a longterm care facility and filed with each resident's chart. 
(2)  Active records. A complete medical file including both past medical history and current medical status shall be maintained for each resident. 
(f)  Additional standards. The following standards shall apply in addition to State standards for all longterm care facilities hereafter constructed or for existing structures which are hereafter converted to use as intermediate care or skilled nursing care facilities, and for all additions to existing facilities. The rate for air changes per hour shall be certified by a licensed HVAC contractor or a mechanical engineer at the longterm care facility's expense. 
(1)  All corridors shall be provided with 6 tempered fresh air changes per hour at a rate of 2 cubic feet per minute per square foot. 
(2)  Residents' living space shall meet the following standards: 
a.  There shall be 225 square feet of floor area per bed provided. This 225 square feet of living space shall include no less than 120 square feet of bed space per single bedroom, 100 square feet of bed space per multiple bedroom and 75 square feet of recreational and dining space per resident. 
b.  All longterm care facilities shall provide each resident with a functional closet or wardrobe with a floor area of no less than 4 square feet. This area is in addition to the requirements of subsection (f)(3)a of this section. 
(3)  There shall be 1 lavatory and 1 toilet for each bedroom. Except, when there are no more than 4 residents in 2 rooms which have such facilities directly accessible from each of the 2 rooms, 1 lavatory and toilet facility may be provided. 
(4)  There shall be 1 bathtub or shower for each 10 resident beds on each floor with direct access from the resident's room or common hallway. Where this results in more than 3 tubs or showers, they are to be placed in 2 separate rooms. Each such room shall contain a lavatory. Each resident's privacy shall be preserved. 
(5)  Pest control shall be provided by a certified pest control operator. 
(6)  All door alarms shall be the tamper/pilfer-proof type. Door alarms shall either require a control key to deactivate the alarm or a remote switch which cannot be easily reached from outside the building or functional area to deactivate the alarm. 
(Code 1979, § 16.06)  
Sec. 54-228. - Emergency medical care and transportation. 
It shall be the responsibility of each longterm care facility to provide or to have available emergency medical care, including transportation, for its residents. If the longterm care facility fails to provide such care and/or transportation and, as a result, the Village is requested to respond, there shall be a charge to the facility in accordance with Section 46-36, which shall be borne exclusively by said facility, for any of the following: 
(1)  Transportation to a hospital for any treatment which can be handled by basic life support ambulance. 
(2)  Transportation to a hospital of naturally deceased residents for the purpose of verifying death. 
(3)  In-house treatment of residents not requiring advanced life support. 
The Village Manager or designee shall have the authority to waive such charges upon ascertainment that the request for aid from the Village was due to unforeseen circumstances beyond the control of the longterm care facility. 
(Code 1979, § 16.08)  
Secs. 54-229—54-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 54-251. - Required. 
No person may establish, operate, maintain, offer, or advertise a longterm care facility within the Village without first obtaining a license in accordance with the provisions of this division. The requirement of a valid municipal license does not preclude the requirement of a valid State license, as required by the Nursing Home Care Act of 1979, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 16.051)  
Sec. 54-252. - Application information. 
(a)  Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  A copy of the annual financial statement given to the State Department of Public Aid/Public Health (either the long or short form). 
(2)  A permit as required by the Illinois Health Facilities Planning Act, 20 ILCS 3960/1 et seq. 
(3)  In the case of new construction or the conversion of existing structures, preliminary plans and specifications for the proposed facility. 
(Code 1979, § 16.052(a))  
Sec. 54-253. - Statement of ownership. 
Before a license can be issued or renewed, the applicant shall provide the Village Manager or designee with a statement of ownership, which shall be public information, on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 16.052(d))  
Sec. 54-254. - State certification required. 
Each applicant for a license for a longterm care facility shall provide evidence of compliance with the State Department of Public Health certification requirements.  
Sec. 54-255. - Action on application. 
All licenses required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 54-256. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 54-257. - Inspection of facilities. 
After receipt and review of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall cause an inspection to be made of the applicant's facility. 
(Code 1979, § 16.052(e))  
Sec. 54-258. - Display. 
Any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed at the location for which the license has been issued.  
Sec. 54-259. - Contents; term. 
Any license granted by the Manager shall state the maximum bed capacity for which it is granted, the date the license was issued and the expiration date. Such licenses shall be issued for a period of 1 year. However, the Manager may issue licenses or renewals for periods of less than 1 year in order to distribute the expiration dates of such licenses throughout the calendar year, and fees for such licenses shall be prorated on the basis of the portion of a year for which they are issued. 
(Code 1979, § 16.053)  
Sec. 54-260. - Renewal. 
At least 90 days but not more than 120 days prior to the expiration of a license issued under this division, the licensee shall submit an application for renewal of the license on forms provided by the Department. 
(Code 1979, § 16.052(c))  
Sec. 54-261. - Notification of change of ownership or administrator. 
Change of majority ownership must be reported to the Village Manager or designee. Any change in administrator must be reported to the Village Manager or designee within 5 days. 
(Code 1979, § 16.054)  
Sec. 54-262. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend all licenses issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend the license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties.  
Sec. 54-263. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed.  
Sec. 54-264. - Hearings. 
The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 54-263. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked.  
Sec. 54-265. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73.  
Sec. 54-266. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or corporation other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license. 
(Code 1979, § 16.053)  
Secs. 54-267—54-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; district regulations for food establishments and restaurants, § 118-85. 
State Law reference— Regulation of food in municipalities, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-1 et seq.; Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 410 ILCS 620/1 et seq.; Sanitary Food Preparation Act, 410 ILCS 650/0.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the Department of Public Health of the Village. 
Director means the Director of the Village Health Department. 
Food delivery vehicle means every vehicle used to transport food within the Village. 
Food service establishment includes a grocery, meat market, fish market, fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionery, nut store, bakery, delicatessen located within a food store and any other establishment other than a private home, whether fixed or moveable, and wholesale or retail, where food or beverages, or food products, intended for human consumption on or off the premises, are sold, manufactured, produced, prepared, stored, handled or transported. 
Health Department means the Village Department of Public Health. 
Temporary food service establishment means any food service establishment which operates for a temporary period of time, not to exceed 14 days, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar transitory gatherings. 
(Code 1979, § 15.011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-292. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 15.11)  
Sec. 54-293. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this article, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 4(15.12), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 54-294. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 4(15.13), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 54-295. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a food service establishment in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 54-296. - Inspections. 
(a)  Frequency. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, the Village Manager or designee shall cause inspections of food service establishments as required by State Department of Public Health standards. Food delivery vehicles and food vending machines shall be inspected as determined by the Village Manager or designee. Additional inspections shall be made when necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of all applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes, and rules and regulations. 
(b)  Access to premises and records. A food permit holder, operator or employee shall cooperate with the Health Department in the conducting of the inspections. Advance notification of an inspection shall not be required; however, inspections shall be made at reasonable times, so as not to unduly interfere with the normal operation of business. Inspections shall include the examination of records in order to obtain information pertinent to the purchase, receipt, and usage of foods and supplies and persons employed by the food permit holder or operation. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the inspection of an establishment at any time if it is determined by the Village Manager or designee to be an emergency. 
(c)  Inspection reports. 
(1)  The findings and results of inspections conducted in accordance with this article shall be put in writing, and a copy of such inspection report shall be provided to the food permit holder or operator. 
(2)  The inspection report shall be substantially equivalent to that of the State Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations for Food Service Sanitation and Retail Food Store reports. 
(d)  Notice of violation. Whenever an inspection results in the finding of a violation of or noncompliance with any applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes, and rules and regulations, the food permit holder or operator shall be so notified in writing of such violation or noncompliance. 
(e)  Form of violation notice. The form of the notice of violation shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific violations found, with each violation being identified by written remarks and by item number, and the necessary corrective measures. 
(2)  Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found, in accordance with administrative standards established by the Health Department. 
(f)  Service of notices. Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been properly served when a copy of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the food permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the food permit holder. A copy of such notice shall be maintained by the Health Department. 
(Code 1979, § 15.05)  
Sec. 54-297. - Adoption of Food Service Sanitation Code. 
(a)  The Village hereby adopts by reference the Food Service Sanitation Code, Title 77, Chapter 1, Part 750 of the Illinois Administrative Code, and any subsequent revisions or amendments to the Code are hereby adopted and made part of this Code. 
(b)  A copy of the Food Sanitation Code shall be available in the office of the Village Clerk for public use. 
(Code 1979, § 15.01; Ord. No. 16-8-C-4245, § 1, 8-15-2016; Ord. No. 18-12-C-4424, § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Sec. 54-298. - Examination of food and equipment. 
(a)  Food. Food may be examined or samples taken by the Village as often as may be necessary to determine adulteration or misbranding. The Village Manager or designee may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a hold order on any food believed to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated, or misbranded. Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored until a final determination is made on the disposition of the food. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order, notice or tag placed on food by the Village. If a hearing is requested as provided for in this article, such food or the containers thereof shall not be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of, or destroyed without permission of the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  Equipment. Where equipment used in the preparation of food products is found to be in a state of disrepair, unsafe, unsuitable for use, or unsanitary, the owner or operator of such equipment shall be so notified by the Village Manager or designee. Such equipment may not be put back into service until written permission is obtained from the Village Manager or designee. Equipment which requires upgrading due to its condition will be assigned an amortization date. Upon completion of the amortization period the food permit holder shall replace or remove the piece of equipment. The amortization period shall be determined by the current condition of the existing equipment, factoring the equipment's potential to contribute to a foodborne illness outbreak and the cost of the replacement piece of equipment. This period shall not be more than 5 years. The Village Manager or designee shall place a tag on the equipment, with the tag specifying the date by which the equipment must be modified, repaired, or removed from the establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter the tag placed on equipment by the Village Manager or designee. Such equipment shall not be altered without permission of the Village Manager or designee. 
(c)  Hearing. The owner or operator of any food service establishment, food delivery vehicle or food vending machine that has received notification in accordance with this section shall have a right to a hearing as provided for in Section 54-328(b)(3). As a result of the findings of the hearing, the Village Manager shall issue an appropriate order informing the owner or operator of the disposition of the food or equipment which was the subject matter of the hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 15.07)  
Sec. 54-299. - Sale of food from establishments outside jurisdiction of Village. 
Food from food service establishments or commissaries outside the jurisdiction of the Village may be sold within the Village if such food service establishments or commissaries conform to all applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. The Village Manager or designee may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service establishments or commissaries are located. 
(Code 1979, § 15.08)  
Sec. 54-300. - Approval of plans for new construction or remodeling. 
(a)  Plans required. 
(1)  When a food service establishment is constructed or remodeled (structural changes or fixed equipment replacement/installation), or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food service establishment, remodeled, or altered, a plan showing building layout, equipment size, type and arrangement, and construction materials shall be submitted to the Village Manager or designee for approval before such work is begun. 
(2)  A plan review form provided by the Village Manager or designee shall be completed and returned prior to a permit being issued. 
(b)  Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by this article or any applicable Village, State or federal codes, ordinances, statutes, and rules and regulations, the Village Manager or designee shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations in order to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and all applicable Village, State and federal, codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. No food service establishment, food vending machine, or food delivery vehicle shall be operated prior to the issuance of a food permit. 
(Code 1979, § 15.09)  
Sec. 54-301. - Employee health standards; procedure when infection is suspected. 
When the Village Manager or designee has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment or vending machine commissary employee, the Village Manager or designee shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make such other investigation as may be indicated, and take appropriate action. No person, while affected with any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores, or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food-contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms, or transmitting disease to other individuals. If the owner, operator or manager of an establishment has reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease, the owner, operator or manager shall notify the Health Department immediately. The Village Manager or designee may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments. 
(2)  The immediate closure of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease. 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee, or other employees. 
(Code 1979, § 15.10)  
Secs. 54-302—54-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 54-321. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment, food vending machine or food delivery vehicle within the Village without a valid food permit. 
(Code 1979, § 15.02)  
Sec. 54-322. - Application information. 
Applications for permits under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant.  
Sec. 54-323. - State certification required. 
Each applicant for a food service establishment permit shall provide the Health Department with evidence of compliance with the State Department of Public Health food handler certification requirements. 
(Code 1979, § 15.03)  
Sec. 54-324. - Action on application. 
All permits required by this division shall be acted upon within 30 days of the Village Manager's or designee's receipt of such application.  
Sec. 54-325. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant.  
Sec. 54-326. - Inspections; issuance. 
Upon receipt of an application for a food permit, the Village Manager or designee shall cause an inspection to be made of the food service establishment, food vending machine, or food delivery vehicle to determine compliance with all applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes, and rules and regulations. When an inspection reveals that all applicable requirements are complied with, a permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1979, § 15.024)  
Sec. 54-327. - Display. 
Any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be posted permanently in a conspicuous location within the food service establishment or on the food vending machine or kept within the food delivery vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(Code 1979, § 15.02)  
Sec. 54-328. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Suspension; authority to close business. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee may suspend any food permit for failure or refusal to comply with any applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes or rules and regulations. 
(2)  If the Village Manager or designee determines that there is an immediate danger to the public health or welfare, the Village Manager or designee may cause a written notice to be served on the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such an immediate health hazard. The notice shall specify the items constituting the health hazards, the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period for compliance. If deemed necessary by the Village Manager or designee an order shall be included in the notice stating that the food permit is immediately suspended, and that all food service operations shall cease immediately. 
(b)  Revocation. 
(1)  The Village Manager may revoke any food permit for failure or refusal of a food permit holder to comply with any applicable Village, State or federal codes, ordinances, statutes or rules and regulations. 
(2)  Grounds for revocation shall include but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Serious or repeated violations by a food permit holder. 
b.  Interference with the Village in the performance of official duties. 
c.  Failure to pay any fee assessed in accordance with this article. 
(3)  The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of the intent to revoke a food permit. The notice shall be in writing, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally served on the food permit holder, and shall set forth the reasons for revocation. However, a food permit may not be revoked unless the food permit holder has had an opportunity to present evidence in the holder's behalf. If, within 7 days of receipt of the notice, the food permit holder does not request a hearing in writing, the Village Manager or designee shall notify the food permit holder that the holder's food permit will be revoked, the effective date of such revocation and the consequences of the revocation. 
(c)  Reinstatement of revoked or suspended permit. Any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked pursuant to this article may request a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. The request shall be made to the Village Manager in writing. As soon as possible, but not longer than 7 days following receipt of a written request for reinspection, including a statement signed by the applicant that in the applicant's opinion the conditions causing suspension or revocation of the food permit have been corrected, the Village Manager or designee shall have a an inspection conducted. If such inspection indicates that the applicant is complying with the requirements of all applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes, and rules and regulations, the food permit shall be reinstated immediately. 
(Code 1979, § 15.04)  
Sec. 54-329. - Fees. 
Fees for permits under this division shall be as set forth in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 15.022)  
Sec. 54-330. - Transfer. 
(a)  No permit issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such permit was issued. No individual or corporation other than the permittee shall act or do business under such permit. 
(b)  Any food permit issued in accordance with this article shall state on its face that a change of ownership of the food service establishment, food vending machine or food delivery vehicle requires inspection by the Health Department and issuance of a new permit as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 15.02)  
Sec. 54-331. - Issuance of new permit on change of ownership of business. 
(a)  Prior to the change of ownership of any establishment for which a permit is issued or required under this article, the prospective owner shall apply for a food permit. Upon receipt of such application, the Village Manager or designee shall cause an inspection to be made of the establishment. The findings of such inspection shall be given to the prospective owner and current food permit holder. These findings shall include a list of requirements necessary to bring the establishment in compliance with all applicable Village, State and federal codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a food permit to the prospective owner, the prospective owner must agree in writing to comply with all deficiencies enumerated on the inspection report within a prescribed time period. Such time period for compliance for individual deficiencies or violations shall be established by the Village Manager or designee. Failure to comply with the agreed-upon schedule shall be cause to suspend or revoke the certificate of occupancy, food permit or applicable licenses. 
(Code 1979, § 15.06)  
Sec. 54-332. - Permit for temporary food service establishments. 
Permits for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 days. 
(Code 1979, § 15.021)  
Secs. 54-333—54-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - BARBERSHOPS, BEAUTY PARLORS AND SALONS 
 
Sec. 54-351. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a barbershop, beauty or salon in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in chapter 42, article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-352. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee shall administer this article and may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-353. - Inspections. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to inspect every establishment regulated under this article as often as necessary to ensure compliance with this article and all other regulations relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-354. - Cleanliness of premises; health of employees. 
Premises used for a barbershop, beauty parlor or salon, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit waste material of any kind to accumulate on the premises. It shall be unlawful to employ in such establishment any person afflicted with a communicable disease. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-355. - Disinfection of implements and towels. 
It shall be unlawful to use in any establishment used as a barbershop, beauty shop or salon, any implements or tools upon any person without first disinfecting the implement or tool. It shall be unlawful to use any towel on any customer after the towel has been used before, without having such towel cleaned and disinfected prior to such second usage. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
ARTICLE XI. - PET AND ANIMAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 54-361. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pets and animals include: dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats and other small animals, unless otherwise indicated specifically. 
Pet and animal sales, services and veterinary services includes any establishment where: 
(1)  Pets and animals may be or are given veterinary care. 
(2)  Pets and animals are raised, trained, boarded or sold for profit or hire. 
(3)  Pets and animals are groomed for profit or hire. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-362. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of such establishment in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in chapter 42, article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-363. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee shall administer this article and may promulgate rules and regulations to carry out its enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-364. - Inspections. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to inspect every establishment regulated under this article as often as necessary to ensure compliance with this article and all other regulations relative thereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-365. - Sanitation; treatment of animals; reporting of communicable diseases. 
(a)  Every establishment shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain thereon for more than 24 hours. 
(b)  All animals shall be humanely treated, and any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and treated. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all under this article to report promptly to the Director of Public Health any animal afflicted with a communicable disease in the care and custody of such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 54-366. - Disturbing noises. 
No establishment regulated under this article shall harbor or keep any animal shut or tied up in any yard or enclosure, or on the premises of such establishment, which, by barking, howling, bawling or other noises, shall disturb the peace and quiet of any family, individual or neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 7, 1-7-2008)  
Secs. 54-367—54-379. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MEDICAL CANNABIS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 54-380. - Violation declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center or Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 14-12-C-4107, § 1, 12-1-2014)  
Sec. 54-381. - Compliance with state regulations and rules. 
All Medical Cannabis Cultivation Centers and Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organizations shall comply with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act 410 ILCS 130 and any rules adopted in accordance thereto. 
(Ord. No. 14-12-C-4107, § 1, 12-1-2014)  
Sec. 54-382. - Location. 
Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organizations shall not be located: 
(a)  In multiple-use or on multiple-tenant property or on a property that shares parking with other uses; 
(b)  Further than fifty (50) feet of an arterial street as delineated in the Comprehensive Plan; 
(c)  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residential property. 
(Ord. No. 14-12-C-4107, § 1, 12-1-2014)  
Sec. 54-383. - Security. 
Any Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall have a minimum of one security guard on the premises at all times. 
(Ord. No. 14-12-C-4107, § 1, 12-1-2014)  
Chapter 58 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; Human Relations Commission, § 2-621 et seq. 
Federal law reference— Civil rights, 42 U.S.C.A. § 1781 et seq. 
State Law reference— Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Registries. 
No Village staff, elected or appointed officials, or any other party acting on behalf of the Village shall in any way assist, enable or participate in the creation or maintenance of any program to register individuals in the United States based on their ancestry, national origin, or religion. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 58-2. - Immigration status-based threats prohibited. 
No Village staff, elected or appointed officials, or any other party acting on behalf of the Village will coerce, including using threats of deportation, or engage in verbal abuse of any person based upon the person's or the person's family members' actual or perceived citizenship or immigration status. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 58-3. - Requesting information prohibited. 
No Village staff, elected or appointed officials, or any other party acting on behalf of the Village shall request information about or otherwise investigate or assist in the investigation of the citizenship or immigration status of any person. 
Any Village form fields requesting information on citizenship or immigration status shall be removed, unless such information is required by statute, federal regulation or an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 58-4. - Right to Village services and benefits regardless of immigration status. 
No Village staff, elected or appointed officials, or any other party acting on behalf of the Village shall condition the receipt of Village services, benefits or any other advantage, upon citizenship or immigration status unless required to do so by statute, federal regulation or an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 58-5. - Detainment. 
The Village shall not detain any individual based on their citizenship or immigration status unless pursuant to an outstanding criminal warrant. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 58-6. - Assistance with enforcement operations. 
No Village staff or any party acting on behalf of the Village shall accept requests by any agencies to support or assist with immigration enforcement operations, including but not limited to requests to provide information on persons who may be the subject of immigration enforcement operations (except as may be required under Section 58-7 of this Article) or to otherwise be present to assist or support an operation. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 58-7. - Information regarding citizenship or immigration status. 
Nothing in this Article prohibits the Village sending to, or receiving from, any local, state or federal agency, a statement of an individual's country of citizenship or a statement of an individual's immigration status. Village staff shall be instructed that federal law does not allow such prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 17-3-C-4274, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Secs. 58-8—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION AND FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Real estate signs, § 82-7(11). 
Federal law reference— Fair housing, 42 U.S.C.A. § 3601 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to enact fair housing ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/11-11.1-1; civil rights violations re real estate transactions, 775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Purpose of article. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village and the purpose of this article that all persons shall be assured full and equal opportunity to obtain fair and adequate housing for themselves and their families within the Village and to secure to all persons an equal opportunity to view, purchase, lease, rent, or occupy real estate in the Village without discrimination because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(Code 1979, § 56.01; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-20-2004)  
Sec. 58-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attorney for the commission means any attorney, duly licensed by the State, designated by Corporation Counsel to act as legal counsel for the Commission in accordance with Village policies and procedures. 
Chair means the duly appointed chair of the Village Human Relations Commission, or the chair's designee. 
Commission means the Village Human Relations Commission. 
Complainant means person(s) filing a charge of unfair housing practices. 
Discriminate means to treat any person(s) differently from others because of race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
Lease includes any sublease, assignment, or rental and any contract to enter into any sublease, assignment, or rental. 
Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, or person(s) in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any person(s) in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person(s) in the business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to, or a security interest in, real estate. 
Owner means any person(s) who holds legal or equitable title to, owns any beneficial interest in any housing accommodation, who holds legal or equitable title to shares of, or any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative which owns any real property, or any person(s) who is acting as the agent, manager or employee of the owner. 
Real estate transaction means the purchase, sale, exchange, or lease of any housing accommodation, or business, commercial or industrial property, and an option to do any of the foregoing. 
Respondent means person(s) charged with violating any provision of this article. 
Sale means any contract to sell, exchange, or convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in, a housing accommodation or business, commercial or industrial property. 
Source of income means the lawful manner by which an individual supports himself or herself and his or her dependents. 
Steering means to influence or attempt to influence by words or acts the choice or location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant, or tenant in connection with viewing, buying, leasing, or occupying real estate, based on race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income, so as to promote or maintain segregation. 
Village Manager and Manager mean the duly appointed chief administrative officer of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 56.02; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-20-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-33. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant to this article, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 56.07; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-20-2004)  
Sec. 58-34. - Enforcement; powers of Human Relations Commission. 
(a)  The Human Relations Commission shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article. In discharging this responsibility, it shall have the power to: 
(1)  Gather and provide for the exchange of information relative to the provisions of this article among real estate brokers and salesmen, lenders, developers, employers, municipal officials and community groups within the Village. 
(2)  Receive and investigate complaints charging discrimination in housing. 
(3)  Seek conciliation of, hold hearings, and make findings of fact with respect to any such complaint. 
(4)  Administer oaths, take sworn testimony and subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by proper petition to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)  Initiate such general and specific investigations as it deems necessary in order to discourage and prevent violations of Section 58-36. 
(6)  Upon good cause and appropriate investigation, initiate complaints. 
(b)  The Commission shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article, to investigate all complaints filed under this article, and to recommend sanctions as defined in Sections 58-38(e), 58-33 and 58-35. 
(Code 1979, § 56.03; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-20-2004) 
Cross reference— Human Relations Commission, § 2-621 et seq.  
Sec. 58-35. - Rules of Human Relations Commission. 
The Commission shall adopt and publish such rules and regulations made at any regular or special meeting as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, provided that a quorum is present. Such rules and regulations or changes thereto shall be subject to approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 56.08; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-20-2004) 
Cross reference— Human Relations Commission, § 2-621 et seq.  
Sec. 58-36. - Unlawful housing practices. 
The following acts shall constitute violations of this article: 
(1)  To discriminate against any person(s) in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(2)  To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person(s) because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(3)  To represent to any person(s) because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(4)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based upon a person(s) race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income, or an intention to make such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(5)  To, for profit, induce or attempt to induce any person(s) to buy, sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of any person(s) of a particular race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(6)  To discriminate in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise financing a real estate transaction of any person(s) on the grounds of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(7)  To delay the processing or denying a loan or other financial assistance to a person(s) applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate in the fixing of that amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(8)  To discriminate in appraising the value of real estate or in the sale of insurance in connection with a real estate transaction of any person(s) because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(9)  To enter into a listing agreement which discriminates against any person(s) because of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(10)  To deny any person(s) access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person(s) in the terms and conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(11)  To engage in steering. 
(12)  To act or undertake as real estate broker, salesman, or agent with respect to any dwelling, the disposition of which requires such person(s) to participate in discrimination. 
(13)  To perform any act of discrimination with the intention of restricting or limiting the housing choice of any person(s). 
(14)  To coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person(s) in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of, such person's having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person(s) in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this article. 
(15)  To solicit any owner to sell, rent, or list residential property at any time after receiving written notice that such owner does not desire to sell, rent, or list such residential property. Such notice may be given by the owner or by a third party on the owner's behalf. 
(16)  To intentionally interfere with the performance of a duty or exercise of a power by the Commission or by its members or representatives. 
(17)  To engage in sexual harassment in any real estate transaction. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when (1) submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an individual's real estate transaction; or (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the individual's real estate transaction; or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's real estate transaction or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment with respect thereto. 
(18)  To aid or abet any of acts described in this section performed in violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 56.04; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-2-2004)  
Sec. 58-37. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this article shall: 
(1)  Apply to the rental, lease, or occupancy of a room in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to person of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of income. 
(3)  Prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests or from giving preference to its members. 
(4)  Prohibit the operation of housing units designed and offered predominantly for use and occupancy by persons over the age of 62. 
(5)  Prohibit the operation of housing units designed and offered predominantly for use and occupancy by persons with a disability. 
(6)  Prohibit any charitable or educational organization from limiting to person(s) of the same sex the rental of living accommodations in facilities primarily providing single room occupancy. 
(7)  Prohibit an initial condominium declaration limiting ownership, rental or occupancy of a condominium unit to a person 55 years of age or older, provided that the person or immediate family of a person owning, renting or lawfully occupying such unit prior to the recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of such age restriction as long as they continue to own or reside in such housing accommodation. 
(8)  Nothing in this chapter shall require any person who does not participate in the Housing Choice Voucher Program, to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance, contribution or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such place of accommodation. 
(Code 1979, § 56.05; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-2-2004)  
Sec. 58-38. - Complaints; conciliation; hearing procedures. 
(a)  Filing of complaint. The Commission or any person(s) aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this article may file with the Village Manager or designee a written complaint setting forth their grievance within 180 days after the date of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed on a form provided by the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  Investigation. 
(1)  After receipt of the complaint, the Village Manager or designee shall conduct an investigation of the alleged violation. If the Village Manager or designee finds that probable cause of a violation exists, the Village Manager or designee shall submit the Manager's or designee's findings in writing to the chair of the Human Relations Commission. Upon receipt of the findings, the chair shall schedule a conciliation conference not less than 10 and not more than 30 days from the date the chair receives the written findings. 
(2)  The Village Manager or designee shall cause a copy of the complaint to be served upon the respondent along with notice of the date, time and location of the conciliation conference. A copy of the complaint and notice of the date, time and location of the conference shall also be served upon the complainant. 
(3)  If the Village Manager or designee finds that probable cause does not exist, the Village Manager will dismiss the complaint and shall notify the chair of the Human Relations Commission in writing of the Manager's or designee's findings. Upon receipt of the findings the chair will send out notification to the complainant, indicating the results of the investigations and the finding of no probable cause. 
(4)  If a complaint indicates multiple respondents, and subsequent to the investigation by the Village Manager or designee, probable cause is found with regard to one or more of the respondents, then the Commission shall proceed on the complaint against those parties for which probable cause was found. The named parties for which no probable cause was found shall be dismissed by the Commission. The chair shall cause notification to be sent to the complainant with regard to the findings of the investigation and to the parties for which probable cause was found. 
(c)  Conciliation conference. 
(1)  A panel of 3 Commission members shall be convened in an effort to resolve the parties' differences in private. The chair of the Human Relations Commission or the chair's designee shall preside over the Conciliation Conference Panel. The chair of the Human Relations Commission shall select 2 members of the Human Relations Commission to serve on the Panel. The Village Manager or designee and an attorney for the Commission shall be present. The complainant and respondent may be represented by attorneys if they desire. The conference shall be closed to all other persons. However, in the discretion of the panel, a complainant or respondent may include an additional person such as an interpreter or family member. 
(2)  No evidence shall be taken at the conciliation conference. The sole purpose of the conference will be to attempt to reconcile the parties. If the parties cannot reach agreement at the conference, a public hearing upon the complaint shall be scheduled. 
(d)  Nondisclosure. Members of the Commission or its staff shall not disclose the filing of a complaint, what transpires during the course of an investigation, or what transpires during the course of a conciliation conference, except as such disclosures are deemed essential to the investigation and endeavors at conciliation or are made at a public hearing in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the Village Manager or designee and the Commission from disclosing dismissal notices or conciliation agreements, including the reasons therefor. The identities of the parties shall not be disclosed without their consent. 
(e)  Public hearing. 
(1)  If an agreement between the parties cannot be reached at the conciliation conference, the chair of the Human Relations Commission or designee shall set a date for a public hearing upon the complaint. The date for the hearing shall be decided upon at the conciliation conference and shall be no less than 10 days and no more than 30 days from the conclusion of the conciliation conference. 
(2)  The chair of the Human Relations Commission or designee shall convene and preside at the hearing. The hearing panel will be composed of 5 members of the Human Relations Commission. The panel shall include the following: the chair or designee, the Housing Committee chair or designee and 3 Commission members to be selected by the chair. An attorney for the Commission and the Village Manager or designee shall also be present. 
(3)  At the hearing, the complainant and respondent shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel, the right to call witnesses, and the right to cross examination. Rules of procedure adopted by the Commission shall govern the proceedings. Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation and an official transcript shall be made and filed in the Village Manager's Office. The hearing shall be open to the public. 
(4)  After all evidence has been taken, the panel shall take the matter under advisement. The panel will render its decision in writing with findings of fact. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the parties and transmitted to the Village Manager. A majority vote of those panel members present at all sessions of the hearing is required to decide the matter. If the panel finds that there was no violation of this article, the complaint shall be dismissed. If, however, the panel finds that a violation of this article has occurred, it shall take action as it deems proper consistent with this section, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Issuing an order to cease and desist from any unlawful housing practices as determined by the panel. 
b.  Recommending that the Village Manager request that the Corporation Counsel institute proceedings to enforce, against any person(s) or business found in violation of this article, the fine provided. 
c.  Recommending that the Village Manager request that the Corporation Counsel apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for: 
1.  An order restraining the party from violating any provision of this article; or 
2.  Such other or further relief as may be appropriate for the enforcement of this article and for the elimination of violations. 
d.  Recommending that the Village Manager request that the Corporation Counsel petition or institute proceedings with the Department of Registration and Education for the purpose of causing the Department to revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew the license granted by such Department to the party found to have violated any provision of this article. 
State Law reference— Civil administrative Code of Illinois, 20 ILCS 2105/60b et seq. 
In addition to the penalty provided for in Section 58-33, the public hearing panel may order restitution, specific performance and any and all remedies the panel deems just and appropriate in accordance with its findings. The panel may further recommend that the Village Manager request that the Corporation Counsel institute appropriate proceeding to enforce the order of the panel. 
(f)  Continuance of conciliation conference or public hearing. The chair of the Public Hearing Panel may grant a continuance and postpone the convening of the public hearing if a party requests a continuance in writing in a timely and reasonable manner. Such a continuance may be granted even if it is more than 30 days from the conclusion of the conciliation conference. A continuance of a conciliation conference may not be granted without the Conciliation Conference Panel convening. If a party fails to appear at either the conciliation conference or the public hearing, the Panel may proceed with and conclude the matter. 
(g)  Evidence and subpoena power. No strict rules of evidence shall apply in conducting a conciliation conference or public hearing, however, the Conciliation Conference Panel and the Public Hearing Panel shall determine the relevance of any evidence to be submitted for consideration, in its' respective proceeding. If said evidence is not deemed relevant it will not be accepted. The Public Hearing Panel shall have the power to subpoena records or individuals for testimony at the public hearing, as it relates to a specific matter. The Conciliation Conference Panel shall not have such subpoena powers. 
(h)  Retention of jurisdiction. The Human Relations Commission shall retain jurisdiction for 1 year after the conclusion of a conciliation conference or public hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 56.06; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3301, § 1, 9-20-2004)  
Chapter 62 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; Police Department, § 2-351 et seq.; emergency services, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Board of fire and police commissioners, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.; police protection and public order, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 et seq.; impersonating member of police organization, 720 ILCS 5/17-2; refusing to aid officer, 720 ILCS 5/31-8; arrest, 725 ILCS 5/107-1 et seq.; no civil liability for failure to enforce law, 745 ILCS 10/2-205; Law Enforcement Disposition of Property Act, 765 ILCS 1030/0.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TEMPORARY DETENTION FACILITY 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Established. 
The place in the Village heretofore established and used as the temporary detention facility, or any other place which may be hereafter used for that purpose, is hereby declared to be a temporary detention facility. 
(Code 1979, § 6.101)  
Sec. 62-32. - Purpose. 
The temporary detention facility shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested for violating any laws of the State or the United States, or any Village penal ordinance, until such person shall be lawfully brought before a court for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration or otherwise lawfully released. 
(Code 1979, § 6.103)  
Sec. 62-33. - Communications with prisoners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in the temporary detention facility without the permission of the Chief of Police or the police officer in charge. 
(Code 1979, § 6.104)  
Chapter 66 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; damaging or failing to return library materials, § 70-93(c). 
State Law reference— Libraries, 75 ILCS 5/1-0.1 et seq.; board of library trustees in villages, 75 ILCS 5/4-3 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a free public library and reading room for the use of the inhabitants of the Village, which shall be known as the Skokie Public Library. The word "Board," when used in this article, shall mean the Board of Directors of the Skokie Public Library. 
(Code 1979, § 3.121)  
Sec. 66-2. - Board of Directors. 
The library shall be under the supervision and management of a Board of 7 directors, to be elected in accordance with the provisions of the statutes relating to public libraries, and the Board shall have all the powers, and duties and authority conferred by such statutes upon the Board. The Board of Directors shall furnish such reports to the Village Board of Trustees as the statutes may require. 
(Code 1979, § 3.122)  
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise, § 42-71 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 62. 
Federal law reference— Crimes and criminal procedure, 18 U.S.C.A. § 2 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power of Village to pass and enforce all necessary police ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1; municipal public order regulations, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1 et seq.; Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.38), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 70-2. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this chapter, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.39), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 70-3. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 8(55.40), 10-16-2000)  
Secs. 70-4—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting governmental functions, 720 ILCS 5/30-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Obedience to police. 
All persons when at or about any public place in the Village shall obey the commands and directions of any police officer who may be stationed or on duty on or about such public places for the preservation of order and enforcing the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Village. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey the commands and directions of a police officer as required by this section. 
(Code 1979, § 55.20) 
State Law reference— Interference with public officer, 720 ILCS 5/31-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-32. - Jailbreaking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break open or out of any jail in the Village or to in any manner, directly or indirectly, aid or assist in or counsel or advise the breaking open or out of any jail in the Village. It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person confined in jail in the Village to escape. 
(Code 1979, § 55.16) 
State Law reference— Escape, 720 ILCS 5/31-6.  
Sec. 70-33. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false alarm of fire in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 55.26) 
State Law reference— False alarms, 720 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.  
Secs. 70-34—70-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses directed against property, 720 ILCS 5/15-1 et seq.; offenses against property, 720 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-61. - Possession of burglar's tools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession any nippers of the description known as burglar's nippers, pick-lock or skeleton key to be used with a bit, jimmy or other burglar's instruments or tools, unless it is shown that such possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose. 
(Code 1979, § 55.05) 
State Law reference— Burglary, 720 ILCS 5/19-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-62. - Destroying, defacing or injuring property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person carelessly or maliciously to break, deface, carry away or in any way injure or destroy any electric light, telephone or telegraph wire, or any appurtenance thereto, parking meter, public lamp or lamppost, street sign or any other sign, gate, sidewalk, or fence in the Village, or to climb upon any public lamppost, or hang or place any signs or objects thereon. 
(b)  No person shall cut, injure, mark or deface any building not such person's own or any tree, grass, or shrub in any parkway, street or public park, or any sewer, water pipe or hydrant laid or placed by the Village. 
(c)  No person shall string wires in the Village in such a manner as to damage or injure any tree or shrub standing along any public way or in any parkway, alley or other Village property. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure, destroy or carry away any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing which may be planted or seeded on the private premises of another, or willfully permit any dog or animal belonging to or under the control of such person to injure or destroy any such vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to injure in any way any property of any kind belonging to the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 55.08) 
State Law reference— Damage and trespass to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-63. - Stealing, detaching or mutilating license plate or tag. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or licensee, to take, carry away, detach or mutilate any metal plate, tag, badge or license worn by or attached to any person, animal or vehicle, or attached to any article, substance or thing whatsoever as a mark of identification or otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this Code or any other ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 55.17) 
State Law reference— Theft, 720 ILCS 5/16-1; criminal damage to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.  
Sec. 70-64. - Misuse of coin-operated telephones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, device or other substance with the intent to obtain from such coin box or money receptacle a legal tender coin of the United States or to obtain telephone service without paying therefor. 
(Code 1979, § 55.24) 
State Law reference— Theft from coin-operated machines, 720 ILCS 5/16-5 et seq.  
Sec. 70-65. - Trespass. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the Village upon either public or private property. 
(b)  Specific violations. Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and appropriate action may be taken under this section at any time to prevent or suppress any violation of this subsection: 
(1)  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance of the premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner, authorized representative of the owner, or occupant; 
(2)  The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner, authorized representative of the owner, or occupant; 
(3)  A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner, authorized representative of the owner, or occupant; or 
(4)  An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right. 
(Code 1979, § 55.25) 
State Law reference— Damage and trespass to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-66. - Tendering of payments to Village via means that proves to be uncollectible. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall remit a check payable to the Village which is written on a closed account or an account which lacks sufficient funds. 
(b)  Fee. Any person who remits a check to the Village which has been returned by the bank or which was written on a closed account or an account which lacks sufficient funds shall be assessed the fee as provided for in Section 46-32. 
(Code 1979, § 55.36; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009) 
State Law reference— Civil liability for deceptive practices, 720 ILCS 5/17-1a.  
Secs. 70-67—70-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VANDALISM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq.; graffiti, § 42-41. 
State Law reference— Damage and trespass to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.; Parental Responsibility Law, 720 ILCS 115/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a Circuit Court of this State, but does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq. 
Library materials means books, periodicals, films, art objects, art reproductions, audio tapes or any other thing, equipment or property (or part thereof) whatsoever owned by or in the custody of the Skokie Public Library. 
Minor means a person who has attained 11 years of age but who has not yet reached 18 years of age. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, the State, or any political subdivision. 
Property means any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty. 
(Code 1979, § 55.351) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-92. - Penalties. 
(a)  Generally; court supervision; payment of restitution. 
(1)  Every person or minor found guilty of an offense under Section 70-93 shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties: 
a.  Such person shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6. 
b.  The court may, without entering a judgment of guilty, place such person under court supervision for any period not exceeding 1 year. Such supervision may include any of the conditions provided for in subsection (a)(2) of this section as the court determines appropriate. If the person completes the period of supervision without violating the conditions imposed by the court, the court shall discharge the defendant from supervision and dismiss the charge against the defendant. If the person, while under court supervision, is convicted of any criminal offense in any jurisdiction and the State's Attorney or municipal prosecutor, as the case may be, moves for termination of supervision, the court shall terminate the supervision and enter a judgment of guilty on the plea or finding. 
(2)  The conditions of court supervision may, in addition, require that the defendant: 
a.  Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training. 
b.  Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss, or $1,000.00, whichever is less. 
c.  Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism. 
d.  If a minor, reside with the minor's parent or in a foster home, attend school, attend a nonresidential program for youth, or contribute to the minor's own support at home or in a foster home. 
(3)  When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for court supervision, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of court supervision, may impose an additional period of not more than 2 years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to revoke the penalty of court supervision if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional period. 
(4)  When the petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for court supervision, the court: 
a.  May order a summons to the offender to appear, or order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of the offender fleeing the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of court supervision until the final determination of the charge, and the term of court supervision shall not run so long as the offender has not answered the summons or warrant. 
b.  Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing. 
c.  Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation, cross examination and representation by counsel. The Village has the burden of going forward within the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance of the evidence. 
d.  Shall not revoke court supervision for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the offender unless such failure is due to the offender's willful refusal to pay. 
e.  May modify the conditions of court supervision on motion of the Village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all parties and a hearing. 
(5)  If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue the offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of the initial penalty. 
(6)  A judgment revoking a sentence of court supervision is a final appealable order. 
(b)  Violation of parental responsibility provisions; liability of parents for fine imposed on minor. 
(1)  Every person found guilty of any offense under Section 70-94 shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(2)  The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of Section 70-93, provided that the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause against such minor and all proceedings thereafter. 
(Code 1979, §§ 55.354, 55.355)  
Sec. 70-93. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall, within the Village, knowingly or recklessly damage or cause to be damaged any property of another person without such person's consent. 
(b)  No person shall, within the Village, knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another person without such person's consent. 
(c)  No person shall, within the Village, wrongfully remove, possess, damage, destroy any library materials or property, or fail to return any library materials when due. 
(Code 1979, § 55.352) 
Cross reference— Library, ch. 66.  
Sec. 70-94. - Parental responsibility for violations by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor living with the minor's parents or guardian to neglect to restrain such minor from committing any act prohibited in this Code. The commission of any such act by a minor who is living with the minor's parents or guardian shall raise the presumption that the parent or guardian has neglected to restrain such minor from committing such act. It shall be an affirmative defense for the parent or guardian to prove that such parent or guardian exercised the parent's or guardian's duty to restrain the minor from committing such act complained of in the pending action, but that such action on the part of the parent or guardian to attempt to restrain the minor, although exercised with due care, was unsuccessful. 
(Code 1979, § 55.353)  
Secs. 70-95—70-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC PEACE 
 
Sec. 70-121. - Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; unlawful assemblages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to congregate or assemble with 1 or more other persons in or upon any public street, alley or sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the free and unobstructed passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or in such a manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace. No person shall stop, stand or park in an alley so as to leave less than 10 feet of width for the free movement of vehicular traffic. Any person in such assembly who fails or refuses upon the order of any police of the Village to move on or away from such assembly shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 8.20) 
Cross reference— Parades and public assemblies, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 106; obstructing traffic, § 106-102; stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, § 106-103.  
Sec. 70-122. - Disorderly conduct. 
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the Village. Any of the following acts constitute disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Making, aiding or assisting in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace. 
(2)  Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight, quarrel or other disturbance. 
(3)  Disturbing any religious service, funeral, public or private meeting, place of amusement, or assembly of persons. 
(4)  Collecting in crowds for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons. 
(5)  Loitering continuously in public places or being idle or dissolute and going about begging. 
(6)  Assembling with 2 or more other persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace. 
(7)  Failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to be a peace officer, where 3 or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm. 
(8)  Lodging in or being in outhouses, sheds, barns, stables or occupied buildings, on private or public property, without permission. 
(9)  Engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or practicing fortunetelling, palmistry, card reading, astrology, clairvoyancy or other scheme to obtain money or other value. 
(10)  Giving any false alarm of fire, danger or disturbance to any person, or false information to any peace officer, firefighter or any Village officer. 
(11)  Making a telephone call with intent to annoy another, whether or not conversation ensues. 
(12)  Engaging in obscene or indecent activities or entertainment, or any lewd or lascivious behavior, or appearing in public in a state of nudity. 
(13)  Using any obscene, profane, threatening or inciting language in any public place. 
(14)  Throwing stones or missiles in public places or at any person or property, or using brandishing or threatening to use any missile, or dangerous weapon or object. 
(15)  Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens, fences, windows, signs, buildings, monuments, or vehicles or engaging in any acts of vandalism. 
(16)  Consuming alcoholic beverages in or on a public way or place. 
(Code 1979, § 55.01) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, 720 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-123. - Disorderly houses or premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or knowingly lease or rent, any bawdy or disorderly house, or any house, structure, or property where any person is permitted or suffered to make any improper noise or disturbance, where any minor is permitted to consume alcohol, where articles or objects for the purpose of gambling including but not limited to dice or cards are used, or any house, store, garage, shop or other place for the encouragement of idleness, gambling, intoxication, adultery, fornication, lewdness or other immoral practices. There shall be a presumption that the owner or person in control of any such premise has permitted or knowingly permitted the aforesaid activity to occur. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be a frequenter, visitor, guest, inmate or patron of a disorderly house as defined in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 55.09) 
State Law reference— Maintaining a public nuisance, 720 ILCS 5/37-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-124. - Damaging house of worship; disturbing religious worship. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carelessly or maliciously deface, damage, or destroy any building or house of religious worship, or to disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious worship, by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or profane discourse, within their place of worship, or so near the place of worship as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting. 
(Code 1979, § 55.10)  
Sec. 70-125. - Intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a state of intoxication on any highway, street, alley or thoroughfare or other public place in the Village. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a state of intoxication in any private house or place within the Village to the annoyance of any other person. 
(Code 1979, § 55.15) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 10.  
Sec. 70-126. - Materials promoting or inciting group hatred, force and violence. 
(a)  The dissemination of any material which promotes or incites hatred against persons by reason of their race, national or ethnic origin, religion, or sexual preference and: 
(1)  Is intended to advocate and likely to produce the use of force or violence against such persons; or 
(2)  Is intended to threaten such persons or at least intended to cause such persons to reasonably fear the imminent use of force or violence; 
is hereby prohibited within the Village. 
(b)  The phrase "dissemination of materials" includes but is not limited to publication or display or distribution of posters, signs, handbills, or writings and public display of markings and clothing of symbolic significance. 
(c)  The Corporation Counsel is empowered to seek an injunction in the Circuit Court of Cook County to restrain any person, group or organization from violating this section. 
(Code 1979, § 55.34) 
State Law reference— Hate crime, 720 ILCS 5/12-7.1.  
Sec. 70-127. - Laser devices. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Laser device means any gadget, object or other such device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye, including, but not limited to, such devices which are integrated into or capable of being attached to a firearm. 
School property means any buildings, grounds or facilities, or portion thereof, owned, occupied by, or under the custody or control of public or private institutions for the primary purpose of providing education or recreational instruction to students, and any vehicles owned, operated or leased by or on behalf of such institutions that are used to transport such students or personnel of such institutions. 
(b)  Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a laser device in the following manner: 
(1)  To focus, point or shine a laser device on another person or animal, or in the immediate vicinity of another person or animal, or in such a manner as to alarm or disturb such person or animal; or 
(2)  To utilize a laser device in any place of assembly, including but not limited to school property, concert halls, theaters, or any other structure or location at which the public gathers for educational purposes, lectures, public meetings, entertainment, sporting events, concerts, plays, dances or other similar events, productions and performances, when a person does not have permission of the owner or operator of the place of public assembly to use a laser pointer in such place. 
(c)  Prohibitions regarding minors. 
(1)  Sales to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, give or deliver a laser device to any person under the age of 17 years. If the use of the laser device is for legitimate educational purposes, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a parent, guardian or schoolteacher's delivery of a laser device to a person under the age of 17 years for the use of such laser under adult supervision on school property or in their residence under adult supervision. 
(2)  Responsibility of parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the age of 17 years to permit such person under the age of 17 years to violate any provisions of this section. 
(3)  Possession by minor. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 to possess a laser device except in their residence. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit possession by a person under the age of 17 whose possession of a laser device is for a legitimate educational purpose and is on school property, or in another's residence and under the supervision of an adult residing therein. 
(d)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the officers or members of the Village Police Department when on duty, or to persons authorized under the State statutes or the statutes of the United States to carry weapons that have laser devices. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 99-11-C-2854, 11-15-1999)  
Secs. 70-128—70-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting public health, safety and decency, 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-151. - Dangerous missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to willfully throw or cast any stone or other missile upon or at any building, railroad car, motor vehicle, tree or other public or private property or upon or at any person in any street, alley, lane, public place or at enclosed or unenclosed grounds in the Village, or aid or abet in such acts. 
(Code 1979, § 55.04) 
State Law reference— Reckless conduct, 720 ILCS 5/12-5.  
Sec. 70-152. - Killing or injuring birds. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, by the use of firearms, slingshot, bow and arrow, pelting with stones or otherwise, any quail, pheasant, robin, blue jay, or any other song, plumage or game bird within any private ground or upon any public park, square, street or grounds, or for any person to take the eggs or young or any quail, pheasant, robin, blue jay or other song, plumage or game bird within any private enclosure or upon any public ground belonging to the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 55.06) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18.  
Sec. 70-153. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded refrigerator or deep freezer or one not in use to remain in any place accessible to children unless the latching or lacking mechanism on the door of the refrigerator or freezer has been removed, or unless the doors of the refrigerator or freezer are bolted and locked in such manner that it is impossible to open the refrigerator or freezer by the use of the hands. 
(Code 1979, § 55.22) 
State Law reference— Abandoned Refrigerator Act, 720 ILCS 505/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 70-154. - Nauseous or offensive substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell, give away or offer to give away, or to have in such person's possession, or for any person to carry about, any stink ball or fire ball, or any bomb, ball, tube, vial or bottle made of glass or other easily breakable material containing any solution or corrosive or caustic acid, phosphorus or other explosive or inflammable fluid or substance, or any hydrogen sulphide, valerianic acid, ammonium valerinanate, valerinate of zinc, or any solution or mixture thereof, or any other stinking, nauseous, offensive or filthy substance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away any corrosive or caustic acid, or any phosphorus or solution thereof or any hydrogen sulphide, valerianic acid, ammonium valerianate, valerianate of zinc, or any solution or mixture of the substance, or any stinking, nauseous, offensive or filthy substances of like or similar nature, except upon the written prescription of a physician, licensed under the laws of the State, which prescription shall be filled only once and shall have written upon it the name and address of the patient; provided that this subsection shall not apply to sale at wholesale by manufacturing or wholesale druggists to retail druggists, physicians or chemists. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, deposit or place any stink ball, fire ball or bomb, or place any substance described in this section, from, upon or to any street or public place in the Village, or at, upon or within any public conveyance, or upon the floor or within any restaurant, house of worship, home, apartment building, private dwelling, theater, hall, assembly room, public building, public park or vehicle within the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 55.23)  
Sec. 70-155. - Placing articles on windowsills or ledges. 
It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any windowsill or ledge or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height above 4 feet from the ground in such a manner that the article can be, or is, in danger of falling onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1979, § 55.28)  
Sec. 70-156. - Scaffolds or ladders on streets. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or construct any scaffold or ladder upon any public street, alley or roadway unless the scaffold or ladder is securely anchored or firmly constructed and safeguarded so as to prevent harm or injury to any person or property. 
(Code 1979, § 55.29) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Secs. 70-157—70-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREARMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Deadly weapons, 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-181. - Sale and possession generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess or sell, loan or give to any person any blackjack, slingshot, metal knuckles, billy, bludgeon, or similar object. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess, with intent to use any of the objects in subsection (a) of this section, a weapon or instrument unlawfully against another. "Weapon" shall include but not be limited to a dagger, dirk, dangerous or switchblade knife, razor, stiletto or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character. 
(Code 1979, § 55.021)  
Sec. 70-182. - Carrying concealed firearm. 
No person shall carry concealed on or about their person a pistol, revolver or other firearm unless they are in compliance with all State statutes and requirements. This provision does not apply, however, to the following officers of their official duties: sheriffs, constables, police officers or other duly constituted peace officers and wardens, superintendents and keepers of jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of crime; or to the following employees or agents while in the discharge of the duties of their employment: watchmen, special agents and police officers employed by railroads or express companies; or to persons lawfully summoned by an officer to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged in assisting such officer. 
(Code 1979, § 55.022; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-183. - Discharge of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearms, or any airgun or toy pistol on which percussion caps are used, within the corporate limits of the Village, unless within a licensed firearms range. 
(Code 1979, § 55.023; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-184. - Register of sales by firearms dealers. 
(a)  All persons dealing at retail within the Village in one or more of the following firearms: (i) firearms of a size which may be concealed upon the person, (ii) shotguns, (iii) rifles, or (iv) firearms of any description not enumerated in this section, shall keep a register of all such firearms sold or given away by them. 
(b)  The register shall contain the following: 
(1)  The date of purchase of the firearm. 
(2)  The name, address and age of the purchaser or donee. 
(3)  The occupation of the purchaser or donee. 
(4)  The kind, description and number of the firearm. 
(5)  The purpose for which the firearm was purchased or obtained. 
(6)  The price of the firearm. 
(Code 1979, § 55.024)  
Sec. 70-185. - Permit for purchase of firearm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person dealing in firearms without proper statutory licensing and review by the State and federal licensing, which may be amended from time to time, to sell, barter, loan or give away to any person within the Village any pistol, revolver, or other firearm of like character. Every such person dealing in firearms shall, on demand, allow any police officer, Sheriff or Deputy Sheriff to enter and inspect all stock on hand and shall, on request of such officer, produce for inspection all written permits or licenses for the sale of such firearms. It shall be the duty of those selling firearms to refuse to sell to all persons having been convicted of any crime, all minors, and all persons not in possession of a firearms owner's card issued by the State and all those not cleared through State review. 
(Code 1979, § 55.025; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-186. - Selling or furnishing firearms to person under 18 years of age; allowing entry to firearms range. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, loan, rent or furnish to any person under 18 years of age any gun, pistol, rifle, revolver or other firearm within the Village. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, loan or furnish to any person under the age of 18 years, within the corporate limits of the Village, any airgun, air rifle, air pistol, or slingshot, or any toy pistol that may be used with metal or paper caps. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or facilitate the use of any firearm by a person under 18 years of age at a licensed firearms range. 
(d)  No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to enter the premises of a licensed firearms range. 
(Code 1979, § 55.026; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, adopted June 2, 2014, changed the title of § 70-186 from "Selling or furnishing firearms to person under 18 years of age" to "Selling or furnishing firearms to person under 18 years of age; allowing entry to firearms range."  
Sec. 70-187. - Sale of certain knives prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or possess for the purpose of selling any knife, the blade of which shall open or be exposed by any pushbutton, spring or mechanical device. 
(Code 1979, § 55.027)  
Sec. 70-188. - Definitions. 
The following terms as they appear in this Article[division], shall have the meaning ascribed below: 
(a)  Assault Weapon Category 1 shall mean and include the following firearms and parts: 
(1)  Semi-automatic action, rifles with a detachable or fixed magazine with a capacity of fifteen (15) or more rounds. 
(2)  Semi-automatic shotguns with a folding stock or a magazine capacity of more than six (6) rounds. 
(3)  Firearms which have been modified to be operable as an assault weapon as defined above. 
(4)  Parts designed to modify a firearm so it can operate as an assault weapon as defined above, including a detachable magazine with a capacity of fifteen (15) or more rounds. 
(b)  Assault Weapon Category 2 shall mean and include the following firearms and parts: 
(1)  Semi-automatic action rifles with any detachable or fixed magazine or shroud around the barrel or grip that can be held by the non-trigger hand. 
(2)  Semi-automatic shotguns with a folding stock or a detachable or fixed magazine or shroud around the barrel or grip that can be held by the non-trigger hand. 
(3)  Semi-automatic pistols with any detachable or fixed magazine or capable of attaching a magazine other than in the pistol grip. 
(4)  Firearms which have been modified to be operable as an assault weapon as defined above. 
(5)  Parts designed to modify a firearm so it can operate as an assault weapon as defined above, including a detachable magazine with a capacity of fifteen (15) or more rounds. 
(c)  Magazine shall mean and include any container such as a box, clip or drum which attaches to, holds and feeds ammunition into a semi-automatic rifle. 
(d)  Rifle shall mean and include a firearm designed, made or retrofitted (1) to be fired from the shoulder or hip; and (2) uses the energy of the explosive in a fixed cartridge to fire only a single projectile through a rifled bore for each single pull of the trigger and shall include any such weapon which may be readily assembled, altered or restored to fire a fixed cartridge. 
(e)  Semi-automatic shall mean and include a firearm which fires a single projectile for each single pull of the trigger which automatically inserts the next round for firing into the firearm chamber using a magazine. 
(f)  Shotgun shall mean and include a firearm designed, made or retrofitted (1) to be fired from the shoulder or hip; and (2) uses the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire a number of projectiles or a single projectile for each pull of the trigger and shall include any such weapon which may be readily assembled, altered or restored to fire a fixed shotgun shell. 
(Ord. No. 13-7-C-3986, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
Sec. 70-189. - Unlawful possession of assault weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to own or possess within the Village of Skokie a weapon or weapon part defined by Section 70-188(a). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to own or possess within the Village of Skokie a magazine defined by Section 70-188(a) which can hold or may be modified to hold fifteen (15) or more rounds. 
(Ord. No. 13-7-C-3986, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
Sec. 70-190. - Safe storage of allowed assault weapons. 
It shall be unlawful to store, transport or keep any firearm defined by Section 70-188(b) in the Village of Skokie, unless such firearm is secured in a locked container or safe, or equipped with a tamper-resistant mechanical lock, trigger lock, gun lock or other mechanical or electronic safety device, engaged so as to keep the firearm inoperable when not in actual use. 
(Ord. No. 13-7-C-3986, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
Sec. 70-191. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Sections 70-189 through 70-190 do not apply to (i) any law enforcement officer, agent or employee of any municipality of the State of Illinois (ii) any law enforcement officer, agent or employee of the State of Illinois, of the United States or of any other state (iii) any active member of the military or other service of any state or the United States, including national guard and reserves, if the person described is on duty and is authorized by a competent authority to so carry an assault weapon loaded on a public way and such person is acting within the scope of his duties or training. 
(Ord. No. 13-7-C-3986, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
Sec. 70-192. - No retail sale of firearms outside of a firearms range. 
No person or entity shall deal in the retail sale of firearms except within a licensed firearms range, with the Firearms Range License being held by the same person or entity engaged in the sale of firearms. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
DIVISION 3. - FIREARMS RANGE LICENSE 
 
Sec. 70-193. - Firearms range license required. 
No person or entity shall operate a firearms range in the Village without first obtaining a Firearms Range License in accordance with the provisions of this Article and payment of an annual Firearms Range License fee. A separate Firearms Range License shall be required for each firearms range location, regardless of whether such multiple establishments are operated by the same person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-194. - Application information. 
(a)  Applications for a Firearms Range License shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from an applicant including but not limited to proof of all state and federal firearm registrations and licenses. 
(b)  The applicant must provide detailed plans of the facility, with fully-designed architectural drawings including MEP design, for review by the Police Department, as well as the Village Community Development Department, Building Division. All safety, environmental, security, ventilation and noise pollution concerns must be satisfactorily addressed and meet the approval of the Chief of Police and the Village Community Development Department, Building Division, before an application will be processed. 
(c)  All applications shall be accompanied by a criminal background investigation of all owners, operators, officers, managers, members, partners and shareholders of the proposed firearms range. Failure of any party to agree to submit to such an investigation will be considered automatic grounds for denial of a license. The results of the criminal background investigation may be grounds for denial of a license. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-195. - Grounds for denial or discipline. 
The Village Manager or designee may (i) deny an application for a license, (ii) refuse to renew a license, or (iii) suspend or revoke a license, if it is determined that the applicant, licensee, or an owner, officer or manager of a licensee: 
(a)  Was convicted of any crime under the laws of the United States or any state or territory therein that is either: (a) a felony, (b) a misdemeanor, pertaining to battery, dishonesty or directly related to the use, purchase, sale, or possession of firearms or other weapons, or (c) an offense listed in Article 24 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq., or a violation of 430 ILCS 65 or 430 ILCS 66. Conviction, as used in this paragraph, shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, an admission of guilt, or a plea of nolo contendere; 
(b)  Made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements, or material omissions, in the application for the license or any related license or permit; 
(c)  Is indebted to the Village for required fees, costs incurred by the Village in relation to the individual or entity, or outstanding fines or penalties; or 
(d)  Has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws or rules and regulations of the Village, State of Illinois, or United States Federal Government. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-196. - Temporary suspension. 
In the event the Village Manager finds that there is sufficient evidence that indicates the occurrence of criminal behavior or a practice that would constitute a danger to the public, he or she may temporarily suspend a license without a hearing simultaneously with the notification of the right to a hearing provided for in section 70-198. In the event that the Village Manager suspends a license issued under this section, a hearing by the Village Manager must be held within 30 calendar days after the suspension has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-197. - Contents and service of notices. 
(a)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this division shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the license. The notice shall inform the applicant or licensee that the applicant or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(b)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee specified on the application or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-198. - Hearings. 
In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a license. The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a license issued under this division. A license shall not be revoked unless the licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's or behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the licensee or in accordance with the notice provisions of Section 70-197. If, within 10 days of the notice, the licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the license shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-199. - Fees. 
Fees for licenses under this division shall be as set forth in section 46-73. Fees for commercial inspection of the premises shall be as set forth in section 46-133. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-200. - Transfer. 
No license issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such license was issued. No individual or entity other than the licensee shall act or do business under such license. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-201. - Cease and desist. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue a cease and desist order to any person owning or operating a firearms range or acting as a firearms seller, as defined by the Code, in the Village that is not properly permitted and affiliated with a licensed firearms range. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue a cease and desist order to any person or entity operating firearms range or acting as a firearms seller without being properly licensed. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-202. - Location. 
No firearms range may be located within one hundred (100) feet of a school or child care facility. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-203. - Hours of operation. 
Permitted hours of operation for a firearms range are: 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 70-204. - Renewal of firearms range license. 
The Firearms Range License shall expire at the end of each Village fiscal year. The Firearms Range License may be renewed based upon application for renewal and the payment of the Firearms Range License annual fee. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to review a renewal request in the same manner as an initial application. 
(Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Secs. 70-205—70-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIREWORKS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-6-C-4063, § 1, adopted June 2, 2014, renumbered Div. 3 as Div. 4 to read as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Use or display of fireworks declared nuisance, § 42-35(d)(5); fire prevention and protection, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Fireworks Regulation Act of Illinois, 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.; Fireworks Use Act, 425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-211. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the balloon, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers or other devices of like construction and any device containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 grain (16.2 mg) of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Code 1979, § 55.031) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-212. - Selling or furnishing fireworks to persons under 18 years of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep, expose for sale, loan or give away to any person under the age of 18 years any toy pistol, toy gun, toy cannon, blank cartridge, or any fireworks or ammunition therefor, or any substance or articles of any explosive designed or intended to be used as fireworks. 
(Code 1979, § 55.032)  
Sec. 70-213. - Unlawful possession or discharge; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be possessed of or to discharge anywhere in the Village any of the articles enumerated in Section 70-211. The Village Manager or designee may issue a permit for the discharge of fireworks or for pyrotechnical displays for wildlife control. 
(Code 1979, § 55.033)  
Sec. 70-214. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Application for permits for the discharge of fireworks or for pyrotechnical displays shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee shall, upon receipt of such applicant's statement, refer the statement to the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, each of whom shall have an inspection made of the premises at the location given in the application where it is proposed to give such public display of fireworks. If in the judgment of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief it would not be hazardous to surrounding property or dangerous to any person or persons to permit such public display of fireworks at such location, they shall approve such application and return the application to the Village Manager or designee, whereupon the Village Manager or designee shall issue a permit upon payment of a fee as set forth in Section 46-39. Any permit issued in accordance with this division shall designate the kinds and quantities of fireworks to be used, and no other kinds and no greater quantities of fireworks than therein specified shall be used. 
(Code 1979, § 55.034)  
Sec. 70-215. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber to sell at wholesale such fireworks as are not prohibited by this division, or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the fireworks are to be shipped directly out of the State, or the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic or sports, or for use by military organizations. 
(Code 1979, § 55.035)  
Secs. 70-216—70-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC DECENCY[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses affecting public health, safety and decency, 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-241. - Indecent exposure, dress or behavior. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place in a state of nudity, or in an indecent or lewd manner of dress, to make any indecent exposure of their person, or to be guilty of any lewd or lascivious behavior. 
(Code 1979, § 55.11) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, 720 ILCS 5/11-9.  
Sec. 70-242. - Obscene material. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, print, offer to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to distribute any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, advertisement, circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film, play, image, instrument, statue, drawing or other article which is obscene. 
(b)  Definition. Material shall be deemed obscene for the purpose of this section when to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interests. 
(c)  Audience. Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially susceptible audience if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstance of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such an audience. 
(d)  Presumption of knowledge. Any person shall be presumed to have knowingly engaged in the exhibition, sale, printing, offering to sell, giving away, circulating, publishing, or distribution of material if, not less than 10 days prior to the service of a summons or arrest for violation of this section, the Village Manager or designee shall have notified such person in writing that certain named material in the person's possession or control is obscene, and that the person will be prosecuted if the such person persists in such activity, and such person thereafter persists in such activity. Such notification shall, however, not be a condition precedent for prosecution under the terms of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 55.12) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, 720 ILCS 5/11-20; child pornography, 720 ILCS 5/11-20.1.  
Sec. 70-243. - Indecent or lewd acts, language or gestures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd or filthy act in any place in the Village, or to utter any lewd or filthy words, or use any threatening language toward any other person tending to a breach of the peace, or to make any obscene gesture to or about any other person publicly. 
(Code 1979, § 55.13)  
Sec. 70-244. - Indecent or lewd writing in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place, or place open to public view, within the Village, to write or draw, cut, make or exhibit any lewd or indecent word, sentence, design or figure. 
(Code 1979, § 55.14) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Removal of graffiti from private property, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13.  
Secs. 70-245—70-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Amusement machines used as gambling devices prohibited, § 14-63; gambling prohibited at carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements, § 14-273. 
State Law reference— Gambling and related offenses, 720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-271. - Maintaining gambling house. 
No person or persons shall set up, keep or maintain, or permit to be set up, kept or maintained, in any house or structure within the corporate limits of the Village occupied or controlled by them, any instrument, device or thing for the purpose of gambling, or with which money, property or anything representing money or property, or anything of value, shall in any manner be played for. 
(Code 1979, § 55.321)  
Sec. 70-272. - Gambling devices. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall bring into the Village or have in such person's possession in the Village, for the purpose of gambling, any table, thing or device of any kind or nature, whereon or with which money or any other thing of value may be in any manner be played for. 
(b)  Seizure and destruction. It is hereby made the duty of the Village Manager or designee and every member of the Police Department to seize any table, instrument, device or thing used for the purpose of gambling, and all such tables, instruments, devices or things shall be destroyed upon order of the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(Code 1979, § 55.322)  
Sec. 70-273. - Dealing or engaging in games of chance. 
No person shall deal, play or engage in any device or game of chance or hazard, either as a banker, dealer or otherwise, nor shall any person bet on any game others may be playing for the purpose of gambling. 
(Code 1979, § 55.323)  
Sec. 70-274. - Betting prohibited. 
All betting, wagering, speculating, pool selling or book making upon any race or contest or the result thereof, and all gambling and every game of chance of any nature, in any building or elsewhere within the Village is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 55.324)  
Sec. 70-275. - Frequenting gambling place; doorkeepers, agents and runners. 
No person shall be a frequenter, visitor, inmate, doorkeeper, solicitor, runner, or agent for any house, hall, room or any other place where any instrument, device or thing for gambling is kept therein or with which money or property or anything representing money or property shall be played for. 
(Code 1979, § 55.325)  
Sec. 70-276. - Advertisement of gambling place. 
No person shall insert or cause to be inserted, or print or publish or cause to be printed or published, in any newspaper or other publication, circular or notice printed, published or circulated in the Village, any notice, advertisement or mention giving or purporting to give information of where or with whom bets or wagers may be made or placed. 
(Code 1979, § 55.326) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6.  
Sec. 70-277. - Gambling places declared nuisance. 
Every house, room, yard, boat, vessel or other structure or premises kept or used for the purpose of permitting persons to gamble for any valuable thing within the Village is hereby declared to be a common nuisance. 
(Code 1979, § 55.327) 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq.  
Sec. 70-278. - Conditions of entertainment licenses. 
All licenses for entertainments, where a license is required, shall contain a proviso that no gambling, raffle, lottery or chance, gift, distribution of money or articles of value shall be connected therewith or be allowed by the person obtaining such license or in any way permitted or held out as an inducement of patrons. 
(Code 1979, § 55.328)  
Secs. 70-279—70-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING MINORS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Contributing to the delinquency of a juvenile, 720 ILCS 5/330. 
 
Sec. 70-301. - Cruelty to children. 
No person shall be guilty of cruelty to any child in any of the following ways: 
(1)  By cruelly beating, overworking, mutilating or injuring any child. 
(2)  By unnecessarily failing to provide any child in such person's charge or custody with proper care and sustenance. 
(3)  By abandoning any child. 
(Code 1979, § 55.07) 
State Law reference— Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act, 325 ILCS 5/1 et seq.; minors requiring authoritative intervention, 705 ILCS 405/3-1 et seq.  
Sec. 70-302. - Curfew. 
(a)  Violation. It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present, at or upon, any public assembly, building, place, street or highway within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie, at the following times unless one of the exceptions listed in subsection (b) applies, at the following times: 
(1)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday. 
(2)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday. 
(3)  Between 11:01 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(b)  Exceptions. This subsection (a) shall not apply to any person less than 17 years of age who is: 
(1)  Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible companion at least 21 years of age, if said adult's supervision was expressly approved by the youth's parent or legal guardian; 
(2)  Engaged in employment, or going to or from a place of employment, which the laws of this state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform; 
(3)  Engaged in the exercise of First Amendment rights as guaranteed by the United States Constitution while attending, or traveling to or from, an official school, religious, or other civic or recreational event or activity which is supervised by adults and sponsored by an entity that takes responsibility for the supervision of the youth. The purpose or nature of the event or activity must be of the type which could not be reasonably held or conducted during non-curfew hours; 
(4)  Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; 
(5)  Traveling between states or internationally from a location outside of Illinois to another location outside of Illinois; or 
(6)  Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended. 
(c)  Enforcement. A police officer shall not take any enforcement action under this section unless the police officer reasonably believes that a violation of this section has occurred and that no exception listed in subsection (b) is applicable. 
(d)  Parental responsibility. It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control, or under his or her supervision, to violate this section. 
(e)  Owner or operator of establishment. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to allow a person under the age of 17 to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours, unless the owner, operator or employee can show that the youth in question refused to leave and the police department was promptly notified that a person under the age of 17 was present on the premises in violation of curfew hours. For the purposes of this section: (i) "establishment" means any privately-owned place of business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment; and (ii) "operator" means any individual, association, partnership, corporation or other entity of any type, operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes partners of the association or partnership and the officers of a corporation or other entity. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person who violates any subsection contained in this section, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6, in addition to any other penalty specially provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 55.33; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3277, § 2, 6-7-2004) 
State Law reference— Child Curfew Act, 720 ILCS 555/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 70-303. - Sale of illegal drug usage paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words shall have the following meaning for this chapter: 
"Drug Paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. It includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance; 
2.  Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which contains cannabis or a controlled substance; 
3.  Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons; 
4.  Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons; 
5.  Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil or other controlled substances in to the human body including, where applicable the following items: 
A.  Water pipes; 
B.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
C.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
D.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
E.  Carburetor pipes; 
F.  Electric pipes; 
G.  Air-driven pipes; 
H.  Chillums; 
I.  Bongs; 
J.  Ice pipes or chillers; 
6.  Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by a seller or user, is for use in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Unlawful to possess Drug Paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess Drug Paraphernalia as defined in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  Unlawful to sell drug paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful to sell any item of Drug Paraphernalia as defined in paragraph (a) of this section. In addition to any other sanctions contained in this Code, any person, corporation or entity licensed to do business or possessing a certificate of occupancy, in the Village of Skokie who pleads guilty or is found guilty of selling any item of drug paraphernalia shall be deemed to have a basis for revocation of a business license and certificate of occupancy by the Village Manager. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject upon a finding of guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction, to the penalties set forth in Section 1-6. In addition to the penalties provided in Section 1-6, no provision of this section shall be construed to preclude or limit the presiding judge in each case in exercising his or her discretion to further order such other corrective measures of the defendant as may be reasonable, equitable and appropriate, and as in each case may be necessary, including court supervision, probation, drug abuse counseling or psychiatric or social service counseling. 
(Ord. No. 05-11-C-3397, § 1, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 11-10-C-3860, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 70-304. - Possession of cannabis prohibited; person under 18 years of age. 
(a)  Definition. Cannabis means marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients; whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction or independently by means of chemical synthesis; or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  Pursuant to the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., it is a criminal violation to possess any substance containing cannabis as defined, however for the purposes of this Code, it shall be a violation for any person under 18 years of age to possess, in quantities of less than 2.5 grams, any substance containing cannabis as defined herein. 
(c)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject upon a finding of guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction, to the penalties set forth in section 1-6. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section 1-6, no provision of this section shall be construed to preclude or limit the presiding judge in each case in exercising his or her discretion to further order such other corrective measures of the defendant as may be reasonable, equitable and appropriate, and as in each case may be necessary, including court supervision, probation, drug abuse counseling or psychiatric or social service counseling. 
(Ord. No. 05-11-C-3397, § 2, 11-7-2005; Ord. No. 11-10-C-3860, § 2, 10-3-2011)  
Sec. 70-305. - Unlawful visitation interference. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Child means a person under the age of 18 or a severely or profoundly mentally retarded person at the time the alleged violation occurred; and 
(2)  Detains means taking or retaining physical custody of a child, whether or not the child resists or objects; and 
(3)  Lawful custodian means a person or persons granted legal custody of a child or entitled to physical possession of a child pursuant to a court order. It is presumed that, when the parties have never been married to each other, the mother has legal custody of the child unless a valid court order states otherwise. If an adjudication of paternity has been completed and the father has been assigned support obligations or visitation rights, such a paternity order should, for the purposes of this Section be considered a valid court order granting custody to the mother. 
(b)  Every person who, in violation of the visitation provisions of a court order relating to child custody, detains or conceals a child with the intent to deprive another person of his or her rights to visitation shall be guilty of unlawful visitation interference. 
(c)  A person committing unlawful visitation interference shall be in violation of the Skokie Village Code and subject to the penalties set out in Section 1-6. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has committed or is committing an act in violation of this Section shall issue to that person a local ordinance citation. 
(e)  The local ordinance citation shall: 
(1)  be in writing; 
(2)  state the name of the person and his address, if known; 
(3)  set forth the nature of the offense; 
(4)  be signed by the officer issuing the notice; and 
(5)  require the person to appear before in the Circuit Court of Cook County at a certain time and place. 
(f)  It is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  a person or lawful custodian committed the act to protect the child from imminent physical harm, provided that the defendant's belief that there was physical harm imminent was reasonable and that the defendant's conduct in withholding visitation rights was a reasonable response to the harm believed imminent; 
(2)  the act was committed with the mutual consent of all parties having a right to custody and visitation of the child; or 
(3)  the act was otherwise authorized by law. 
(g)  A person convicted of unlawful visitation interference pursuant to this section, shall not be subject to a civil contempt citation for the same conduct for violating visitation provisions of a court order issued under the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act. 
(Ord. No. 08-6-C-3623, § 1, 6-16-2008)  
Sec. 70-306. - Truancy. 
(a)  Purpose. School attendance, as mandated by Illinois School Code, is essential for both a complete education and for the social development of the child. Often, truancy is a manifestation of an underlying situation or problem a student may be experiencing such as addiction, depression or social issues, which may be addressed through proper diagnosis and counseling. Truancy has an effect on society as a whole, which may be realized through parents missed work time, truant kids engaging in more severe or criminal activity or the downgraded education of our population. 
The intent of this section is to address the issue of chronic truancy regarding those students enrolled in schools located within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie and, if appropriate, mandate through the Circuit Court of Cook County available services as may be necessary to resolve the underlying issues of chronic truancy. The goal of the Village, in conjunction with the schools, is to provide assistance to these students and have them resume their education. 
(b)  Definitions. 
School means either a public or private educational institution fully accredited and/or certified by the Illinois Department of Education. 
Truant Minor means child who is 16 years of age or younger enrolled in any school accredited or certified by the Illinois Department of Education, located within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie, and is absent without cause or an acceptable excuse from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof. 
Chronic Truant Minor means a Truant Minor, to whom supportive services, including prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services, alternative programs and other school and community resources, has been provided and has failed to result in the cessation of habitual or ongoing truant behavior, or has been offered and refused. 
(c)  Prohibition of Chronic Truancy. 
a.  It shall be a violation of this section for a minor who is 16 years of age or younger enrolled in any school located within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie and subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois School Code, to engage in a pattern of continuing or chronic absenteeism from a school accredited or certified by the Illinois Department of Education, without cause or an acceptable excuse. 
b.  A Chronic Truant Minor shall be identified to the Skokie Police Department by the minor's school, along with any and all information detailing his or her absences from school. 
c.  Prior to a minor being cited under this section for chronic truancy, his or her school must have provided supportive services, including prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services, alternative programs and other school and community resources that have failed to result in the cessation of habitual or ongoing truant behavior, or has been offered to the student and refused. 
(d)  Parental Responsibility. It shall be a violation of this section for any parent, guardian, or person having custody or control of a child, who is enrolled in any school accredited or certified by the Illinois Department of Education located in the Village of Skokie, to cause, permit or encourage a child he or she is responsible for, to violate this section of the Village Code. 
(e)  Excused Absences. If a parent, guardian or person having legal custody and control over a student presents in writing to school officials, any of the following reasons for a student's absence, there is a rebuttable presumption that it is a legitimate and acceptable excuse: 
a.  Illness (if illness persists more than 5 days, a doctor's report will be required detailing the nature of the illness and the projected return date of the student), 
b.  observance of a religious holiday, 
c.  death in the family, 
d.  family emergency, 
e.  any situation beyond the control of the student as determined by the student's school officials, 
f.  or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student. 
(f)  Violation Notice. Citations issued by the Skokie Police Department for violation of this section shall be heard in the Circuit Court of Cook County, 2 nd Municipal District, on the Village's Youth Ordinance Call. 
(g)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable by the penalties set forth in Section 1-6, including but not limited to a fine of $750.00. 
(h)  Deferred Prosecution. The Corporation Counsel may determine after a review of a citation issued to any individual under this section along with any relevant factors, that in lieu of prosecution of the citation, the charged individual may be offered the option of enrolling in various services, if applicable, including but not limited to: drug and alcohol counseling, mental health services, community service, education classes or other counseling services. If this option is offered to and accepted by the individual, and he or she completes the ordered course of action, the Corporation Counsel's Office will dismiss the violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-8-C-3635, § 1, 8-18-2008)  
Chapter 74 - PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 10, 2005, amended the former Ch. 74, §§ 74-1—74-4, and enacted a new Ch. 74 as set out herein. The former Ch. 74 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from (Code 1979, §§ 57.01—57.13; Ord. No. 01-3-C-2973, § 1(57.01—57.14), adopted Mar. 19, 2001. 
Cross reference— Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic, § 70-121; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; parades and processions, § 106-62. 
State Law reference— Parade Police Protection Charge Waiver Act, 50 ILCS 730/0.01 et seq.; Illinois Public Demonstrations Law, 430 ILCS 70/1 et seq.; local regulation of processions or assemblages on highways, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(3). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Title of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade and Public Assemblies Ordinance of the Village of Skokie." The intent of the regulatory control of the Parade and Public Assemblies Ordinance is to: (1) protect resources and improvements; (2) allocate space among potential or existing uses and activities; and (3) address concerns of public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 1, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, or procession of any kind, or other similar activity consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or any combination thereof, in or upon any street that is Village owned, leased, or maintained. 
Permit means a written approval in the form of a letter from the Permit Official to proceed with the parade/public assembly on the date as specified in the parade/public assembly permit application, or subsequently agreed to by both the applicant and the Village of Skokie. 
Permit Official means the person designated by the Village Manager as being responsible for issuing permits under this Article. In the event that the Permit Official is not available, the Village Manager may designate a different person as the Permit Official. 
Public assembly means any congregation or gathering of persons held outdoors and upon any Village owned, leased or maintained property or any public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, for a religious, political, educational, fraternal, social, civic, charitable or artistic purpose or similar activity within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie. Private functions, defined as those by invitation only, shall be prohibited on Village owned, leased or maintained property or any public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie. Public assemblies shall be prohibited in public buildings or upon any street within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie. 
Sidewalk means that portion of the public right-of-way which is designated for the use of pedestrians and may be paved or unpaved and shall include easements and rights-of-way. 
Right-of-way means any street, alley, other land or waterway dedicated or commonly used for roadway. The term "right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Street means that portion of the right-of-way that is paved and intended for vehicular traffic, generally known as curb to curb. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 74-3. - Public conduct; parking restrictions. 
(a)  Interference with parade or assembly. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade, public assembly or similar activity, or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such activity. 
(b)  Driving through parade or assembly. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons composing a parade, public assembly, or similar activity when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade, public assembly or similar activity. Fire and police vehicles and ambulances may interrupt a parade, public assembly, or similar activity in an urgent or emergency situation. 
(c)  Parking on route. The Village Manager or Designee shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade, public assembly, or similar activity. The Village Manager or Designee shall order the posting of signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be in violation of this chapter, for parking on a street that is not posted. 
(d)  Towing of vehicles. The Village Manager or Designee is hereby authorized to tow any motor vehicle parked in violation of this Section and to collect any and all fees associated with the towing of the vehicle, from the vehicle's registered owner. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 106-91 et seq.  
Secs. 74-4—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Required; limitation on number of permits. 
The Village has a significant interest in ensuring that its streets and sidewalks remain safe, orderly and accessible. No public assembly or similar activity where the number of participants and spectators are expected or may reasonably be expected to exceed 50 or more persons are permitted, unless a permit allowing such activity has been obtained from the Permit Official. No parade is permitted unless a permit has been obtained from the Permit Official. This chapter shall not apply to students going to and from school classes, or participating in educational activities under the immediate direction and supervision of school authorities or a governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions, nor shall a permit be required for normal or scheduled activities of the Village. Only 1 permit shall be issued during any 12-month period to the same applicant, or an affiliate organization of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-32. - Filing of application. 
(a)  Any person, partnership, voluntary association, corporation or other organization seeking to obtain a parade or public assembly permit shall file an application with the Permit Official. An application for a public assembly permit shall be filed not more than 150 days and not less than 70 days before the date for which the public assembly is proposed. An application for a parade permit shall be filed not more than 150 days and not less than 40 days before the date for which the parade is proposed. Applications for permits shall be made to the Permit Official Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Permit Official. The Permit Official may request additional information from the applicant. An application will not be considered filed until all required information is submitted as set forth in this article, including a completed public assembly and parade application form. The Permit Official is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the processing of parade and public assembly permit applications. 
(b)  In order for any application to be reviewed by the Permit Official, it must contain any and all information and requested materials listed in Section 74-33. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-33. - Contents of application. 
Any application for a parade, public assembly or similar activity permit filed with the Permit Official shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the person signing the application. 
(2)  If the parade, public assembly, or similar activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the authorized and responsible officers of the organization conducting the parade or public assembly, and the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of any state, regional, and national organizations with which the applicant organization is affiliated. 
(3)  The application shall contain the date of the proposed parade or public assembly and the time that it will commence and terminate. 
(4)  The application shall contain the location of the assembly area and the time when the participants will begin to assemble. 
(5)  The application shall contain the route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The application shall contain the approximate number of persons, animals and/or vehicles to participate in the parade, public assembly, or similar activity. 
(7)  The application shall contain a statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(8)  The application shall contain the interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(9)  If the parade, public assembly or similar activity is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person, partnership, voluntary association, corporation or other organization other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Village a communication in writing from such person or from an authorized and responsible officer of such organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on behalf of such person or organization. 
(10)  The application shall contain any additional information which the Permit Official shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-34. - Standards for issuance. 
(a)  Generally. The Permit Official shall issue a permit as provided for under this article when, from a review of the application and other information as may otherwise be obtained, it is found that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade, public assembly, or similar activity will not substantially interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area contiguous to the route. 
(2)  The activity will not present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, Village employees, or members of the public, which is to be determined upon the basis of past events that have occurred within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(3)  There are available at the time of the parade, public assembly, or similar activity a sufficient number of peace officers to police and protect lawful participants in the activity and maintain adequate police protection throughout the Village. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly points of the parade, public assembly, or similar activity will not unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The activity will not interfere with scheduled Village functions or the normal pursuit of activities of the residents of the Village. 
(6)  The conduct of such parade, public assembly, or similar activity will not interfere with the movement of emergency equipment in route to an emergency. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays in route. 
(8)  The parade, public assembly, or similar activity is not being conducted for an unlawful purpose or for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(b)  Insurance. Before the issuance of a permit, the Permit Official shall require the organization to furnish evidence of insurance, providing commercial general liability of $1 million per occurrence, naming the Village as an additional insured in such form as may be determined by the Permit Official to provide for the payment of any claims for personal injuries, including death and any injuries to Village employees, agents, or contractors, property damage or other suits arising out of or connected with such public assemblies or parades. 
(c)  Agreement. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a parade or public assembly, the applicant shall enter into an Agreement with the Village. The Agreement shall be in the form specified by the Permit Official, and approved by the Corporation Counsel. At a minimum, the applicant shall agree to: (1) holding the Village harmless and indemnify it from any and all claims, damages, lawsuits, costs, expenses and other liabilities whatsoever, that may arise from or be connected with, either directly or indirectly, the parade or public assembly; and (2) pay the costs and expenses incurred by the Village for the purposes referenced in this section. 
(d)  Security deposit. Prior to the issuance of any permit, all parade or public assembly applicants must agree to pay for the actual cost of cleanup, contractual services, restoration of the area of the event and traffic control costs of any Police Department, Fire Department, Public Works Department or other Village personnel utilized in conjunction with the function at a reasonable rate to be determined by the Permit Official. The Permit Official, in consultation with the Village Police and Fire Departments, shall determine the number of officers needed to appropriately police street closures and for internal security, and any additional personnel services needed, and the anticipated duration thereof, taking into consideration the application contents. A deposit shall be made to cover the anticipated or estimated costs by the Village. 
(i)  For any activity described in this chapter, no permit shall be granted unless the applicant has paid the required security deposit within 14 days from the date of the Permit Official's written approval notice. However, if the applicant is in the process of appealing the Permit Official's decision, and the Village Manager approves the applicant's permit application, the security deposit shall be due within 2 days of the Village Manager's approval. 
(ii)  If it is determined that the entire amount of the security deposit was not needed to cover the anticipated costs, the remaining portion shall be refunded to the permittee. In the event that the Village incurred additional expenses and costs exceeding the security deposit, the permittee shall pay said additional sums owed to the Village within 30 days of the written invoice date, delineating such assessments. 
(iii)  If there is damage to Village property in excess of normal wear, the Village shall retain the security deposit or any portion thereof, necessary to pay for the cost to repair or replace. Permittee will be provided a written notice of the assessment of damages and retention of the security deposit. Any assessment of damages of fines in excess of the security deposit shall be paid to the Village within 30 days after notice of such assessment of damages or fine. 
(e)  Multiple applications for same time and place. If the Permit Official receives more than 1 application for a parade or public assembly to be held at the same time and at the same place, the applications filed first in time shall take precedence. An event shall be considered to be "at the same time" if the event is scheduled to commence within 2 hours before or after the holding of another event. If the Permit Official receives an application for more than 1 parade or public assembly in a single day, the Permit Official may set a time for the duration of each parade or public assembly, which shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than 3 hours. 
(f)  Notice to residents. If it is determined by the Permit Official that a public assembly located within 500 feet of any occupied residential dwelling, an applicant may be required to provide written notification by First Class United States Mail or personal delivery, to each residential unit within the specified distance 30 days prior to the public assembly. In the case of notification for multi-unit structures, the notice may be posted in the common areas of the building. The notice shall set forth substantially the information contained in the application regarding the event along with any contact information. Notice to residents also applies to parades that culminate into a public assembly. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-35. - Denial/appeal. 
A.  Denial. The Permit Official shall, within 21 working days issue notification that the permit will either be approved, contingent upon the applicant's compliance with the requirements of Section 74-35 (a) and (b), or denied. If there is no written notification regarding approval or denial of the application for the permit within the specified time frame, the application is considered approved. The Permit Official reserves the right to deny a permit based on any of the following factors: 
(a)  Failure to meet the requirements of Section 74-34 (a) and (b); 
(b)  The applicant has not submitted the required application fee with the application, executed agreement, certificate of insurance, or security deposit within the times prescribed; 
(c)  The application for permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(d)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; 
(e)  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has outstanding monies owed or unpaid debts to the Village; 
(f)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by local ordinances, state statutes and/or federal law; 
(g)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, Village personnel or other residents in the Village; 
(h)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the Village and previously scheduled for the same time and place; or 
(i)  Facts or circumstances that are revealed to the Permit Official prior to a parade, public assembly or similar activity and not included in the application. 
(j)  "Notice to Residents" applying for public assembly permits per Section 74-34 (f) was not satisfied in circumstances where it was required. 
If the Permit Official denies the application, the applicant shall receive a written notice outlining the reasons for denial along with information regarding the applicant's right to appeal the Permit Official's decision to the Village Manager. 
B.  Appeal. The applicant has 10 days from the date of the written notice of denial to file a written appeal with the Village Manager outlining the reasons why the denial should be rescinded. The Village Manager shall either uphold or reject the Permit Official's denial notification within 7 days after receipt of the applicant's appeal in a written correspondence. The decision of the Village Manager shall be final but subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-36. - Alternate permit. 
The Permit Official, in denying a permit application pursuant to Section 74-34(a), shall be empowered to authorize a parade, public assembly or similar activity on a date, at a time, at a location or over a route different from that named by the applicant in the form of an alternate permit. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within 2 days after notice of the action by the Permit Official, shall file a written notice of acceptance with the Permit Official. An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-37. - Distribution of copies of permit to Village personnel. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the Permit Official shall send a copy of the permit to the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Public Works/Engineer Directors, Risk Management, Village Clerk and the Corporation Counsel. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-38. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and rules and regulations. One of the authorized and responsible leaders of the organization conducting the parade, public assembly, or similar activity shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon their person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-39. - Revocation/appeal. 
A.  Revocation. The Permit Official shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public assembly permit issued under this article if, at any time, facts are brought to the attention of the Permit Official which shows that the parade, public assembly, or similar activity does not, or will not, comply with the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. The designated police authority may revoke the necessary permits during the actual parade or public assembly for purposes of public safety or known violations pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Appeal. The applicant has 10 days from the date of the written revocation notice to respond to the Village Manager in writing outlining reasons why the revocation notice should be rescinded. The Village Manager shall either uphold or reject the Permit Official's revocation decision within 7 days after receipt of the applicant's appeal in a written correspondence. The decision of the Village Manager shall be final but subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-40. - Deferred payment of fee. 
If it appears that the applicant does not have sufficient funds to satisfy the financial requirement prior to the proposed event, but that the applicant demonstrates sufficient funds will be raised at the event, the Permit Official may allow the applicant to pay such fees out of the proceeds for the proposed event. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-41. - Extemporaneous assemblies. 
The time requirements for applying for an assembly permit may be reduced in the case of extemporaneous world or local events which could not have been anticipated by the applicant. This paragraph shall be strictly construed. A waiver of the timeless provisions in this ordinance shall not occur when the cause of failure to apply can reasonably be attributed to the actions or omissions of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Sec. 74-42. - Neighborhood parades. 
Parades that have been held at least annually since 1955 and are substantially comprised of residents living along streets abutting the parade route are exempt from all provisions of the Parade and Public Assemblies Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-10-C-3389, § 2, 10-10-2005)  
Chapter 78 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Peddling alcoholic liquor, § 10-4; businesses, ch. 26; transient merchants, § 26-1371 et seq.; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of hawkers and peddlers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5; Transient Merchant Act, 225 ILCS 465/1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Severability. 
If any section of chapter 78 is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, under any circumstances, such a finding shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or of any section remaining. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 2, 12-1-2003)  
Sec. 78-2. - Rules and regulations. 
The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, procedures and forms for the regulation of the activities which are the subject matter of this chapter 78. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 3, 12-1-2003)  
Sec. 78-3. - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive solicitation. For the purposes of this Chapter the following shall be considered aggressive solicitation: 
(1)  Intentional touching of the person being solicited, or their vehicle, without the person's consent; 
(2)  Intentional obstruction of the path of the person being solicited or their vehicle; 
(3)  Following the person being solicited unless the person has consented; 
(4)  Using profane or abusive language during solicitation or following a refusal by the person being solicited. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 4, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-4. - General policy. 
The occupant or occupants of the residences in this Village shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their respective residence. 
(Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-5. - Posting of notice. 
(a)  Notice of the determination by the occupant or occupants of a residence that they do not invite solicitors shall be deemed to have been given by posting on the entrance door to the residence a notice indicating "NO SOLICITORS INVITED." 
(b)  The posting of the notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence that solicitors are not invited. 
(Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-6. - Duty to comply with posted notice; duty to leave premises at request of occupant. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the Village upon which a residence is located where notice is posted as provided for in Section 78-5 to immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
(b)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-7. - Uninvited soliciting. 
It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of Section 78-5. 
(Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Secs. 78-8—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Registered solicitor means any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as provided in this article. 
Residence means any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by 1 or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means any 1 or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application for or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Code 1979, § 45.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-32. - Exclusion of charitable solicitations. 
Nothing contained in this article shall apply to charitable solicitations as defined and provided for in Article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 45.02)  
Sec. 78-33. - Hours and days restricted. 
It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m. of any weekday, prior to noon or after 5:00 p.m. on a Saturday or Sunday, or on a State or national holiday. 
(Code 1979, § 45.10; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, adopted June 5, 2017, repealed §§ 78-33—78-36, which derived from Code 1979, §§ 45.06—45.09. Additionally, said ordinance renumbered §§ 78-37 and 78-38 as §§ 78-33 and 78-34.  
Sec. 78-34. - Minors to be accompanied by parent or guardian. 
No person under 16 years of age shall be permitted to engage in door to door solicitation, as defined in section 78-31, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 5, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Secs. 78-35—78-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 78-61. - Required. 
Every person engaging in soliciting from persons in residences within the Village is required to have a certificate of registration as provided in this division. Any person issued a certificate of registration in accordance with this division, while engaged in solicitation activities shall have their certificate of registration in their possession. 
(Code 1979, § 45.03)  
Sec. 78-62. - Application; background check. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of registration under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee shall cause a criminal background check to be performed for each named solicitor. 
(Code 1979, § 45.04; Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 6, 12-1-2003)  
Sec. 78-63. - Eligibility. 
No certificate of registration shall be issued under this division to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States, within 5 years of the date of the application, or to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or to any person whose certificate of registration issued under this article has previously been revoked as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 45.04)  
Sec. 78-64. - Issuance or denial. 
The Village Manager or designee, after review of the application for a certificate under this division and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as required in this division, and if the issuance of a certificate to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this article. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate shall be issued forthwith. 
(Code 1979, § 45.05)  
Sec. 78-65. - Revocation. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke all certificates of registration issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation of a certificate. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke the certificate if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The certificate holder has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The certificate holder has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the certificate. 
(3)  The certificate holder owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties. 
(4)  The certificate holder otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. 
(c)  Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate as provided in subsection (c) of this section. Upon the giving of such notice the certificate of registration shall be null and void. 
(d)  All notices required to be given in accordance with this section shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the revocation of the certificate. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the certificate holder. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(Code 1979, § 45.05)  
Sec. 78-66. - Expiration. 
The certificate of registration issued under this division shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 45.05)  
Sec. 78-67. - Badge or identification card. 
A badge or identification card issued by the Village, which shall bear a number, the organization's name, the individual's name and the date(s) of validity, shall be worn by each person soliciting door to door. 
(Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 7, 12-1-2003)  
Secs. 78-68—78-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Handbills and billposters, § 6-31 et seq.; permit fee for charitable soliciting, § 46-77. 
State Law reference— Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable includes but is not exclusive of the word "philanthropic," "benevolent," "social services" or "welfare," either actual or purported. 
Contributions includes the words "alms," "food," "clothing," "money," "property," "subscription" or "pledge," and also donations under the guise of loans of money or property. 
Fund raiser means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign of solicitation. 
Solicit and solicitation mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value will be used for a charitable purpose as those purposes are defined in this section. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things or value: 
(1)  Any oral or written request. 
(2)  The making of any announcement to the local press or by telephone concerning a local appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith. 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or other local publication. 
Solicitation shall be deemed to have taken place when the request is made, whether or not the person making the request receives any contribution referred to in this section. 
Vehicle solicitor for charity means any person undertaking to or engaging in the solicitation of money from passengers or drivers in motor vehicles for charitable purposes. 
(Code 1979, § 46.01, 46.20) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-92. - Financial records of permittees. 
No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations to it and all disbursements are entered upon the official books or records of such person's treasurer or other financial officer. 
(Code 1979, § 46.11; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, adopted June 5, 2017, repealed §§ 78-92 and 78-94, which derived from Code 1979, §§ 46.01, 46.12; Ord. No. 03-5-C-3162, § 1, 5-5-2003. Additionally, said ordinance renumbered § 78-93 as § 78-92 and §§ 78-95—78-97 as §§ 78-93—78-95.  
Sec. 78-93. - Misrepresentation, deception or fraud. 
No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of such person's name, occupation, financial condition, social condition, residence or principal place of business. No person shall make or cause to be made any misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the Village, or in any application or report filed under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 46.13; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-94. - Hours restricted. 
It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person or organization, whether a permittee under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant the residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in soliciting, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. 
(Code 1979, § 46.14; Ord. No. 04-9-C-3303, § 1, 9-20-2004; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-95. - Solicitations from persons in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Applicability of article. All of the conditions enumerated in this article pertaining to charitable solicitations shall pertain to charitable solicitations from passengers and drivers in automobiles. 
(b)  Age requirements. Vehicle solicitors for charity shall be at least 16 years of age. Any such solicitor between the ages of 16 and 18 may engage in vehicle soliciting only in the presence of a supervising adult who must be present at all times. 
(c)  High-visibility clothing required; Identification badge. All vehicle solicitors for charity are required to wear highly visible paraphernalia or clothing and, where applicable an easily recognizable badge or other symbol from which the organization for which they solicit can be easily recognized by a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle. 
(d)  Hours and location. Charitable solicitations from motor vehicles shall be only between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and shall only occur at intersections protected by traffic lights, stop signs, or median islands at all corners. 
(e)  Indemnification of Village; Insurance. Any organization seeking to secure a permit for charitable solicitation shall present evidence satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel's office that the Village will incur no liabilities for injuries resulting directly or indirectly from the granting of the permit, and will, in addition thereto, present an insurance policy satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel's Office insuring each vehicle solicitor against bodily injuries to the extent of $300,000.00 during the solicitation period. 
(Code 1979, § 46.20; Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 8, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 106.  
Secs. 78-96—78-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 78-121. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for an individual or group to solicit door to door or on public property, contributions for any charitable purpose within the Village, except for an individual soliciting for himself or herself, without a permit from the Village Manager or designee, verifying the authenticity of the represented solicitation. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any established person, organization, or not-for-profit corporation, organized and operated wholly or partially for charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations by such established person or not-for-profit corporation are conducted only among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or meetings of any such established person, organization, or not-for-profit corporation. Also exempt from this provision are those individuals belonging to an organization or group which has obtained the required permit. 
(Code 1979, § 46.02; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-122. - Application. 
(a)  Information and filing. 
(1)  Applications for a permit to solicit shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the Manager at least 15 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the Manager may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than 15 days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. 
(2)  The application shall include a financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, such statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and the final distribution thereof. 
(3)  The application shall include a full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done or to be done by the applicant, showing how much thereof is being done or to be done within the Village. 
(4)  The application shall include a statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not exceed 25 percent of the total amount to be raised, or, if the cost of solicitation is expected to exceed 25 percent, a statement of what the maximum cost is expected to be, together with a statement of any special facts tending to show that there are peculiar reasons which make a cost higher than 25 percent reasonable in the particular case. 
(5)  The application shall include a statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the Village, or by any department or officer thereof. 
(6)  The application shall include a statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, no person under the age of 16 will be permitted to solicit money. 
(b)  Notification of change in information. If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the Manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. 
(Code 1979, § 46.03)  
Sec. 78-123. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the information and/or the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 46.05; Ord. No. 03-12-C-3231, § 9, 12-1-2003)  
Sec. 78-124. - Examination of records. 
Upon request by the Manager, the applicant for a permit under this division shall make available for inspection by the Manager, or any person designated in writing by the Manager as the Manager's representative for such purpose, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired.  
Sec. 78-125. - Granting or denial. 
(a)  The Manager shall issue the permit provided for in this division whenever the Manager shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  All of the statements made in the application are true. 
(2)  The applicant, or, if the applicant is not an individual person, that its managing officers and managing agents, are of good character and reputation for honesty and integrity. 
(3)  The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons. 
(4)  The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(5)  The solicitation will not be a fraud of the public. 
(6)  The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application, and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(7)  The cost of raising the funds will be reasonable. Any such cost in excess of 25 percent of the amount collected shall be considered to be unreasonable unless special facts are presented showing to the satisfaction of the Manager that peculiar reasons make a cost higher than 25 percent reasonable in the particular case. 
(8)  The kind, character and method of the proposed solicitation, the time when it will take place, and its duration are such that the solicitation will be in the interest of and not inimical to the safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the Village. 
(b)  The Village Manager shall file for public inspection a written statement of the Manager's findings of fact and decisions upon each application, for which a denial has been issued. In such case, the Manager shall notify the applicant by registered mail, at the address given in the application, of the Manager's decision along with a copy of the findings of fact. 
(Code 1979, § 46.06)  
Sec. 78-126. - Contents. 
Permits issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the person or organization to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the Village, or by any of its departments, officers or employees, of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation. All permits must be signed by the Village Manager. 
(Code 1979, § 46.07; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-127. - Badge or identification card. 
A badge or identification card shall be issued to be worn by each person soliciting contributions, which badge or identification card shall bear a number and the words "Solicitor for charitable purposes, Village of Skokie." 
(Code 1979, § 46.04)  
Sec. 78-128. - Term; renewal. 
The Village Manager may by permit grant the right to solicit for one calendar year from the date of the permit. Upon the expiration of a permit granted under this article, if requested in writing so to do, the Manager may renew the permit, if the Manager is satisfied that the requirements of this article are still being met, and that no violation of this article has been committed. The Manager may, in the Manager's discretion, require a new application, and the Manager's action upon such new application shall be governed by the same standards as to granting or withholding the permit as in the case of an original application. 
(Code 1979, § 46.07; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017)  
Sec. 78-129. - Procedure for suspension or revocation. 
Whenever it shall be shown or whenever the Manager has reason to believe that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this division has violated any of the provisions of this article, or that any promoter, agent or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the Manager shall immediately suspend the permit. The Village Manager shall send the permit holder written notice by personal delivery, or by certified mail. This notice must contain a statement of the facts upon which the Manager has acted in suspending the permit. The permit holder may request a hearing within five business days of the issuance of the suspension notice by the Village Manager. At the hearing, the permit holder, and any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the Manager based the suspension of the permit, and any other facts which may aid the Manager in determining whether this article has been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented. If, after such hearing, the Manager finds that this article has been violated, or the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, the Manager shall, within 2 days after the hearing, file in the Manager's office for public inspection and send to the permit holder by registered mail, or serve upon the permit holder in any manner provided by general law for the service of notices, a written statement of the facts upon which the Manager bases such a finding, and shall immediately revoke the permit. If, after such hearing, the Manager finds that this article has not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, the Manager shall, within 2 days after the hearing, give to the permit holder a written statement reinstating the permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have been committed. If no request for hearing is made by the permit holder within the aforesaid time period such suspension shall become a revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1979, § 46.09)  
Sec. 78-130. - Notification to Chief of Police of suspension or revocation. 
The Chief of Police shall be notified forthwith by the Village Manager or designee of the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1979, § 46.10)  
Sec. 78-131. - Transfer. 
No permit issued or granted under this division shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such permit was issued. No individual or corporation other than the permittee shall act or do business under such permit. 
(Code 1979, § 46.08; Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-6-C-4292, § 1, adopted June 5, 2017, repealed § 78-131, which pertained to fees and derived from Code 1979, § 46.04. Additionally, said ordinance renumbered § 78-132 as § 78-131.  
Chapter 82 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Appearance Commission, § 2-771 et seq.; advertising, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; gasoline price signs, § 26-1430; fees for sign permits and inspections, § 46-123; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; posting of political signs on election day, § 90-41(f); zoning, ch. 118. 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Title of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Sign Code." 
(Code 1979, § 31.01)  
Sec. 82-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alter means change or modification of any sign except for normal maintenance and repair. 
Approved combustible materials means any material more than 1/20 inch in thickness which burns at a rate of not more than 2½ inches per minute when subjected to the ASTM (American Society for Testing Materials) standard test for flammability in sheets of 0.06-inch thickness. 
Curbline. The curbline shall be measured from the back of the curb. 
Electrical code means the latest edition of the National Electrical Code which has been adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees for the Village (see Section 22-91). 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of signs on building surfaces. 
Facing and surface mean the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
Gross surface area of sign means the entire area defined by the limits or perimeter of a sign. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside or inside of the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
(1)  For computing the area of any wall sign which consists of letters, trademarks or symbols mounted on a wall, the gross surface area shall be the area within a single continuous perimeter formed by the parallel lines at the top, bottom and sides of such letters, trademarks or symbols. 
(2)  For computing the area of any multi-sided sign, the gross surface area shall refer to all sides of such sign. 
Incombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
IBC means the latest edition of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., code which has been adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees for the Village (see Section 22-31). 
Inflatable or air-supported signs means structures which are used for advertising promotional purposes which are supported by air. This shall include but shall not be limited to balloons or dirigibles. 
Maintenance means the replacing or repairing of a part of a sign made unusable or unsightly by ordinary wear and tear or damage beyond the control of the owners, or the reprinting of existing copy without changing the wording, composition or color of the sign as it was approved. 
Major occupant means any owner or tenant who occupies more than 50,000 square feet of building floorspace. 
Nonconforming sign is as defined in Section 82-8. 
Notice. The following is the required notice procedure in each situation stated; 
(1)  Upon determination that a sign or portion thereof is unsafe or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Village Manager or designee shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, a written notice containing the description of the sign, building or structure or portion thereof that is unsafe or in violation. The notice shall include order requiring the sign, building or structure or portion thereof to be made safe and secure, removed, or brought into compliance as may be deemed necessary by the Village Manager or designee. If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found after a diligent search then such notice and order shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the last known address of such person, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice and service. 
(2)  Whenever the Village Manager or designee has determined that a sign, or any work in connection therewith, the installation, construction or addition or alteration, execution of which is regulated, permitted or forbidden by this chapter or other applicable statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations and regulations, is being erected, constructed, added to or altered in violation of the provisions or requirements of this chapter or other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations or in violation of a submitted and approved detailed statement or plan or of a permit or issued certificate, the Manager or designee shall serve a written notice or order upon the owner or person responsible for or performing such work, directing that all work be ceased until the violation is remedied. 
Owner means any person or persons having legal title to any sign, property, building, structure or premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, and shall include such person's duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devise, lessee, executor, trust officer, administrators or fiduciary and any person having a vested or contingent interest or control of or in the sign, property, building, structure or premises in question. The term "person" shall include any legal entity. 
Public right-of-way means all of the land included within an area which is dedicated, reserved by deed or granted by easement for a street, alley, walkway, parkway or easement, in which the public, public agencies, utilities and service have access at all times. 
Rigid materials means a material or composition of materials which cannot be folded and can support its own weight when rested upon parallel edges of such materials. 
Sign means any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons, and any structure or part thereof, or device attached thereto, painted or represented thereon, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, insignia, device which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. The term "sign" shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Ground sign. Any sign supported by uprights, solid base, columns, poles, posts or braces placed in the ground and not attached to any building. 
(2)  Wall sign. Any sign attached, applied to, or placed flat against the exterior front, rear or side wall or fascia of any building or other structure. 
(3)  Temporary sign. Any sign, banner, bunting, pennant, valance, or advertising displayed for a limited time period allowed by this Code or Village ordinances or regulations. 
(4)  Marquee. Any fixed hood, designed primarily for advertising purposes, which is constructed of metal or other noncombustible material, supported solely by and extending from the building to which it is attached. 
(5)  Canopy and awning. Any hood, designed to provide pedestrian shelter, made of cloth or an approved membrane, with metal frames attached to a building and carried by a frame supported by the ground, sidewalk or wall. 
(6)  Window sign. Those signs, regardless of material, which are on the inside or outside surface of the window. Signs, packaged products, packaging materials and other opaque materials which are not placed upon the surface of a window shall be considered to cover the window if they are placed within 36 inches of the window surface. A permanent window sign is a sign that is displayed on a constant basis for more than 4 weeks. A temporary window sign is a sign that is displayed on a constant basis for 4 weeks or less. 
(7)  Painted sign. Signs painted directly on an exterior wall, fascia or parapet of a building or fence, or on a chimney. 
(8)  Roof sign. A sign, any portion of which is erected, constructed and maintained above any portion of the roof of a building. 
(9)  Projecting sign. A sign attached to a structure which projects greater than 12 inches from the exterior wall of the structure. 
(10)  Flashing sign. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light(s) are not maintained in a stationary condition or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is illuminated. For purposes of this definition only, stationary condition or constant in intensity and color, shall mean such imagery shall not change more than once in any 24 hour period. 
(11)  Restaurant information sign. A case or frame containing a menu limited to 20 inches in height and four hundred (400) square inches attached to a building where a restaurant is located. 
(12)  Blade sign. A projecting sign allowed only in the CX Core Mixed-Use district attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall or fascia of any building or other structure to identify a business use where a wall sign is allowed. 
(13)  A-frame sign. A freestanding sign constructed of two ridged sheets of material that are hinged on top that is used to display the name of the business, information concerning the services or products provided by the business and the cost of the same. 
(14)  Illuminated sign. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines lit by electric lights, luminous tubes or any other light source. 
Signable area means a designated area of the facade of a building, the boundaries of which shall form a square, rectangle or other Appearance Commission approved shape, which is free of windows, doors and all major architectural details. Only 1 signable area may be established for a facade of a building. In no event shall the signable area of a building exceed, in square footage, 1/3 of the square footage of any facade of the building. 
Site means all lots as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, Buildings, and/or uses in a development. 
Standards means a test, measure, model or example of quantity, extent or quality. 
Structural trim means any molding, battens, capping, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms which are attached to the sign structure. 
(Code 1979, § 31.02; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 5, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 05-10-C-3390, § 1, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-3. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 6(31.16), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 82-4. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this chapter, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 6(31.17), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 82-5. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 6(31.18), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 82-6. - Permit; inspections. 
(a)  Permit required; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate or change the message or graphic display of any sign without first obtaining a permit from the Village Manager or designee. The permit fees shall be as set forth in Section 46-123. No permit shall be required for the maintenance of existing signs or for those signs exempt under the provisions of Section 82-7. 
(b)  Certificate of appropriateness. Prior to the issuance of a permit as required in this chapter, a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the Appearance Commission, except for sign face changes to existing signs, which require review and approval by the Village Manager or designee. 
(c)  Application for permit. 
(1)  Applications for sign permits shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(2)  All permit applications shall contain a written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be installed. In lieu of written consent, a copy of the lease clearly authorizing such installation shall be acceptable. 
(3)  Applications for temporary sign permits shall be accompanied by such information as may be requested by the Village Manager or designee to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations. 
(d)  Compliance with electrical code. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used, a determination of compliance with the electrical code must be established. The plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections shall be submitted to and examined by the Village Manager or designee to determine if there is compliance with the electrical code. 
(e)  Pre-installation and post-installation inspections. 
(1)  Pre-installation inspection. Prior to the installation of a sign requiring a permit, the Village Manager or designee shall conduct an inspection of the proposed sign location. The inspection shall include but shall not be limited to an inspection of the footing, mountings and placements. 
(2)  Post-installation inspection. Upon completion of the installation of a sign requiring a permit, the Village Manager or designee shall conduct an inspection of the sign to confirm that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans as approved by the Appearance Commission and Village codes, ordinances and regulations. If there has been a determination of noncompliance with the plans or certificate of appropriateness, the Village Manager or designee may order the removal of such sign. 
(f)  Issuance of permit; expiration. 
(1)  If the Village Manager or designee determines that the application, plans and specifications comply with all relevant codes, ordinances and regulations, after the inspection provided for in subsection (e) of this section and payment of required fees, the requested permit shall be issued. A permit shall only be issued for those permitted signs enumerated in Section 82-12. 
(2)  If, within 6 months after the date of issuance of the permit for the installation, the work has not been completed, the permit shall become null and void and the applicant shall be required to restore the premises/structure to its original condition. 
(g)  Periodic inspections. For the purpose of determining whether a sign is secure or in need of repair or removal, the Village Manager or designee shall cause biennial inspections or inspections at such other times as deemed necessary. The inspection fee shall be as set forth in Section 46-123. 
(Code 1979, § 31.04; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 5, 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 82-7. - Exempt signs. 
The provisions and regulation of this chapter shall not apply to the following signs; provided, however, such signs shall be subject to the provisions of Section 82-29(c). The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except for the conditions contained in this section: 
(1)  Address/name signs. A sign, not exceeding 1 square foot in area, identifying the name or house number of the occupant or the presence of a permitted home occupation. 
(2)  Auxiliary signs. Auxiliary signs placed in store windows regarding hours of operation, accepted charge cards, warnings or similar information. 
(3)  Business nameplates. Non-illuminated nameplates not exceeding 1 square foot which denote the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the premises. Only 1 nameplate per proprietor shall be permitted. 
(4)  Construction signs. One sign per street frontage not exceeding 32 square feet in area. Such sign may indicate the architect, engineer or contractor and can be installed upon application of a building permit and removed upon the issuance of a certificate of completion. 
(5)  Flags and pennants. Flags and pennants at educational, governmental, or eleemosynary institutions which are not displayed for commercial purposes and are not greater than 50 square feet. A maximum of 4 flags or pennants per site may be displayed. The pole height shall be limited to the zoning district height limitation. The maximum number of 4 flags to be displayed as provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable at the Northshore Sculpture Park. 
(6)  Garage sale signs. Signs advertising garage sales, yard sales or house sales, in accordance with Chapter 26, Article XVI, on the day(s) that the sale is actually taking place, which do not exceed 4 square feet. No more than 2 signs per sale shall be permitted, with 1 sign per street frontage on the premises containing the sale. 
(7)  Government signs. Traffic signs, regulatory signs, municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger signs and such temporary emergency or noncommercial signs as may be approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
(8)  Interior signs. Signs which are located on the interior of premises and which are primarily oriented to persons within the premises. 
(9)  Monument signs. Plaques, tablets, cornerstones, or lettering inlaid into the architectural materials of a building or structure not exceeding 4 square feet, denoting the name of that structure and date of erection. 
(10)  Promotions/special displays. The display of 4 American flags shall be allowed on a permanent or temporary basis without a permit, provided that each flag does not exceed 24 square feet. The pole height shall be limited to the zoning district height limitation. A banner shall be permitted for 3 periods in each calendar year for a maximum of 14 days per period, or one 30 day period. A separate permit for such display or promotion shall be required for each instance of its use subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Temporary banners are permitted for any non-residential use in any non-residential district. 
b.  Temporary banners are limited to 32 square feet for uses less than 20,000 square feet in gross floor area. Uses with a gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or more shall be allowed a temporary banner with a maximum area of 48 square feet. 
c.  Only one banner is permitted per street frontage of the property. 
d.  Only one banner is allowed at one time for tenants in a multiple tenant property. 
e.  No temporary banner may be located higher than the roof line of the building to which it is attached or, if attached to a permanent sign, higher than the permanent sign. 
f.  All materials must be nonflammable. 
g.  The banner must be maintained in a safe and aesthetically pleasing condition. A banner that becomes illegible, damaged, or is otherwise in poor condition, must be removed. 
(11)  Real estate signs. Signs pertaining to the sale, rental, management or lease of real property, referred to in this section as "real estate signs," subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Real estate signs shall be non-illuminated, and no more than 1 sign per street frontage shall be posted on any property. 
b.  No real estate sign pertaining to residential property may contain more than 4 square feet, excluding the post. When computing the 4-square-foot area, any marking or symbol which identifies a real estate licensee or group of real estate licensees shall be included. 
c.  A placard stating "Open House" may be temporarily erected on or above a residential sign on the subject property and 1 off-premises directional sign may be permitted on private property or the public parkway on Sundays from noon to 5:00 p.m. and Tuesdays from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. The term "public parkway" shall not include the median strip. Any such directional sign shall not exceed 30 inches for a minimum distance of 15 feet from a street intersection or alley/street intersection. Signs set back more than 15 feet shall have a maximum height of 3 feet. Directional signs must indicate the real estate agency or individual responsible for the placement of the sign. 
d.  A real estate sign advertising "vacant business or industrial property" shall not exceed 24 square feet for property with a street frontage up to 100 feet and shall have a sign setback of 6 feet from the property line. For property with more than 100 feet of frontage, the sign shall not exceed 48 square feet and shall have a sign setback of 8 feet from the property line. In the CX Core Mixed-Use district, a real estate sign advertising "vacant business property" shall not exceed 24 square feet for property with a street frontage up to 100 feet. For property with more than 100 feet of frontage, the sign shall not exceed 48 square feet. Window signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the total of a window pane area. Only one sign shall be allowed per street frontage of the building. A window sign shall not be allowed if a ground or wall sign is used to advertise the sale or rental of the property. Additional window signs shall be allowed if the property is participating in the Village's Window Covering Program. 
e.  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit the maintenance or installation of any sign which promotes an unlawful housing practice pursuant to federal, State, or local laws or regulations. 
Cross reference— Fair housing, § 58-31 et seq. 
f.  Real estate signs may be erected only on the vacant lot or outside of a building to which the sign applies. 
g.  Signs for the sale of residential property shall be removed by the owner of the property or the real estate agency or individual responsible for such sign within 14 days after a contract for the sale of the property has been signed by the buyer and the seller, or their representatives. The existence of any contingencies to which the contract is subject to shall not defer the 14-day period. 
(12)  Direction signs. Signs to direct traffic flow or parking, which shall be limited to directional/traffic information. Directional/traffic information signs covered by the Illinois Manual on Traffic Control Devices shall comply with all regulations therein. Signs shall not exceed 4 square feet, with a maximum dimension of 38 inches in one direction, unless required by the Illinois Manual on Traffic Control Devices. No more than 1 sign per driveway opening shall be permitted, unless additional signs are required by the Village Manager or designee. The size and number of direction signs may also be increased as part of a planned development or site plan approval granted in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(13)  Temporary window signs. No more than 25 percent of an individual window pane surface inside the frame shall be covered by any type of sign. Signs, packaged products, packaging material and other opaque materials shall be considered when calculating the window coverage area. 
(14)  Restaurant informational sign. As defined in Section 82-2. 
(Code 1979, § 31.05; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-8. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Legal nonconforming signs. Any sign which, on July 15, 1991, the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, does not conform with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and shall be permitted, provided that when originally installed it was in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations which were in effect. 
(b)  Unlawful nonconformance. Any sign which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, all applicable codes, ordinances, and rules and regulations and is not considered a legal nonconforming sign is unlawful. The Village Manager or designee shall serve notice that the sign must be brought into compliance within 30 days. 
(c)  Loss of legal nonconforming status. A sign shall no longer be considered a legal nonconforming sign, and shall be considered an unlawful sign, if one or more of the following occurs: 
(1)  Alteration. The sign is altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair, which makes the sign less in compliance with this chapter or other applicable codes, ordinance or regulations. 
(2)  Message change. The message or graphic display is changed in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair which does not increase the nonconformity. 
(3)  Relocation. The sign is relocated either on the premises or to another location. 
(4)  Unsafe signs. The sign fails to conform with applicable maintenance, operation and safety standards. 
(5)  Damaged signs. The sign is damaged to the extent that required repairs exceed 50 percent of replacement value. 
(6)  Excessive maintenance costs. Maintenance costs exceed 50 percent of the replacement value. 
(7)  Change in use. A change in use or occupancy of the premises which requires a new occupancy permit. 
If any one of the conditions or events described in this subsection occurs, the sign shall be brought into compliance with this chapter and all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations within 30 days. 
(Code 1979, §§ 31.151, 31.152)  
Sec. 82-9. - Relief. 
(a)  Criteria. Relief may be granted from the provisions of this chapter upon a request to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals as allowed in Section 118-6 and Section 118-7 of the Village Code if: 
(1)  The relief is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)  There are practical difficulties or particular hardship in complying with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(3)  The relief is not for any sign specifically prohibited by Section 82-11. 
(4)  The signs have been reviewed and endorsed by the Appearance Commission. 
(b)  Effect of decisions. All variances shall be construed as administrative actions for the purpose of assuring that inequities in specific situations may be avoided by granting a variance and shall not be construed as amendments to the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise provided by the corporate authorities. 
(Code 1979, § 31.153; Ord. No. 13-12-C-4024, § 2, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 82-10. - Signs on public right-of-way. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall permit the installation of signs on the public right-of-way except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 31.03) 
Cross reference— Private use of public ways, § 90-55.  
Sec. 82-11. - Prohibited signs. 
Prohibited signs shall include the following: 
(1)  All signs specifically or generally prohibited by other sections of this chapter. 
(2)  Signs painted directly on a building surface. 
(3)  Roof signs, except as provided for in this chapter. 
(4)  Projecting signs. 
(5)  Inflated or air-supported signs. 
(6)  Signs painted or attached directly to a vehicle for advertising purposes when the vehicle is used primarily for advertising purposes and not for transportation. 
(7)  Flashing signs. 
(Code 1979, § 31.06; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-12. - Permitted types of signs. 
The following types of signs are permitted signs, subject to the restrictions and limitations contained in this chapter: 
(1)  Ground signs. 
(2)  Wall signs. 
(3)  Temporary signs. 
(4)  Marquee signs. 
(5)  Canopies and awning signs. 
(6)  Permanent window signs. No more than 25 percent of an individual window glass surface inside the frame shall be covered by any type of sign. Signs, packaged products, packaging material and other opaque materials shall be considered when calculating the window coverage area. 
(Code 1979, § 31.07)  
Sec. 82-13. - General requirements. 
(a)  Materials standards. All permanent signs permitted by this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable federal, State, and local laws and regulations. 
(b)  Information to be affixed on electrical signs. Every sign shall have indicated in a conspicuous place the date of installation, the name of the applicant, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus. 
(c)  Wind pressure and dead load. All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of net surface area and to receive dead loads as required in IBC. 
(d)  Obstructions. No sign shall be installed or maintained so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any fire escape or means of ingress or egress. 
(2)  Interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
(3)  Interfere with any existing warning or instructional sign. 
(4)  Interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Interfere with or be attached to a standpipe used for fire suppression purposes. 
(e)  Sign face and smoothness. Any sign which is installed or maintained within 5 feet of a public right-of-way shall have no nails, tacks, wires or other projections, except illuminating devices, which may extend in front of the sign. 
(f)  Illumination. 
(1)  Exterior and interior illumination shall be permitted on all signs except temporary signs and blade signs. All illuminating devices shall be completely shielded from view beyond the lot line in order to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
(2)  Letter or symbols having channeled neon lighting, with the light source flush or in line with the face of the letters or symbols, are permitted. 
(3)  In no instance shall the lighting intensity of any sign exceed 75 footcandles when measured with a standard light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign from a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign. 
(Code 1979, § 31.08; Ord. No. 05-10-C-3390, § 2, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-14. - Construction and installation. 
(a)  Ground signs. 
(1)  Construction. 
a.  Any movable part of a ground sign shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges. Movable parts shall include but shall not be limited to the cover of the service opening. 
b.  Lettering or advertising designs illuminated from the interior shall be composed of noncombustible or approved combustible materials. 
c.  All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular form maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  Every ground sign shall be securely constructed, erected and installed upon posts and standards extending at least 3 feet below the natural surface of the ground. 
b.  All wood posts, anchors and bracings shall be treated to protect them from moisture by creosoting or other approved form of moisture protection. 
c.  Where pedestrians or vehicles may reasonably pass beneath or within 2 feet of the perimeter of the sign, there shall be no less than 10 feet of open space between the ground and the bottom of the sign structure. In areas where pedestrians may pass but vehicles are prohibited, a ground sign may be supported at a height less than 10 feet off the ground. In all circumstances, a pedestrian barrier shall be provided which is a maximum height of 30 inches and a minimum height of 24 inches. 
d.  No part of a ground sign supported above ground level shall extend horizontally more than ½ its height from the pole or column to which it is attached. 
e.  All ground signs and related structures shall be located entirely on private property. In the CX Core Mixed-Use district ground signs shall be located in a landscaped bed that extends beyond the plan dimensions of the sign. The landscape bed shall be elevated a minimum of 12 inches high, and shall be planted with shrubs, perennials, and/or groundcovers. 
f.  All wiring shall be contained in rigid conduit or enclosed in poles or raceways. Wiring shall not be visible to the public. 
(b)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Construction. Every wall sign shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible or approved combustible materials. Illuminated fire-resistant wooden signs shall be lighted from an exterior source of illumination. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  Attachment to building. No wall sign shall be secured to a building with wire, wood strips or nails. Every wall sign shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall in one of the following manners: 
1.  Embedded a minimum of 5 inches into the wall with metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of not less than 3/8 inch in diameter. 
2.  Securely fixed to the wall by bolting the sign to metal brackets or saddles which shall be no more than 6 feet apart. 
b.  No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, or project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. 
c.  Any wall sign which is located above and within 1 foot of a public right-of-way shall be attached to the building or wall at a height of not less than 10 feet above the public right-of-way. In areas where pedestrians may pass but vehicles are prohibited, a wall sign may be supported at a height less than 10 feet off the ground. In all circumstances, a pedestrian barrier shall be provided which is a maximum height of 30 inches and a minimum height of 24 inches. A sign shall not project more than 12 inches from the wall to which it is attached. 
(c)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  Construction. 
a.  No temporary sign of combustible material shall exceed 4 feet in any of its dimensions if it is attached to an exterior building wall or other stable structure. 
b.  Every temporary sign with an area in excess of 16 square feet, if it is attached to an exterior building wall or other stable structure, shall be made of rigid materials. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  Every temporary sign shall be attached to an exterior building wall or other stable structure with an approved anchorage, with the exception of A-frame signs allowed in the CX Core Mixed-Use district. 
b.  No temporary sign shall extend more than 4 inches beyond the face of the wall or structure to which it is attached. 
c.  No temporary sign or its supports shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, or project beyond the ends or top of the building or wall to which it is attached. 
(d)  Marquees. 
(1)  Construction. 
a.  The roof of every marquee shall be properly guttered and connected by downspouts to the ground in order to ensure that water will not drip or flow onto public property. 
b.  Signage shall be limited to the face of the hood. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  Every marquee shall be supported solely by the building to which it is attached. No additional supports, columns or posts shall be permitted. 
b.  The roof of any marquee shall be designed and constructed to support a live load of not less than 100 pounds per square foot. 
c.  No marquee shall be installed on any building or other structure of wood frame construction. 
d.  No marquee shall overhang or extend into the public right-of-way. 
e.  No part of a marquee shall be less than 10 feet above the level of the sidewalk or other right-of-way over which it projects. 
f.  No marquee shall be wider than the entrance of the building from which it extends plus 5 feet on each side. 
(e)  Canopies and awnings. 
(1)  Construction. All canopies and awnings shall be constructed and installed in compliance with IBC and all other applicable federal, State, and local laws and regulations. 
(2)  Installation. 
a.  The lowest part of the projecting frame of canopies and awnings shall not be less than 7 feet 6 inches above the ground. the lowest portion of the descending skirt shall not be less than 6 feet 8 inches above the ground. 
b.  No canopy or awning shall be within 4 feet of the public curb line. 
(Code 1979, § 31.09; Ord. No. 05-10-C-3390, § 3, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-15. - Obscene or immoral displays. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(Code 1979, § 31.101)  
Sec. 82-16. - Unlawful freestanding signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install within the Village, except the CX Core Mixed-Use district, any freestanding sign which is not attached to the ground or to an existing structure in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Temporary freestanding A-frame signs are permitted in the CX Core Mixed-Use district with the following restrictions: 
1.  Limited to 6 square feet in area (each side) and 4 feet in height. 
2.  Use of sign is limited to business hours (sign must be stowed indoors during off hours) and must not be used outdoors in high winds. The sign must not be used when snow accumulation is 2 inches or more and shall not be placed in a snow bank. 
3.  One sign is permitted per business. 
4.  Sign must be placed within 10 feet of the center of the primary entrance of the business, but not directly in front of the business door or in front of an adjacent business. 
5.  Placement of signs must maintain a five (5) foot sidewalk clearance at all times. 
6.  Placement of signs must not violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or Illinois accessibility codes. 
7.  Sign must be on building side of sidewalk. 
(Code 1979, § 31.102; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-17. - Maintenance. 
All signs and appurtenances thereto shall be maintained by the owner and occupant in a clean and inoffensive manner. 
(Code 1979, § 31.103)  
Sec. 82-18. - Electronic Message Centers (EMC) regulations. 
(a)  An Electronic Message Center (hereinafter referred to in this Article as "EMC") is any sign or portion of a sign that displays electronics or electronically generated images, graphics, videos or pictures, with or without text, generated by a matrix of elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs, pixelated screens or other illumination devices within the display panels(s). 
(b)  An EMC shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  It shall be designed and located so that the entire message is legible to the traveling public; 
(2)  It shall be constructed from non-reflective materials and illuminated in a manner that does not create a glare; 
(3)  It shall be located and mounted in compliance with requirements for the type of sign (ground, wall, window, etc.) in this chapter; and 
(c)  The message format shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The message shall not consist of flashing, chasing or animated lights, or include animated pictorial graphics; 
(2)  Text shall be uniform in color, appearance, and font; 
(3)  The message, including single and multiple lines of text, shall not change more frequently than once every twenty (20) seconds; 
(4)  Relief to allow a sign facing residential property shall only be allowed after the following factors are reviewed and determined not to be detrimental to the residential property: time the sign is illuminated, duration of display, and brightness of the display. 
(d)  EMC signs must not exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn and/or on cloudy days as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness. All signs shall have an ambient light monitor that will automatically adjust the brightness levels based on ambient light conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall submit photos of the proposed EMC, as it would appear during daytime and evening hours. 
(e)  All EMC signs must be equipped with a default mechanism that will stop the messaging, freeze the image in one position, or turn off the sign when a malfunction in electronic programming occurs. 
(Code 1979, § 31.104; Ord. No. 05-10-C-3390, § 4, 10-10-2005; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4449, § 1, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 82-19. - Traffic hazards. 
No sign shall be installed or maintained which purports to be an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which obstructs the view of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, without prior approval from the appropriate governmental agency. 
(Code 1979, § 31.105) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 106.  
Sec. 82-20. - Off-premises signs. 
Every sign shall relate directly to the property, business or enterprise conducted on the premises. No vacant lot shall have permanent signage. 
(Code 1979, § 31.106)  
Sec. 82-21. - Product and service identification. 
Product and service identification shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the surface area of a single sign. This requirement shall not apply to exclusive dealerships, manufacturers of name-brand products or the exclusive manufacturer's representatives, or single word product or service identification or window signs. Phone numbers and website locations shall only be allowed as part of a window sign. 
(Code 1979, § 31.107; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-22. - Awning, canopy or marquee signs. 
(a)  Number and placement. Each use shall be allowed only 1 awning, canopy or marquee sign facing any street, mall, parking lot, or public access area where there is a business entrance or display window. No awning, canopy or marquee sign shall be permitted facing any residential use, except where it is the principal frontage. For uses in the CX Core Mixed-Use district, an individual awning, canopy or marquee may be allowed over each door or window facing any street, mall, parking lot, or public access area where there is a business entrance or display window, however, only one awning, canopy or marquee per street frontage sign shall be allowed to have lettering or a logo. The top of the awning, canopy or marquee shall be at least 12 inches below the top of the building parapet or 10 percent of the facade above the first floor window line whichever is less. 
(b)  Area and design. The surface area of any sign affixed to an awning, canopy or marquee shall not exceed 50 percent of the face to which it is attached or 100 square feet, whichever is less. Letters or signs affixed to any awning, canopy or marquee shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Letters, lettering, or logos shall not project above the physical dimensions of the awning, canopy or marquee. No letters shall exceed 18 inches in height, nor shall any logo exceed 20 inches in height. For uses located in the CX Core Mixed-Use district, if the business has a wall sign, the awning may only contain a logo and address number and street. The address shall not exceed 12 inches in height. The lettering or logo shall not exceed one-third the area of the face parallel to the building. Letters or lettering shall only identify the name or use of the business conducted therein, the address number, and street name. Lettering or logos are allowed only on the canopy face that is parallel to the building wall. 
(2)  The general character, color and style of all awnings and canopies shall relate to each other and be harmonious within the group of uses having common party walls. 
(3)  Letters or lettering shall only identify the name or use of the business conducted therein, and the address number. The common name or identity for a group of uses may be substituted. The establishment/building owner may elect to designate the marquee, canopy or awning as the signable area as defined in Section 82-27(c). 
(4)  No temporary sign shall be attached to or hung from a marquee, awning or canopy except a sign painted or illuminated directly upon the vertical hanging fascia of the structure, and such sign shall not be lower than 7 feet 6 inches above the sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(5)  No advertising material shall be placed upon the roof of or hung from any awning, canopy or marquee. 
(c)  Approval. Any lettering, logo, or sign on an awning, canopy or marquee shall be approved by the Appearance Commission. 
(d)  Height. The height of any awning, canopy, or marquee shall be regulated by Section 82-14(d) and (e). 
(Code 1979, § 31.108; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-23. - Window signs. 
No more than 25 percent of an individual window pane surface shall be covered by any type of sign. Signs, packaged products, packaging material and other opaque materials shall be calculated in the window coverage area. Only one (1) sign per window pane or glass door is allowed in the CX Core Mixed-Use district. 
(Code 1979, § 31.109; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-24. - Changeable copy signs. 
Any ground or wall sign may contain changeable copy with the limitations contained in this chapter. Any changeable copy shall not exceed a gross surface area of 25 square feet, and such footage shall be included as part of the maximum square footage for the form of sign taken and shall be subject to all other regulations for such signs. When temporary signs are not displayed in a development, the gross surface area of the changeable copy area on the ground sign may be increased to a maximum of 50 square feet. 
(Code 1979, § 31.1010)  
Sec. 82-25. - Temporary or sale signs. 
No temporary or sale sign shall exceed 25 square feet in sign area or more than 25 percent of any window pane or other surface to which it is attached. Such a sign shall be calculated as part of the total square footage of any other applicable permitted signs. No temporary or sale signs made of paper or cardboard shall be affixed to any exterior window surface, wall or other exterior surface of the structure. Such signs in the CX Core Mixed-Use district shall not be hand drawn or hand written except for those on A-frame signs. 
(Code 1979, § 31.1011; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-26. - Residential district uses. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to signs in all residential districts, and no other signs except those listed in this section shall be permitted. 
(b)  Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted in residential districts without prior approval of the Appearance Commission, but are subject to the conditions and limitations as contained in Section 82-7: 
(1)  Real estate signs. 
(2)  Address/name signs. 
(3)  Garage sale signs: those signs advertising a garage sale in accordance with Chapter 26, Article XVI. 
(4)  Government signs: Official signs of governmental or quasi-governmental entities. 
(5)  One non-illuminated window sign per residential unit not to exceed 4 square feet. Such sign may be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days in any 6-month period. 
(6)  One non-illuminated ground sign per property not to exceed 4 square feet. Such sign may be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days in any 6-month period. 
(c)  Signs requiring approval of Appearance Commission. The following signs are permitted in residential districts with the prior approval of the Appearance Commission; however, sign face changes to existing signs shall only require review and approval by the Village Manager or his designee: 
(1)  Residential development signs. 
a.  Type. Such signs shall be either a wall or ground sign. 
b.  Number. There shall only be 1 sign for each abutting street frontage. 
c.  Area. Such signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in gross surface area for each exposed face, not to exceed an aggregate gross surface area of 12 square feet. 
d.  Location. Such signs shall not be located closer than ½ the minimum setback required for the zoning district or within 15 feet of any point of vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public roadway. 
e.  Height. Wall signs shall not be higher than 10 feet from the sign base to building grade, or ground signs shall not be higher than 4 feet from the sign base to grade. 
(2)  Cemetery signs. 
(3)  Historic markers. 
(4)  Signs for eleemosynary uses. 
a.  Type. Wall and ground signs are permitted. 
b.  Number. There shall be only 1 sign of each type for each street frontage. 
c.  Area. Ground signs shall not exceed 35 square feet. When a changeable copy sign is included, the square footage allowed may be increased to 50 square feet. Wall signs shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
d.  Location. Ground signs shall not be located closer than the minimum setback required for the zoning district, or within 15 feet of any point of vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public roadway. 
e.  Height. Wall signs shall not be higher than 10 feet from the sign base to building grade. Ground signs shall not be higher than 4 feet from the sign base to grade. 
(Code 1979, § 31.11; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 5, 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 82-27. - Mixed-Use and small business district uses. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all signs in the NX Neighborhood Mixed-Use, TX Transit Mixed-Use, and CX Core Mixed-Use, and B1 Service Commercial zoning districts and signs on sites under 1 acre in the B2 Commercial and B3 Business zoning districts. All signs listed in Section 82-12 shall be permitted subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter and as regulated by this section. 
(b)  CX Core Mixed-Use District. Buildings in the CX Core Mixed-Use district undergoing historically correct renovations to their original appearance shall be exempt from the sign criteria in this chapter. However, all building signage, signage support structures, and illumination shall be subject to review and approval by the Appearance Commission and Board of Trustees. 
(c)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Signable area. 
a.  The signable area shall be no greater than 1/3 of the commercial portion of the facade and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Appearance Commission. 
b.  The signable area may be established on the following facades: 
1.  A facade facing a street frontage, except where it faces residentially zoned property, unless it is the only street frontage. 
2.  A facade facing a mall, parking lot. or public access area where there is a business entrance or display window. 
(2)  Number. Each business shall be allowed only 1 wall sign per signable area. 
(3)  Area. No wall sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 1/3 of the signable area. No letter or logo shall be larger than 36 inches in height. For uses in the CX Core Mixed-Use district, no letter or logo shall be taller than 24 inches for uses less than 10,000 square feet in area of the building footprint. Uses 10,000 square feet or greater in size shall be allowed letters or logos up to 36 inches. No wall sign shall be located closer than 10 percent of the distance to the top or to the bottom of any fascia or structural surface to which it is attached. No wall sign shall be wider than 80 percent of the width of an occupant's space with a minimum width of 2 feet from each side of the tenant's space. 
(4)  Location. Wall signs shall be displayed only within the signable area of a building, and only to the extent permitted by this chapter. 
(5)  Height. No wall sign shall extend over the top of the facade of any building to which it is attached. The sign shall not be located above the sills of any second-story window in the same elevation. 
(6)  Sign information. Signs shall only identify the name, use and/or logo of the business conducted therein, and the address number. 
(d)  Ground signs. 
(1)  Number. There shall only be 1 ground sign at any single- or multiple-use site, excluding ground signs used for directional purposes. Where there are adjoining uses sharing party walls, there shall only be 1 ground sign to be used jointly by all the adjoining uses. Each use shall have its proportionate share of the sign area based on its proportion of the linear footage of building frontage. 
(2)  Area. No ground sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 35 square feet per face, with a maximum gross surface area of 70 square feet per sign for a single occupant/use or common identity use. When more than 1 occupant is listed or when a changeable copy sign is included, the square footage allowed may be increased to 50 square feet per face with a maximum gross surface area of 100 square feet per sign. 
(3)  Location. No ground sign (other than directional signs such as entrance/exit signs) shall be located closer than its height, measured horizontally, to any interior lot line, rear lot line, or adjacent ground sign, subject to the approval of the Director of Engineering. No ground sign shall overhang or encroach upon any public sidewalk or other public right-of-way. 
(4)  Height. No ground sign shall exceed a height of 18 feet or the top of the lowest level or any roof or facade line of the associated building, whichever is less. 
(e)  Blade signs. 
(1)  Signable area. 
a.  The signable area shall be no greater than 1/3 of the commercial portion of the facade and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Appearance Commission. 
b.  The signable area may be established on the following facades: 
1.  A facade facing a street frontage, except where it faces residentially zoned property, unless it is the only street frontage. 
2.  A facade facing a mall, parking lots or public access area where there is a business entrance or display window. 
(2)  Number. Each business shall be allowed only one (1) blade sign per signable area. A blade sign is not allowed if the business has an awning or a wall sign. 
(3)  Area. No blade sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 10 square feet. No letter or logo shall be larger than 24 inches in height. Blade signs shall all be at least as tall as wide and shall not project more than 36 inches from the wall to which it is attached. The sign shall be constructed of rigid material or of taut fabric and attached without chains or diagonal bracing and have a maximum thickness of 3 inches. The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(4)  Location. Blade signs shall be displayed only within the signable area of a building, and only to the extent permitted by this chapter. No blade sign shall be located closer than 10 percent of the distance to the top or to the bottom of any fascia or structural surface to which it is attached. A blade sign shall be located at least 2 feet from each side of the tenant's lease line. 
(5)  Height. No blade sign shall extend over the top of the facade of any building to which it is attached. The sign shall not be located above the sills of any second-story window in the same elevation. Height from the top of the facade shall be 12 inches or 10 percent above the window line, whichever is less. The minimum clearance from the ground shall be 8 feet. 
(6)  Sign information. Signs shall only identify the name, use, and/or logo of the business conducted therein, and the address number. 
(f)  Maximum gross surface area. Maximum gross surface area of signs is 1/3 of all signable areas, as defined in Section 82-2 and allowed in subsection (c) of this section, excluding ground signs, as regulated in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 31.12; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3887, § 1, 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 82-28. - Large business district uses and industrial district uses. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to signs in the B2 Commercial and B3 Business zoning districts where the site exceeds 1 acre and all signs in the B4 Regional Shopping, B6 Downtown Science and Technology, H1 Hospital, M1 Office Assembly Industry, M2 Light Industry, M3 Industry, and OR Office Research zoning districts. All signs listed in Section 82-12 shall be permitted subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter and as regulated by this section. 
(b)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Number. 
a.  Only 1 wall sign facing a street frontage on which it is located shall be permitted per occupancy. In the B4 Regional Shopping district, no wall sign shall be permitted facing a street frontage where there is residentially zoned property located directly opposite such street frontage, unless it is the only street frontage of the business. 
b.  Only 1 wall sign shall be permitted per facade facing a mall, parking lot or public access area for an occupancy without street frontage. 
c.  In the B4 Regional Shopping district, only 1 wall sign shall be allowed for each occupant in a development, except that, where an occupant abuts 2 or more streets, 1 additional sign shall be permitted for each building facade abutting a street, provided that no wall sign shall be permitted facing a street frontage where there is residentially zoned property located directly opposite such street frontage, unless it is the only street frontage of the business. In addition, 1 wall sign shall be allowed for each exterior building facade of an occupant facing an internal court of the development. 
Major occupants of shopping centers on sites over 80 acres in the B4 Regional Shopping district shall be permitted 1 sign for each building facade. Major occupants shall be allowed 1 additional sign per public entrance, if, in the judgment of the Appearance Commission, the primary sign is permanently obstructed from view at the pedestrian level by construction such as canopies, retail buildings, major landscape features, parking structures, etc. 
(2)  Area. No wall sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 20 percent of the wall to which it is applied or 200 square feet, whichever is less. In the B-4 Regional Shopping district, no wall sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 10 percent of the wall to which it is applied for major occupants of shopping centers on sites over 80 acres. If more than 1 wall sign is located on a face of a major occupant building, the gross surface area of all signs shall not exceed 10 percent of wall to which it is applied. 
(3)  Location. A wall sign shall be located on the outermost wall of any principal building. 
(4)  Height. 
a.  Except in the B6 Downtown Science and Technology, OR Office Research, B4 Regional Shopping, and H1 Hospital Zoning districts, a wall sign shall not extend over the top of the facade of any building to which it is attached. The sign shall not be located above the sign frieze. 
b.  In the B6 Downtown Science and Technology, OR Office Research, B4 Regional Shopping, and H1 Hospital zoning districts, wall signs may be located above the top of the facade, on a building penthouse, or above the first floor. 
(5)  Sign information. Signs shall only identify the name, use and or logo of the business conducted therein, and the address number. 
(c)  Ground signs. 
(1)  Number. There shall only be 1 ground sign at any single or multiple-use site excluding ground signs for directional purposes. Each use shall have its proportionate share of the sign based on its proportion of the linear footage of building frontage. However, at shopping centers with a minimum of 10 or more tenants and minimum of 50,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area, the Appearance Commission may approve, as an element of the site's sign criteria, a sign package limiting the ground sign to anchor tenants and major uses. In such instances, other means of signage must be available for tenants not represented on the ground sign and written proof provided to the Village that these uses are not entitled to signage on the ground sign. Additional ground sign locations may be permitted if the following criteria are met: 
a.  For industrial zoned sites: 
1.  The site must be at least 3 acres in size and the occupied building floor area must be at least 50,000 square feet. 
2.  The use must have a separate street address and entrance. 
3.  The use must have direct street frontage. 
4.  There shall be no common ground sign for the development, unless it is a single tenant building. 
5.  The sign and all other ground signs to be located at the site must be approved as a package. 
6.  All ground signs shall have the same size, shape, lettering, style, color and means of illumination and shall be set back the same distance from the street frontage. 
b.  For sites in business zoning districts: 
1.  The site must be at least 2 acres in size. 
2.  The site must have more than 1 street frontage with a maximum of 1 sign per street frontage. 
3.  The sign shall be a common ground sign for all uses at the site. 
4.  The sign and all other ground signs to be located at the site must be approved as a package. 
5.  All ground signs shall have the same size, shape, lettering, style, color and means of illumination and all shall be set back the same distance from the street frontage. 
c.  As part of a hotel development with a restaurant that is enclosed in, or part of, the building. A separate ground sign specifically for the restaurant is authorized, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The restaurant sign cannot exceed 15 feet in height. 
2.  The gross surface area of the restaurant sign shall not exceed 75% of the total square feet per sign allowed pursuant to paragraph (c)(2) of this Section. 
3.  If the special use permit or site plan approval has already been granted and the only item that is requested is a separate restaurant sign, then the request shall be considered through the modified review procedure stated in Section 118-8. 
4.  Only one separate sign for a restaurant may be authorized, the number of: (A) streets that are adjacent to the hotel site; or (B) restaurants on the hotel site. 
5.  A restaurant that has a separate restaurant sign shall not be allowed to have another sign in combination with a hotel sign. 
(2)  Area. 
a.  No ground sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 100 square feet per face, with a maximum gross surface area of 200 square feet per sign or 2 square feet per face for every linear foot of building frontage, whichever amount is less. The total permitted gross surface area of a ground sign may be increased by 2 square feet for each linear foot of sign setback from the street right-of-way for a maximum gross surface area of 150 square feet per face with a maximum gross surface area of 300 square feet per sign. Where the site exceeds 2 acres, a common ground sign shall not exceed 200 square feet per face, with a maximum gross surface area of 400 square feet per sign, or 2 feet per face for every linear foot of building frontage, whichever amount is less. 
b.  No ground sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 100 square feet or 2 square feet per face for every linear foot of building frontage, whichever amount is less. The total permitted gross surface area of a ground sign may be increased by 2 square feet for each linear foot of sign setback from the street right-of-way for a maximum gross surface area of 150 square feet. Where the site exceeds 2 acres, a common ground sign shall not exceed 200 square feet or 2 feet per face for every linear foot of building frontage, whichever amount is less. 
(3)  Location. A ground sign may be located in any required yard subject to the conditions contained in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). All ground signs over 30 inches in height shall not be located within a 15-foot sight triangle in any direction along the property line from any vehicular access drive or public thoroughfare and shall not create any dangerous sight obstructions at other locations on the site, including visual obstructions of, or to, pedestrian traffic on designated public or private sidewalks. 
(4)  Height. No ground sign shall exceed a height of 18 feet or to the top of the lowest level of any roof or facade line of the associated building, whichever is less. Ground sign height may be increased as part of a planned development or site plan approval granted in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(d)  Maximum gross surface area. 
(1)  The total permitted gross surface area of all signs for a single building shall not exceed 3 times in square feet the total building frontage expressed in linear feet, up to a maximum of 500 square feet for a building with 1 frontage, 800 square feet for a building with 2 frontages, and 1,000 square feet for a building with 3 or more frontages. 
(2)  If a single building is designed for occupancy by more than 1 establishment or use and is so used, the formula to be applied in ascertaining the permitted gross surface area for each individual establishment shall be determined on the basis of 3 times, in square feet, the total building frontage of each individual establishment. 
(3)  The total permitted gross surface area of all signs for a single building shall be increased by 2 square feet for each linear foot of building setback beyond the setback required under the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). For a single development on a site larger than 3 acres, the total permitted gross surface area of all signs for all buildings shall be increased by 50 square feet for each acre of land in excess of 3 acres. 
(4)  The total permitted gross surface area of all signs advertising the sale, development, use or ownership of vacant or undeveloped real estate shall be limited to and in conformity with the provisions of Section 82-7. 
(Code 1979, § 31.13; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 5, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 10-1-C-3731, § 1, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 13-12-C-4024, § 2, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 82-29. - Maintenance; removal on termination of business; unsafe signs. 
(a)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Required. Every sign, including but not limited to those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and sound structural condition. 
(2)  Paint or surface treatment. To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, all signs and supports shall be painted unless they have been anodized or similarly treated. 
(3)  Repairs. Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign shall be replaced or repaired. 
(b)  Removal on termination of business. Within 30 days of the termination of a business, commercial, or industrial enterprise, all signs relating to such activity shall be removed. The owner shall be responsible for the removal of such signs or, display a blank sign face until such unit is occupied and also cover the interior of all ground floor windows that face public streets or sidewalks with an opaque, single-color material that prevents interior viewing of the space by the public. 
(c)  Unsafe signs. 
(1)  If a determination is made by the Village Manager or designee that any sign is unsafe, is not secure, is in violation of this chapter, or is in violation of any applicable law or a public danger, notice of such violation shall be given to the owner that the sign must be removed or repaired or the violation cured within 30 days. 
(2)  If such remedial action or removal does not occur, the Village Manager or designee may cause the removal of the sign. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of removal within 30 days after notification of such costs. Any costs that continue to go unpaid shall cause a lien to be recorded against the affected property. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, provided that, within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the Village files notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cook County. 
(3)  Any sign which presents an immediate danger to the public may be removed at the direction of the Village Manager or designee in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 31.14; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 5, 12-6-2004)  
Chapter 86 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Department of Public Works, § 2-241 et seq.; health and sanitation requirements at carnivals, circuses, fairs and other amusements, § 14-276; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; health and sanitary regulations for dry cleaning establishments, § 26-434; environment, ch. 42; fee for landscape waste bag stickers, § 46-44; burning garbage or refuse, § 50-44; health and sanitation, ch. 54; refuse and litter on streets and sidewalks, § 90-52; utilities, ch. 110. 
Federal law reference— Solid waste disposal, 42 U.S.C.A. § 6901 et seq. 
State Law reference— Disposal of refuse, garbage and ashes in municipalities, 65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq.; removal of garbage and debris, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13; land pollution and refuse disposal, 415 ILCS 5/20 et seq.; Local Solid Waste Disposal Act, 415 ILCS 10/1 et seq.; Solid Waste Planning and Recycling Act, 415 ILCS 15/1 et seq.; Illinois Solid Waste Management Act, 415 ILCS 20/1 et seq.; Litter Control Act, 415 ILCS 105/1 et seq.; spilling loads on highways, 625 ILCS 5/15-109 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Purpose and scope of chapter. 
This chapter regulates the collection and pre-collection practices within the Village with respect to garbage, refuse, rubbish, landscape wastes, building materials, debris, all other waste materials and recyclables. Its provisions are binding upon all citizens, residents, homeowners, tenants, landowners, institutions, businesses, manufacturers, and private scavengers located within or operating within the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 14.01)  
Sec. 86-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Composting means the controlled method of decomposing organic matter (landscape waste) by the natural activity of microorganisms. 
Containers means Village-provided refuse carts. 
Hazardous waste shall be as defined by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (1980) (CERCLA) (42 U.S.C.A. § 9605), the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) (42 U.S.C.A. § 11001 et seq.), the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, Section 5/3.15 (415 ILCS 5/3.15), Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, PL 94-580 (42 U.S.C.A. § 6921), the Illinois Potentially Infectious Medical Waste Act (P.A. 87-752) (415 ILCS 5/56 et seq.), or pursuant to State Pollution Control Board regulations, all as may be amended from time to time. 
Landscape waste means grass, leaves, small brush and tree clippings and other similar waste. 
Medical waste sharps includes but is not limited to used or unused discarded hypodermic, intravenous, or other needles, or hypodermic or intravenous syringes. 
Private scavenger means any person, firm or organization engaged in the business of collecting, hauling or disposing of waste materials. 
Putrescent and putrescible mean waste material which is decayed or is likely to decay. 
Recyclable materials includes materials collected in accordance with the Village recycling program. 
Recycling containers means containers provided by the Village to residents in accordance with the Village's recycling program in which recyclable materials are placed for collection by the Village or its contractor. 
Recycling program means the Village-wide recycling program as approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees on March 5, 1990, and as amended from time to time. 
Waste materials includes but is not limited to litter, garbage and other household waste products. 
(Code 1979, § 14.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-3. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 14.17)  
Sec. 86-4. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this chapter, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Code 1979, § 14.18)  
Sec. 86-5. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Code 1979, § 14.19)  
Sec. 86-6. - Responsibility for compliance. 
The responsibility for compliance with this chapter shall include but shall not be limited to each, all or any combination of persons or organizations as follows: 
(1)  The specific individual who commits an act or omission in direct violation of this chapter. 
(2)  The person or organization in charge of the day-to-day operation and management of the premises wherein the violation occurred. 
(3)  The owner or agent of the owner of the premises wherein the violation occurred, provided that no such owner or agent shall be held responsible for such violations unless the owner or agent has actual knowledge thereof or has been duly notified by the Department of Public Health that such violations have occurred. 
(Code 1979, § 14.16)  
Sec. 86-7. - Garbage containers; preparation of garbage for disposal. 
All putrescent or putrescible waste materials or substances, except landscape waste, recyclable materials and hazardous waste, placed out for collection must be stored in Village provided containers. Waste should be drained and wrapped or bagged in such a manner that moisture cannot spill when the material is removed from the container. Animal feces and dusty residuals such as charcoal ash, fireplace ash and sawdust must be bagged and not placed loose in the container. 
(Code 1979, § 14.03)  
Sec. 86-8. - Preparation of refuse for disposal. 
All nonputrescible waste materials, including recyclable materials, must be stored in a bag or wrapped, tied or bundled in such a manner that the material will not blow or scatter during the storage period. 
(Code 1979, § 14.04)  
Sec. 86-9. - Combining garbage and refuse. 
When any putrescible materials are combined with nonputrescible materials, the provisions pertaining to putrescible materials shall apply. 
(Code 1979, § 14.05)  
Sec. 86-10. - Unlawful deposit of waste. 
No waste materials shall be deposited, be thrown away, or be permitted to accumulate or remain in any street, alley, or other public place or in any place or in any condition where its presence would constitute a nuisance to others, or a potential or actual hazard to health, sanitation or safety. 
(Code 1979, § 14.06) 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq.  
Sec. 86-11. - Hazardous wastes. 
(a)  Explosives and flammable liquids shall not be placed in garbage containers for storage or collection. 
(b)  Medical waste sharps shall be packaged in a puncture-proof container prior to disposal in the Village container. 
(c)  Hazardous waste shall be disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws. Paint shall be completely dried or mixed with an absorbent material, such as sand or cat litter, and allowed to solidify prior to disposal. 
(Code 1979, § 14.07) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42.  
Sec. 86-12. - Designated collection area required. 
Every building, establishment, institution or premises wherein waste materials are created shall contain a designated collection site or sites which meet the standards of convenience, health and safety set by the Mayor and Board of Trustees or Village Manager. This requirement expressly includes all construction sites and remodeling projects. 
(Code 1979, § 14.08)  
Sec. 86-13. - Responsibilities of operators of multiple-occupancy buildings. 
Whenever premises are occupied or used by more than 1 family, business or legal entity, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or owners of the premises to designate or cause to be designated a single named individual who at all times shall be responsible for all pre-collection practices. The failure of the owner or owners to designate such a person shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 14.09)  
Sec. 86-14. - Prohibited collections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to collect, procure, or obtain any waste materials from parkways or alleys unless the person or entity is the Village or its contractor. 
(Code 1979, § 14.10)  
Sec. 86-15. - Place of disposal; collection hours. 
(a)  No waste materials collected shall be disposed of within the Village. 
(b)  Waste material pickup shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. unless the Village Manager or designee authorizes the implementation of an emergency waste collection schedule. 
(Code 1979, § 14.11)  
Sec. 86-16. - Regulations for premises serviced by Village crews. 
The following provisions relate to buildings serviced by Village refuse crews pursuant to policies and procedures set forth by the Village's refuse policy: 
(1)  Containers generally. 
a.  All locations serviced by Village refuse crews shall utilize only containers provided by the Village for putrescible waste and recyclable materials. 
b.  All materials placed in containers shall be in compliance with instructions specified on the container or otherwise provided by the Village as prescribed by the Village's refuse policy. 
(2)  Use of containers; ownership of containers. Containers shall only be used in accordance with this chapter and other applicable regulations. Village-provided containers shall be considered Village property and shall at all times remain at the property originally provided for. 
(3)  Residential waste materials. 
a.  Containers provided for a residential property shall be used for waste materials and recyclables generated on that property only. Building, construction and remodeling materials generated by a professional contractor shall be removed by the contractor. Disposal of do-it-yourself projects shall conform to instructions specified by the Village as prescribed by the Village's refuse policy. 
b.  Waste materials generated on other properties shall not be placed in Village containers. 
(4)  Noncomplying garbage cans. Garbage cans not meeting the standards of the Village are subject to removal by the Village. 
(5)  Placement of waste for pickup. 
a.  No recycling or waste material, including landscape waste, intended for regularly scheduled pickup shall be placed at the curbside sooner than 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the date scheduled for collection. Containers placed at the curbside shall be removed from the curbside the same day as the pickup. 
b.  The time restrictions in subsection (5)a of this section shall also apply when containers are placed for alley pickup where the collection site is not directly adjacent to the resident's property (e.g., townhomes). 
c.  All waste material must be so packaged, stored or bundled that 2 persons can carry it away or load the material in an efficient manner. The weight of the waste material, including the container, shall not exceed 200 pounds (90 kg). Bagged or boxed items placed outside the container shall not exceed 50 pounds each. 
d.  All waste materials must be placed in an open space on the owner's property or on the Village parkway adjacent to the property in a spot conveniently accessible to the Village or its contractor at ground level. 
(Code 1979, § 14.12)  
Sec. 86-17. - Landscape waste and landscape and food scrap composting. 
(a)  Landscape Waste Collection. 
(1)  Landscape waste collected by the Village or its contractor at residential sites, except as provided in this section, shall be placed in biodegradable paper bags. 
(2)  Large limbs must be cut into lengths not exceeding 5 feet and shall not exceed 3 inches in diameter and shall be bundled for collection with other landscape waste. No bag of landscape waste or bundle of brush, including branches and limbs, shall exceed the weight of 50 pounds each. 
(3)  Leaves may either be pushed into the curb lane of the street during the Village's fall leaf collection or bagged like landscape waste in a biodegradable paper bag. 
(b)  Landscape and Food Scrap Composting. 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  "Backyard Composting" shall mean an operation which (i) has no more than 25 cubic feet of landscape waste and composting material on site at any one time and (ii) is for personal use and not for any commercial activity. 
b.  "Approved Composting Bin" shall mean any composting bin which meets the specifications, as outlined by the Director of the Skokie Health Department or designee, and as may be amended from time to time. 
c.  "Permitted Composting Materials" shall mean landscape waste materials including grass clippings, leaves and twigs and food scraps such as but not limited to, vegetable scraps, fruit peels, coffee grounds, egg shells and tea leaves. 
(2)  Open compost piles of any kind are not permitted. 
(3)  Backyard Composting is permitted, in Approved Composting Bins that have been constructed in compliance with specifications set forth by the Skokie Health Department or commercial models approved by the Skokie Health Department. 
(4)  Only Permitted Composting Materials are permitted to be put into Approved Compost Bins. 
(5)  Backyard Composting is permitted in R1 Single-Family residential zoning districts and in R2 Single-Family residential zoning districts, for the benefit of the owner/occupant of the residence. Approved Composting Bins shall be located in a rear yard, and be placed a minimum of 5 feet away from all side yard lot lines. 
(6)  Required Maintenance of Approved Composting Bins. 
a.  Approved Composting Bins must be maintained in such a way as to prevent pest infestation or noxious odors. 
b.  In the event an Approved Composting Bin has been damaged or penetrated by rodents or another animal pest, then the owner or occupant of the residence, shall immediately dismantle or destroy the bin and dispose of any and all material, or cause this to happen. Failure to do so shall be a violation of the Section. 
(7)  Authorized Entry. In furtherance of the goal of maintaining the public's health and safety, the Skokie Health Department is hereby authorized entry onto private property in the following circumstances: 
a.  In the course of investigating a rodent or other pest infestation, the Skokie Health Department is authorized to examine any Approved Composting Bin located in the blocks with a known infestation and determine if the Approved Composting Bin(s) are contributing to the infestation. 
b.  If it is determined that an inspected bin is a direct cause of an infestation in the area, then the Skokie Health Department shall direct the property owner/occupant to immediately dismantle or destroy the Approved Composting Bin and dispose of any and all material, or cause this to happen or direct the property owner/occupant to make specific changes to the Approved Composting Bin within a proscribed time. In the event that the property owner/occupant fails to act and make proscribed changes and dismantle or destroy and remove all composting material, the Skokie Health Department, at the direction of the Director of Health or designee, is hereby authorized to enter on the property and dismantle or destroy the damaged bin, dispose of all material and eradicate any infestation found at the site. Any and all expenses incurred, shall be paid by the property owner. 
(Code 1979, § 14.13; Ord. No. 06-1-C-3408, § 2, 1-17-2006; Ord. No. 17-8-C-4310, § 1, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 86-18. - Demolition, construction, renovation and other non-garbage waste requiring the use of a dumpster. 
(a)  All residential, commercial, and industrial sites where demolition, construction, renovation, clean up or like activity is underway shall have a construction dumpster or roll-off type waste receptacle for depositing all construction waste and related non-garbage litter and trash. It shall be the responsibility of both the property owner and the contractor, if applicable, to ensure regular servicing of the roll-off type waste receptacle as required and to ensure removal of the receptacle within 14 days of the completion of the work or, if applicable, prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Completion, whichever is sooner. 
(b)  All construction dumpsters and roll-off waste receptacles shall exhibit a clear and legible demarcation of owner of the receptacle, contact information, address and a 24 hour contact phone number. 
(c)  Construction dumpsters and waste receptacles shall be located on the private property undergoing construction, demolition or renovation. The location of the construction dumpster shall not block exit doors or fire lanes and said dumpsters and waste receptacles shall remain free of graffiti as defined in Section 42-41(a) of the Skokie Village Code. 
(d)  Where the private lot has limited space, the construction dumpster or similar waste receptacle may be placed in the public right-of-way provided that that the receptacle: 
(1)  Does not block the public street or right-of-way; 
(2)  Is not placed within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(3)  Is not placed within 15 feet of an intersection; 
(4)  Is not placed within 8 feet of a private driveway; 
(5)  Is located in a legal parking area if parked on a street; 
(6)  Is parked 12 inches or less from the curb; 
(7)  Has one of the following types of visible safety markings: 
(a)  sufficient reflective stripes and/or reflectors visible by motorists and pedestrians; or 
(b)  possess a barricade with flashing lights at each street-side corner; 
(8)  Is free of graffiti as defined in Section 42-41(a) of the Skokie Village Code; 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the entity that owns the dumpster or like receptacle, to ensure safe and legal placement and maintenance of the receptacles, in accordance with this Section. 
(f)  The Village Manager or designee will address special circumstances on a case-by-case basis. 
(g)  Any dumpster or roll-off type receptacle in violation of this Section on the public right of way, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which may be abated by any police officer by ticketing and/or removing such receptacle to a Village vehicle pound or to any authorized garage or storage area. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3117, § 1, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-12-C-3137, § 1, 12-2-2002; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016)  
Secs. 86-19—86-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE COLLECTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses and business regulations, ch. 26; business license fees, § 46-71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 86-41. - General policy. 
As suits the current best interest of the Village, and to better enable the Village to regulate and control the services provided to the users of solid waste services, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may provide for an exclusive franchise for the collection and disposal of solid waste for commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily users by competitive procurement of 1 (or more) contracts with qualified scavengers. 
(Code 1979, § 14.14)  
Sec. 86-42. - Franchise and license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of collection, transportation or disposing of solid waste, from any commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily building within the Village without first having secured an exclusive franchise and license and made payment of the license fee as provided in Section 46-73, unless said building has received an exemption pursuant to Section 86-45. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste, from any commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily building within the Village that have been exempted pursuant to the circumstances outlined in Section 86-45, without first having secured a license and having made payment of the license fee as provided in Section 46-73. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1401; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3276, § 1, 6-7-2004)  
Sec. 86-43. - Service under contracts. 
All commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily buildings shall be serviced by the exclusive solid waste franchise scavenger selected by the Village. No person or entity owning or occupying a commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily building shall enter into a contract for solid waste collection with a person or entity other than the exclusive franchisee unless said building is exempted pursuant to Section 86-45. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1402; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3276, § 2, 6-7-2004)  
Sec. 86-44. - Standards for service. 
Private scavengers operating under a license or exclusive franchise shall provide collection services as often as may be required to prevent a nuisance or a threat to public health, welfare and safety, but in no event shall service be less than once each week. The site and containers for storage of waste materials shall meet the requirements of health, sanitation and safety set by the Village Manager or designee or the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1403)  
Sec. 86-45. - Request for exemption from franchised service. 
Any person or entity occupying any commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily building may request, in writing, to the Village Manager or designee, that they be exempted from the franchised service. The request shall specify the circumstances that necessitate such exemption status, which may include but are not limited to a corporate contract whose provisions are outside the person's or entity's control, or a specialized service that cannot be provided by the Village franchised service. In the event an exemption is granted to a building, then the solid waste hauler servicing the building must obtain a license from the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1404; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3276, § 3, 6-7-2004)  
Sec. 86-46. - Use of licensed scavenger required for persons exempted from franchised service. 
Any commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily user that has been granted an exemption from the exclusive franchise or has a valid contract for solid waste services shall utilize only a scavenger that is licensed by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1405)  
Sec. 86-47. - Duties of franchisees and licensees. 
Each licensee or franchisee under this article shall maintain its equipment used in the designated services in good repair and working order, shall perform its operations efficiently and faithfully, and shall punctually perform all obligations imposed on it pursuant to this article. All collection equipment used by the licensee or franchisee must have the name of the firm clearly displayed on both sides of vehicles and on the front of refuse containers. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1406)  
Sec. 86-48. - Examination of records. 
Each licensee or franchisee under this article shall make and keep proper books and accounts in which complete entries shall be made of all transactions relating to the licensed or franchised services (separate and apart from all other records and accounts of the licensee or franchisee), which books and accounts shall be made available to inspection by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1407)  
Sec. 86-49. - Additional standards and specifications. 
All licensees or franchisees under this article shall meet any other standards and specifications with respect to service, fees and collection thereof, and manner of performance, as may from time to time be required by agreement of the Village and such licensee or franchisee. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1408)  
Sec. 86-50. - Indemnification of Village; insurance. 
All licensees and franchisees under this article shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Village from any and all loss, cost, damage, expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which the Village may suffer or which may be recovered against the Village from or on account of the issuance of the license or franchise agreement or on account of any activity advocated or permitted by the Village. Licensees and franchisees shall furnish the Village a certificate of insurance for the insurance amounts indicated in a solid waste agreement, as established by the Village Manager or designee, and shall obtain additional insured coverage protecting the Village for the required amounts of insurance, which additional insured status shall be reflected in the certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1409)  
Sec. 86-51. - Revocation of franchise or license. 
(a)  Authority of Village Manager. The Village Manager has the authority to temporarily revoke the license or franchise of any scavenger whose practices present an immediate threat to the health, safety and well-being of the community or any persons therein. The Village Manager has the right of permanent revocation for violation of any of the provisions of this article upon notice and after a hearing. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of a franchise or license. 
(b)  Grounds. The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend a franchise or license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The franchisee or licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The franchisee or licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the franchise or license. 
(3)  The franchisee or licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties. 
(c)  Contents and service of notices. 
(1)  Contents. All notices required to be given in accordance with this section shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial or revocation of the franchise or license. The notice shall inform the franchisee or licensee that the franchisee or licensee has the right to request a hearing before the Village Manager. 
(2)  Service. All notices shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the franchisee or licensee specified in the franchise or license. Notice shall be considered given on the date such notice is mailed. 
(d)  Hearings. The Village Manager or designee shall send notice of intent to revoke a franchise or license. A franchise or license shall not be revoked unless the franchisee or licensee has had an opportunity to present evidence in the franchisee's or licensee's behalf. The Village Manager or designee shall, within 5 business days of the hearing, issue a written order of the findings. Such written order shall be sent to the franchisee or licensee in accordance with the notice provisions of subsection (c) of this section. If, within 10 days of the notice, the franchisee or licensee does not request a hearing in writing, the franchise or license shall be revoked. 
(Code 1979, § 14.1410)  
Sec. 86-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-6-C-3276, § 4, adopted June 7, 2004, deleted § 86-52 in its entirety. Former § 86-52 pertained to the effective date for use of franchised contractor and derived from Code 1979, § 14.1411.  
Chapter 89 - STREET NAMES AND ADDRESS NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 89-1. - General. 
The Village shall have an established address numbering and street naming system. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-2. - Authority. 
The Village shall have the sole authority to assign address numbers and street names to any and all properties within its jurisdiction. The Village may also reassign address numbers and street names if it determines that an existing address number or street name is in violation of the conditions set below or is impeding public safety response. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-3. - Record of address. 
The Village Manager or designee shall keep a listing showing the official address of every property in the Village, which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-4. - Required address number. 
All buildings, parks, stand-alone parking lots, construction sites, and vacant lots in the Village shall have an assigned address number. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-5. - Address numbering procedures. 
(a)  All addresses shall follow the continuation of the Village's grid system and shall maintain a street frontage interval of 20 feet per address. A building/structure's address number shall be assigned at the location where the front entrance falls relative to its position along the street frontage interval. 
(b)  No single-tenant building/structure shall use more than one address number. 
(c)  Multiple address numbers for buildings on corner lots shall be prohibited unless occupants within those buildings have separate entrances on different streets. 
(d)  No half (e.g. 4000 ½ Main Street) or alphanumeric address numbers (e.g. 4000A Main Street) shall be used. 
(e)  Address numbers for parks, stand-alone parking lots, and vacant properties shall be assigned based upon the location of the midpoint of the property's shortest street frontage relative to the frontage unit interval along the block face. 
(f)  Where multiple residences or businesses share one common entrance, one address number shall be used and shall have a unit numbering system that adheres to the following conditions: 
(1)  Alphabetic (e.g. unit A), three-digit numeric (e.g. unit 101), or alphanumeric (e.g. unit 1A) unit numbers shall be assigned to each unit. 
(2)  Alphabetic, three-digit numeric, or alphanumeric unit numbers may be used in buildings with one floor. 
(3)  Only three-digit numeric or alphanumeric unit numbers shall be used in buildings with more than one floor. 
(4)  Unit numbers shall reflect the floor that the unit is located on (e.g. unit 401 is located on the fourth floor and unit 2B is located on the second floor). 
(5)  Buildings with units in the basement shall use three-digit numeric unit numbers beginning with zeroes (e.g. unit 001) or lower-level alphanumeric unit numbers (e.g. unit LL5) only. 
(6)  Combinations of alphabetic, three-digit numeric, and alphanumeric unit numbers within one building are prohibited. 
(g)  Directional prefixes shall not be used within an address (e.g. 4000 W. Main Street). 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-6. - Posting of address numbers. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owners and occupants of every building in the Village to display address numbers in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street. 
(b)  All address numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. 
(c)  All address numbers shall contrast with their background. 
(d)  Where alleys are present, the address numbers shall also be posted on a garage such that the address is visible from the alley. If no garage is present, the address numbers shall be posted on the rear door, rear wall, or rear porch of the principle building, or on the rear gate behind the principle building, such that the address number is visible from the alley. Businesses shall post their address numbers on their rear door, regardless of whether an alley is present or not. 
(e)  Where a residence or business exists on a corner lot, the address numbers shall be posted such that they face the street used in the address. 
(f)  Where multiple residences share one common entrance, the unit number shall be provided on each mailbox. The unit number shall also be posted on all interior and exterior points of entry to the unit. 
(g)  Where multiple businesses share one common entrance, the business name and unit number shall be listed on a directory in the lobby. 
(h)  In instances where a tenant occupies more than one storefront or the business spans multiple connected buildings, and the storefronts or connected buildings each have individual addresses, the tenant shall use the address of the storefront where the entrance is located and remove all addressing labels from the other storefronts or connected buildings. 
(i)  In instances where a tenant occupies multiple units in a building, the tenant shall post and use the address number of the unit that functions as the main entrance. The address numbers of adjoining combined units on a single floor shall be removed. 
(j)  All sites and buildings under construction shall post the address of the site or building under construction on the construction fence surrounding the property so that it is visible from the street. If no construction fence is present, the address shall be posted on the building so that it is visible from the street. If no new address has yet been assigned for the site or building under construction, the existing address of the site shall be used. 
(k)  Village staff shall have the authority to determine additional locations where address numbers need to be posted, if necessary. 
(l)  It shall be prohibited for any person to remove any address numbers placed on any property in accordance with this section, except for repair or replacement of such address numbers. 
(m)  It shall be prohibited to display any address number on any such building or property other than as designated in this section and approved by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-7. - Naming of Streets. 
(a)  All platted public or private streets shall be named consistent with the existing grid system, except as indicated below. 
(b)  Non-standard street designations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any newly platted public or private street that is 660 feet in length or less and is parallel to the existing grid system or is in between the regular grid streets shall use the name of the street to its south or east and "Terrace" as its street designation (e.g. Kostner Terrace). 
(2)  Any newly platted public or private street that terminates in a permanent dead-end shall use "Court" as its street designation (e.g. Lee Court). 
(3)  Any newly platted curvilinear public or private street that does not follow the grid system shall use "Lane" as its street designation (e.g. Salem Lane). 
(c)  A public or private street shall not be designated by more than one name, except where the street is also a numbered County, State, or U.S. route (example: Skokie Boulevard is also known as U.S. Route 41). Temporary or permanent honorary street names shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Any change to the name of a public or private street shall require approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall file with the Community Development Department a written request demonstrating a need critical to public safety or emergency response or to rename the street to be consistent with the existing grid system. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department a signed and verifiable petition containing the signatures of a minimum of 60 percent of the occupants and property owners adjacent to the street affected by the proposed name change. 
(3)  Upon approval of the request, the applicant shall be responsible for the Village's cost of producing the new street signs. One sign for each intersection is required. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Sec. 89-8. - Violations. 
Any building, unit, lot, property, owner, occupant in violation of this Section shall be subject to penalties provided in Section 1-6 of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3678, § 2, 6-1-2009)  
Chapter 90 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments or establishing special taxing districts saved from repeal, § 1-3(2); ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication, opening, grade, naming, improvements, altering, widening or vacating of streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public grounds saved from repeal, § 1-3(5); ordinances authorizing or relating to particular public improvements saved from repeal, § 1-3(7); ordinances relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways or relating to conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities saved from repeal, § 1-3(8); Department of Public Works, § 2-241 et seq.; billposting and distribution of handbills, § 6-31 et seq.; distributing handbills in public places, § 6-37; animals in public areas, § 18-37; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; numbering of buildings, § 22-301 et seq.; sidewalk sales, § 26-1301 et seq.; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 42; fees for street and sidewalk work, § 46-161; spitting in public place, § 54-6; smoking in public places, § 58-61 et seq.; obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic, unlawful assemblages, § 70-121 et seq.; scaffolds or ladders on streets, § 70-156; indecent or lewd writing in public places, § 70-244; parades and public assemblies, ch. 74; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 78; signs, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 94; water, sewer and street improvements in subdivisions, § 94-7; deposit for cost of street signs, § 94-8; telecommunications, ch. 102; traffic and vehicles, ch. 106; temporary street closings, § 106-44; one-way streets, § 106-50; authority to restrict use of streets, § 106-53; riding bicycles on sidewalk, § 106-227; utilities, ch. 110; vehicles for hire, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Local improvements, 65 ILCS 5/9-1-1 et seq.; municipal streets and public ways, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-1 et seq.; Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.; municipal administration of streets, 605 ILCS 5/7-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Skokie owned or leased property; hours of operation. 
(a)  All property and facilities either owned or leased by Skokie shall close daily at 11:00 p.m. and reopen daily at 4:30 a.m. The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized to post signage indicating different hours of operation, if warranted, in his or her judgement. 
(b)  The hours of operation outlined in Section 90-1(a), shall not apply to roadways, alleys, and other public rights-of-way or to the properties containing the Skokie Police Station and Skokie Fire Stations. 
(Ord. No. 18-5-C-4380, § 1, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 90-2. - Keeping or storing of personal items on Skokie owned or leased property; removal of items. 
(a)  No person may keep, hold, harbor or store personal belongings or personal property on any Skokie owned or leased property, facility or location without written permission from the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  Any personal belonging left or stored in violation of Section 90-2(a) shall be subject to removal by Skokie. There shall be no obligation on the part of Skokie to store, hold inventory or return such material. 
(Ord. No. 18-5-C-4380, § 1, 5-22-2018)  
Secs. 90-3—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fees for construction of parking areas and driveways, § 46-125; fees for street and sidewalk work, § 46-161 et seq. 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carriage walk means that portion of a street immediately adjacent to the curb parallel to the street that is intended for ingress and egress from the street or vehicles located upon the street which is separated from the sidewalk by the parkway and which was originally installed by the owner of and for the benefit of the adjacent property. 
Driveway means that portion of the street that is intended for vehicular travel to and from the street to the adjacent property which was installed and constructed by the owner of the adjacent property. 
Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by a street or sidewalk. 
Permittee means any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms and requirements of this article and the specifications adopted in connection therewith. 
Service walk means that portion of the street which is intended for pedestrian travel to and from the sidewalk to the adjacent property or to and from the street to the sidewalk. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street that is intended for pedestrian travel and is situated between the curblines or the lateral outside lines of the street and the adjacent property lines, except that portion thereof defined in this section as a parkway, carriage walk, service walk or driveway. 
Street means the entire width between property lines of every public way, easement, right-of-way, highway, alley, road, or curb of every nature whatsoever when any part or all thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 8.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-32. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 1(8.27), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 90-33. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever any person violates any provision of this article, such person shall be served with a violation notice providing for an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 1(8.28), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 90-34. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for in this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10-C-2947, § 1(8.29), 10-16-2000)  
Sec. 90-35. - Work on public ways. 
(a)  Supervision and control. The maintenance, repair, new construction, curb cuts, excavation and pavement cuts or street openings of streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs and other public ways shall be supervised, controlled, and under the direction of the Village Manager or designee and, the Village Manager or designee is hereby charged with the duty, and authorized, to enforce the provisions of this article in the Manager's or designee's official capacity on behalf of the Village. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter, grade, or lay any pavement or surfacing material, tunnel, open or excavate on any public street, sidewalk, alley, curb or other public way in the Village, or to repair any public street, sidewalk, alley, curb or other public way, or to make curb cuts, without a permit from the Village as provided by this article. 
(c)  Emergency work. Any person maintaining pipes, lines, cables, conduits, or any other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way may proceed with an opening without a permit being first obtained when unforeseen circumstances or occurrences constituting a clear and immediate danger to persons or property create an emergency, in which event the necessary work may be done immediately; provided, however, that the person charged with the responsibility of making the tunnel, opening or excavation shall apply for a permit on the first regular business day and the permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun. 
(d)  Application for permit. 
(1)  Applications for permits under this section shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. The applicant shall provide proof of insurance for a comprehensive general liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00. Cancellation of the insurance shall automatically suspend the permit. 
(2)  Contractors who are required to be licensed by the State shall provide proof of such license. 
(3)  A bond will be required to guarantee proper construction of the work as provided in Section 90-37. 
(4)  A certificate of arrangement to protect against interference with underground public utility facilities shall be required to be filed with the application for permit. 
(e)  Transfer of permit. No permit shall be assigned or transferred to any other person or corporation other than to the person to whom such permit was issued. No individual or corporation other than the permittee shall act under such permit. The work shall not be done in any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit. 
(f)  Permit fee. Fees for permits under this section shall be as set forth in Section 46-161. 
(g)  Violations; stop work order. If the Village Manager or designee as a result of inspection shall find that the work being done or the work that has been done is in violation of the provisions of this article or any other code, ordinance, statute, or rule or regulation, the Manager or designee shall promptly notify the permittee to cease and discontinue violation or noncompliance or the work resulting in the violation or noncompliance. Upon the failure of the permittee to discontinue the Village Manager or designee is authorized to stop further work. If the work has proceeded to completion in violation of this article, the bond posted in accordance with this article shall not be refunded. 
(h)  Notice of violation. The notice required under subsection (g) of this section shall be in writing and delivered directly to the permittee or any one of the permittee's agents or employees. Such notification shall specifically set forth the nature of the violation. 
(Code 1979, § 8.02; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 6, 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 90-36. - Construction and repair of sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks required. A public sidewalk is required along all rights-of-way containing a street that abuts a lot, unless otherwise provided in this Article. 
(b)  Design. The design and materials of the sidewalk and other required sidewalk amenities and parkway elements are determined by the Village and must conform to the sidewalk plan for the area. These amenities and elements include, but are not limited to, handicapped accessibility improvements, landscaping, lighting, pavers, service walks, curbs and gutters, and driveway aprons. 
(c)  Handicapped accessibility improvements. All new curbs and sidewalks must meet federal, state, and Village handicapped accessibility standards and may only be constructed with a Village permit. Any substandard curbs and sidewalks must be made to conform to those standards in conjunction with any new construction or reconstruction within the right-of-way or on an abutting lot. 
(d)  Requirement for applicant for a building permit. As a condition of obtaining a building permit for any work with a construction value that equals or exceeds $10,000.00, the applicant must pay the Sidewalk Installation and Repair Fee. 
(e)  When a sidewalk is not present in an adjoining public way for any use other than a single-family residence, the applicant must also either construct a public sidewalk or pay into a dedicated fund an amount calculated on the Village's cost of sidewalk construction under the terms of the existing contract for new sidewalk construction at the time the work is performed or an estimate determined by the Village Manager or designee. In areas with a unique sidewalk design and plan, including but not limited to the areas of Dempster Street, Main Street and Downtown, the amount paid shall be based on the Village's cost estimate for implementing the improvements as determined by the Village Manager or his designee. This determination shall be based on a review of the site plan, the location of nearby existing sidewalks, and the sidewalk plan for the area. The applicant must also repair any preexisting adjoining damaged public sidewalks, curbs, and parkways, and any damage or alteration of any area outside the owner's property caused by the work permitted. 
(f)  Failure to complete work. A certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion for the building will not be issued until the work in the abutting right-or-way is constructed or repaired as shown on the approved plans or drawings or a payment made into the Sidewalk Installation or Repair Fund. 
(g)  Responsibility for maintenance. Property owners must maintain sidewalks, parkways, service walks, carriage walks, and driveway aprons in adjoining public ways in a reasonably safe condition for the use for which these facilities were intended. The Village shall have a right to recover from the adjoining property owner any sums for which the Village may be held liable as a result of a property owner's failure to maintain the areas specified in this subsection. 
(h)  Action taken for failure to maintain. If sidewalks and other improvements are not maintained as required in subsection (g) of this section, the Village will take the following actions: 
(1)  Notice. The Director of Public Works or designee shall send the adjoining property owner responsible for maintenance a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, informing the owner which sections of sidewalk or improvements will be replaced or repaired by the Village and the costs or charges due. Within 10 days from the owner's receipt of the certified mailing of the notice as shown by the return receipt, the adjoining property owner shall have the right to file an objection with the Director of Public Works or designee objecting to the necessity for the work and the amount of the charge. All decisions by the Director of Public Works can be appealed to the Village Manager within 10 days of the Director's decision, and the Manager's decision is final and non-appealable. There is no fee to file such objections. 
(2)  Calculation of cost. The cost to the property owner shall be divided evenly between the Village and the property owner, and shall be based on the Village's cost of sidewalk construction under the terms of the existing contract for sidewalk replacement or repair at the time the work is performed. In areas with a unique sidewalk design and plan, including but not limited to the areas of Dempster Street, Main Street and Downtown, the amount paid shall be based on the Village's cost estimate for implementing the improvements. The property owner shall also pay an additional 10 percent of the full construction cost to cover program administration expenses. 
(3)  Recovery of charges. If the cost determined in subsection (g)(2) has not been remitted to the Village within 30 days from mailing of the bill to the owner, the Village will seek to recover the cost in an appropriate action instituted by the Corporation Counsel and cause a lien to be recorded against the property involved for any uncollected charges owed the Village to maintain sidewalks and other improvements. Upon receipt of payment of the costs and any additional expenses incurred by the Village to file the lien, the lien shall be released by the Village. Any recording of the release of lien shall be the responsibility of the owner and at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1979, § 8.03; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 6, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 12-5-C-3905, § 3, 5-21-2012)  
Sec. 90-37. - Bonds. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit under Section 90-35(b) and (c), the applicant shall have an indemnity and performance bond issued to the Village in a sum determined by the Village Manager. The bond shall be for the faithful observance and performance by the applicant for the permit of all of the provisions of this article for which the permit is issued and compliance with all codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. The bond shall further provide for the indemnification of the Village and hold the Village harmless for all property damage or personal injury resulting from the permittee. 
(b)  In any case where a permittee under this article shall be in default or shall otherwise fail to complete the work or fail to comply with the requirements of this article or be in violation of the codes, ordinances, or rules and regulations of the Village, the Village Manager or designee shall invoke the penalty of the bond and order the completion of the work to be done on behalf of the Village. If the cost of the work to be done exceeds the proceeds recoverable by the Village under the bond, the Village shall recover the additional cost, in an action at law, from the permittee. 
(Code 1979, § 8.04)  
Sec. 90-38. - Street specifications. 
(a)  The repair, construction, and reconstruction of streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs, and curb cuts of all other public ways shall, unless otherwise provided by special ordinances of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, conform to all Village specifications and all applicable codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee shall have the duty to prepare, from time to time, and keep on file in the appropriate office of the Village, such specifications as to material and manner of construction and repair which will provide the Village good and durable streets, sidewalks, alleys and curbs. 
(Code 1979, § 8.05)  
Sec. 90-39. - Work done by Village or by Village contractors exempt from permit requirement. 
The provisions of this article relative to obtaining permits shall not apply to officers, employees, or contractors of the Village engaged in doing work for or on behalf of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 8.06)  
Sec. 90-40. - Damage to streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  New streets or sidewalks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon or drive any vehicle over and upon, or place an object or permit an animal to go upon, any newly laid street, sidewalk, curb or alley constructed of concrete or any other material while the street, sidewalk, curb or alley is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or is under construction, or in any other manner damage any soft or newly laid street, sidewalk, curb or alley. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle over and upon, or walk upon, or place an object or permit an animal to go upon, any street or alley in the Village after oil or other liquid, asphalt, macadam, stone chips or other material has been freshly applied, during the time such street or alley is under construction. 
(b)  Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel, drive or operate any type of vehicle, or any type of mechanical device, upon, along or across any street, sidewalk, curb, alley or parkway in such manner as to break, crack, damage or injure the street, sidewalk, curb, alley or parkway. 
(c)  Duty to repair damage. In addition to the penalties provided in Section 1-6, any person who violates any of the provisions of this section and damages any street, sidewalk, curb, alley or parkway shall, without cost to the Village, repair, replace or reconstruct such damage. 
(Code 1979, § 8.07) 
Cross reference— Vehicles or equipment damaging street or sidewalk, § 106-52.  
Sec. 90-41. - Parkways. 
(a)  Use. Parkways shall be used exclusively as an ornamental strip for the planting of grass, trees, flowers or other surface material approved by the Village. 
(b)  Permit for cutting trees. It shall be unlawful to remove, cut down, trim or damage any trees or shrubs in any parkway or other public place without a permit therefor from the Village Manager or designee, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Trees on private property overhanging street or sidewalk. Any trees or shrubs on private property which overhang any parkway, sidewalk, street or other public place, including alleys, in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public places shall be trimmed or removed by the owners or those in control of the premises where such trees or shrubs grow so that the obstruction shall cease. If, after due notice, such overhanging trees or shrubs have not been trimmed or removed within 10 calendar days, then the Village Manager or designee shall have the authority to do so, and the costs for such removal may be assessed against such owner or person in control. No notice shall be required if the overhanging trees or shrubs constitute an imminent threat to public health or safety; provided, however, that in such an event the owner or person in control shall be assessed with costs. 
(d)  Assessment of costs incurred by Village. Any costs incurred by the Village, or its duly appointed officers or agents, in trimming or removing trees or shrubs in accordance with subsection (c) of this section shall be assessed against an owner or person in control of the property where the shrubs or trees are located. Such costs may result in a lien upon the real estate and the lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens. The Village, or person performing the service by authority of the Village, in its or such person's own name, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cook County. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (i) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, (ii) the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and (iii) the date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by the Village or one acting under its direction and authority. Upon payment of the costs and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record, at the expense of the adjacent property owner, as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(e)  Attaching signs to trees or other plants. It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree, shrub or landscape material in any street, parkway or other public place in the Village, except the temporary posting of notices of danger or warning of unsafe conditions or Village notices. 
(f)  Posting of political signs on election day. On official election days within the Village, signs relating to candidates for public office, political parties, and referenda may be posted in public rights-of-way. No sign shall be posted closer than 100 feet to a polling place or farther than 300 feet from a polling place. All such signs shall be removed when the polls close. 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 82. 
(g)  Trimming of trees near poles and wires. Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, shall keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs so far as may be possible, and shall keep such trees and shrubs properly trimmed and subject to the supervision of the Village Manager or designee, so that no injury or damage shall be done to the shrubs and trees by contact with such poles or wires. 
(h)  Excavations. Any person making an excavation in any street or other public or private place shall exercise due and proper care to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub wherever possible, and excavations made on parkways shall be resodded after closing so as to restore the area to its prior condition. 
(i)  Vehicle parking. Vehicle parking in the parkway shall be allowed upon the approval of the Village Manager or designee as part of a Village-approved plan in designated redevelopment areas in the M-1 Office Assembly Industry, M-2 Light Industry and M-3 Industry Districts in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(j)  Agreement by applicant for building permit to plant trees in the public right-of-way. In every application for permit to construct a new residence or an addition to a residence that is greater than 400 square feet in area or to erect, construct, alter, or remodel any commercial, industrial, institutional, or public building, structure, or facility the applicant shall agree to plant trees, or pay the Village for the planting of trees, in the public parkway to complete the Village's tree planting pattern. The location of trees, species, and size shall be shown in the submitted plans or drawings and shall conform to Village specifications, codes, ordinances, and rules and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 8.08; Ord. No. 00-4-C-2887, § 1, 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 6, 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 90-42. - Trees on public property. 
(a)  Purpose; applicability; authority of Village Manager. 
(1)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village to regulate and control the planting, transplanting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in the Village in order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or property of the Village; to promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the public; to prevent damage to any street, sidewalk or other Village property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas owned by the Village from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance practices; and to guard all trees and shrubs on Village property against the spread of pests and disease. It is the intent of the Village that the provisions of this section shall apply to all trees and plants growing or planted in or upon any public right-of-way or other premises owned or controlled by the Village. 
(2)  The Village Manager or designee is hereby empowered to superintend and regulate the planting, preservation, protection and maintenance of trees on all public ways of the Village. No person shall plant any tree or plant on any public way or place any planting thereon until the Village Manager or designee has issued a permit for such planting. 
(b)  Approved species. Tree species planted in the parkway must conform to the parkway tree planting list as approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
(c)  Removal of diseased or damaged trees. All crippled, deformed and physically damaged trees, regardless of species, if professional opinion indicates that recovery and normal development cannot be expected, shall be removed. All trees infected with a non-curable disease that will result in deformation, death and infection of other trees shall be removed. 
(d)  Spacing. All new plantings in parkways shall conform with a tree spacing of 30 feet, except where the Village Manager or designee has determined that the tree species planted is appropriate for the planting space available. 
(e)  Planting requirements. 
(1)  Trees, when planted, shall have a minimum trunk diameter of 2 inches measured at a distance of 6 inches above ground level and shall be free from deformity and indication of undesirable growth characteristics. 
(2)  Trees, when planted, shall be free of infectious disease or insect infestation. 
(3)  No trees may be planted on parkways less than 3 feet wide, unless, in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee, the planting and the species of tree approved will not endanger the sidewalk, curb or other property. 
(4)  Planting of trees is prohibited under the following conditions: 
a.  If such planting interferes with existing or planned structures or existing or planned underground or overhead utilities, such as sewers, pipes, or cables. 
b.  If such planting would create a hazardous traffic situation by impairing driver or pedestrian visibility at intersections or where traffic controls are located. 
(f)  Spraying, injections and pruning. Spraying and injections of trees in parkways for the prevention and elimination of diseases and insect infestation shall be performed to meet the specific requirements of the species of tree and the particular disease or insect infestation which exists or threatens. It shall be the responsibility of the Village Manager or designee to determine the need and extent of spraying, injections and pruning requirements. 
(g)  Tree protection. 
(1)  Protection during construction work. During any type of construction work, the owner or contractor shall place guards around all nearby trees on the parkway or any other public ways to prevent injury to such trees or plants. In case of injury to a tree or plant, an approved replacement must be furnished. 
(2)  Wires. No person shall permanently attach or connect any electric or other wire to any tree or permit any such wire to come in contact with any tree. 
(3)  Placing materials around trees. No person shall place or maintain upon the ground around a parkway tree any surfacing or material which will impede free passage of water and air to the roots without leaving an open space of not less than 2 feet in width around the tree. 
(h)  Planting and replacement of trees by Village. The Village retains the right to plant parkway trees wherever needed in conformance with this section. 
(i)  Permit required for trimming or removing trees. 
(1)  No person shall, without a permit from the Village Manager or designee, remove, destroy, break, cut, deface, trim or injure or interfere with any tree or plant growing in any street, parkway, or public place in the Village. 
(2)  When such trees or shrubs are damaged or broken by the force of nature in such a manner as to constitute a threat to life or property, then such owner or person in control shall promptly remove them or the parts thereof which constitute the danger and shall report such person's actions to the Village Manager or designee within a reasonable period thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 8.09)  
Sec. 90-43. - Obstructions to view at intersections. 
(a)  Street intersections. The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel of land adjoining a street intersecting with another street upon which any trees, shrubs, bushes or plants are growing shall trim, prune or cut the trees, shrubs, bushes or plants or cause the trees, shrubs, bushes or plants to be trimmed, pruned or cut so as not to obstruct the passage of light from any streetlight or traffic signal light or interfere with or obstruct the vision of persons using the streets. The existence of any trees, shrubs, bushes or plants on the premises of any owner or occupant adjoining a street intersecting with another street which shall obstruct the passage of light from any streetlight or traffic signal light or which shall interfere with or obstruct the vision at street intersections or the intersection of a street with a public way is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of such premises to fail, neglect or refuse to abate such nuisance by removing, trimming, cutting or pruning such tree, shrub, bush or plant within 5 days after being notified in writing to do so by the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  Driveway and alley intersections. The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel of land adjacent to a driveway or upon which a driveway exists and where such driveway intersects with a street or where such lot or parcel of land is adjacent to an alley intersecting with a street upon which any trees, shrubs, bushes or plants are growing shall trim, prune or cut the trees, shrubs, bushes or plants or cause the trees, shrubs, bushes or plants to be trimmed, pruned or cut so as to maintain a visual angle of 10 feet from the intersecting street, alley or driveway and to have a maximum height of 30 inches within the visual angle distance. The existence of any trees, shrubs, bushes or plants on the premises of any owner or occupant of land adjacent to a driveway or upon which a driveway exists and where such driveway intersects with a street or where such lot or parcel of land is adjacent to an alley intersecting with a street within the visual angle distance mentioned in this subsection is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any occupant of such premises to fail, neglect or refuse to abate such nuisance by removing, trimming, cutting or pruning such tree, shrub, bush or plant within 5 days after being notified in writing to do so by the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 8.21)  
Sec. 90-44. - Driveways. 
(a)  Permit. 
(1)  Required. No person shall construct a driveway across or abutting any public right-of-way in the Village or reconstruct, enlarge or resurface (not including seal coating) any portion of an existing driveway which crosses or abuts a public right-of-way in the Village without having first obtained a permit therefor. 
(2)  Application information; fees. Applications for permits under this section shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. Fees for permits under this section shall be as set forth in Chapter 46. 
(b)  Grade surface. No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be level and the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk or curb. It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the driveway crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to pedestrians. 
(c)  Specifications. Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with IDOT standards or any other current specifications deemed acceptable by the Village Manager or designee. 
(d)  Maintenance. It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises served by the driveway to keep the driveway in good repair and free from snow or ice or other obstruction where it crosses a sidewalk. 
(Code 1979, § 8.11)  
Sec. 90-45. - Installation of sidewalk ramps on existing curbs. 
(a)  Permit required. No private entity shall cause a public street curb to be depressed and sidewalk to be ramped without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations, and procedures for the implementation of this section. 
(b)  Conditions for issuance of permit. In every application for a permit to depress a public street curb and ramp a sidewalk, the applicant shall agree to the following: 
(1)  That any costs related to the installation and maintenance or removal of the depressed curb and ramped sidewalk shall be incurred by the applicant. 
(2)  That the privileges granted to the applicant under this section are nontransferable. 
(3)  That a copy of the agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cook County at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 1979, § 8.24)  
Sec. 90-46. - Use of non-concrete or non-bituminous materials for driveway approaches or sidewalk on public right-of-way. 
(a)  Permit required. No private entity shall cause the installation of a non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material on a driveway approach or sidewalk on the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Village Manager or designee. The installation of non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material on the public right-of-way shall only be permitted if the adjacent driveway or sidewalk on private property is of the same non-concrete and/or non-bituminous materials. The application of non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material on the driveway approach or sidewalk portion of the public right-of-way shall be limited to exposed aggregate concrete or brick pavers as approved by the Village Manager or designee in accordance with standards established by the Village Manager or designee. The installation of a non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material on the public sidewalk or driveway portion of any public right-of-way is prohibited (i) when there is an existing intersecting public sidewalk or (ii) on the sidewalk commonly referred to as a carriage walk which is parallel and adjacent to the curb or street. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the installation of non-concrete or non-bituminous materials in accordance with an ordinance approving a planned development or site plan. Such ordinance shall provide for the agreement as required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Conditions for issuance of permit. In every application for a permit to install a non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material application on the public right-of-way portion of any driveway approach or sidewalk, the property owner shall agree in writing to the following: 
(1)  That the property owner shall incur any and all costs related to the installation, maintenance, repair and removal of the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material. 
(2)  That the installation, maintenance, repair and removal of the non-concrete or non-bituminous material shall be in accordance with Village standards as determined by the Village Manager or designee. 
(3)  That the owner and all future owners of the property shall be responsible for maintenance, installation, replacement, repair and removal of the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material on the driveway approaches or sidewalk on public right-of-way adjacent to their property. 
(4)  That the owner and all future owners shall forever hold harmless and indemnify the Village, its agents and employees, and save them from and indemnify the Village for all costs, claims, suits, demands, and actions, including but not limited to court costs and attorney's fees arising from or through or because of or in any way connected with any work performed or being done in the installation, maintenance, excavation, construction, building, repair or finishing of the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material on the driveway approaches or sidewalk on public right-of-way adjacent to their property. 
(5)  That the owner and all future owners hold the Village harmless for any damage or restoration costs to the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous materials on the driveway approaches or sidewalk on the public right-of-way adjacent to their property when the Village or any utility is maintaining, installing, repairing, or constructing within the public right-of-way. 
(6)  That the owner and all future owners shall be solely responsible for the acts and/or omissions of their agents, contractors and/or employees. 
(7)  That the public right-of-way portion where the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous materials are installed shall be included in the owner's homeowner's insurance policy. The applicable insurance shall be in an amount determined by the Village Manager or designee and the homeowner shall: 
i.  provide the Village with 30 days notice, in writing, of cancellation or material change; 
ii.  name the Village as an additional insured on all required insurance coverage. The Village, its agents, officials and employees shall be specifically referenced on all applicable certificates. 
(8)  That a current plat of survey shall be submitted showing the proposed driveway approach and sidewalk in the right-of-way and a description of the material to be used. 
(9)  That if at anytime the Village causes or approves by whatever means or mechanism, the installation of an intersecting public sidewalk, the owner and all future owners shall cause, at the then current property owner's sole expense, the removal of the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material and replacement with the same material as the intersecting public sidewalk. 
(10)  That if at anytime the Village performs any work that results in the need for restoration or repair of the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous material, the owner and all future owners shall be responsible for any and all restoration and costs related thereto. 
(11)  That the property owner and all future owners shall reimburse the Village for any and all damage to Village property or persons, arising directly or indirectly as a result of the installation, removal, maintenance or existence of the non-concrete and/or non-bituminous materials. 
(12)  That the property owner and all future owners shall comply with all Codes, Ordinances, policies, procedures and rules and regulations of the Village. 
(13)  That a copy of the agreement shall be recorded with the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cook County at the owner's expense. 
(c)  Additional regulations. The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations, standards and procedures for the implementation of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section 90-46 shall relieve a property owner from obtaining a permit for the installation of a driveway, driveway apron or sidewalk (i) on private property, regardless of the materials or (ii) with concrete within the public right-of-way as provided by Village Code and Ordinances. 
(Code 1979, § 8.25; Ord. No. 02-9-C-3118, § 1, 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 90-47. - Barricades for street work. 
(a)  Any person who lays, paves, constructs, reconstructs or repairs any street, sidewalk, alley, curb, curb cut or other public way, or who excavates in, under or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, curb, curb cut or other public way, shall place and erect adequate and suitable temporary barricades meeting the standards of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices to protect the work done and safeguard life, property, and prevent injury to any person. All such barricades shall be maintained so as to fully perform their function and shall be provided with warning lights between dusk and dawn. If no barricades are placed at a site, the Village shall place barricades at the site at a charge as specified in Section 46-163. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or the light or lights thereon as provided for in this section, or to remove any barricade, without the consent of the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 8.12)  
Sec. 90-48. - Placing materials in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, and allow to remain, any dirt, sand, gravel, brick, lumber, coal or any other substance or material used in building construction or maintenance in or upon any street, sidewalk or alley for a period of time beyond 6:00 p.m., on any 1 day. In no event shall any street be used for such purpose when the placing of such substance or material extends into the street more than 3 feet from the nearest curbline or the nearest exterior lateral line of the street. 
(Code 1979, § 8.13)  
Sec. 90-49. - Obstructions generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any obstruction in any street, sidewalk, alley or public way so as to impede or prevent the free and unrestricted movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, except as is permitted by this article or any other ordinance of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 8.15)  
Sec. 90-50. - Obstructing drainage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the free passage of water in any street, gutter or public sewer, culvert, water pipe or hydrant. 
(Code 1979, § 8.16)  
Sec. 90-51. - Snow removal and disposal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit an accumulation of snow or ice upon any public way. All persons in control of property located in any business zoned district fronting or abutting paved sidewalks shall remove the snow and ice from the portions so abutting or, if the snow and ice is too hard for removal, shall cover it with abrasive materials within 24 hours after a snowfall or freezing precipitation. 
(Code 1979, § 8.17)  
Sec. 90-52. - Refuse and litter. 
(a)  Litter means. All dead animals, debris, garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, waste matter or other discarded materials of every kind and description. 
(b)  Littering generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, lay, discard or place in or upon any public street, alley or sidewalk, or private property, other than in a receptacle or container provided for the collection thereof, any litter so as to litter the public way or private property. 
(c)  Allowing litter on private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of private property to permit the accumulation thereon of any litter. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant to remove any litter from the property. 
(d)  Sweeping litter into street or sidewalk; duty to keep street and sidewalk clean. No person shall sweep or blow with mechanical equipment into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other public places in the Village the accumulation of litter or yard waste from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk and driveway, with the exception of the Village's leaf collection program. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the street curb, sidewalk and parkway in front of their premises free from litter. The owner or person in control of any private property shall prevent any litter deposited thereon from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(e)  Dirt from vehicle wheels. No person shall drive or move any vehicle within the Village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley, or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or similar matter of any kind. 
(f)  Debris falling from vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, sand, crushed stone, gravel, ashes, cinders, lime, shavings, waste paper, mortar, earth, litter, rubbish, garbage or any other material that could sift, fall or be blown upon the public ways, unless such material shall be hauled, conveyed and carried in a tight, self-containing vehicle. 
(g)  Removal of litter. If litter or any material shall fall or be scattered in and upon the public way, the person causing such condition shall forthwith pick up and remove the litter from the public way. 
(Code 1979, § 8.18; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86.  
Sec. 90-53. - Poles and wires. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain, or cause to be erected or maintained, any pole or wires over any public property, street, sidewalk, alley or other public way except as may be permitted by ordinance or resolution of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 8.19) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 110.  
Sec. 90-54. - Permit required for paving or re-paving. 
It shall be unlawful to surface or resurface any ground area with impermeable surfaces without first having secured a permit from the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 8.22)  
Sec. 90-55. - Private use of public ways. 
Unless otherwise provided by this Code or Village ordinance, the use of public ways shall be prohibited. The prohibited use of public ways shall include but shall not be limited to fences, sculptures or structures. 
(Code 1979, § 8.26) 
Cross reference— Signs on public right-of-way, § 82-10.  
Secs. 90-56—90-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 90-81. - Purpose and scope of article. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities in, on, over and above rights-of-way located within the Village's jurisdiction which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the rights-of-way within the Village and the Village as a whole, enhance the planning of new utility facilities, minimize interference with, and damage to, rights-of-way and the streets, sidewalks, and other structures and improvements located in, on, over and above the rights-of-way, and reduce costs and expenses to the public. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this Chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
(5)  Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
(6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
(7)  Preserve open space and the tree-lined parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(c)  Facilities subject to article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way located within the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. The provisions of this article shall not apply for private sewer and water main connections for detached residential buildings, which are covered by Chapter 110, Article II. 
(d)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements authorized. The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way located in the Village. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(e)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications or cable television providers. If a utility other than a telecommunications or cable television provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications and cable television providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications or cable television providers, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(f)  Conflicting ordinances. This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior to the ordinance codified in this article that are in conflict with this article, to the extent of such conflict. 
(g)  Conflicts with State and federal law. If applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations. 
(h)  Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the Village so determines. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1979, § 38.1; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this article. 
ASTM means the American Society for Testing Materials. 
Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
Bore and boring mean to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
Cable Operator means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
Cable Service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Cable System means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
Carrier pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
Clear zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
Coating means a protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
Conductor means a wire carrying electrical current. 
Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
Construction and construct mean the installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over a buried utility pipe or conductor. 
Crossing facility means a facility that crosses 1 or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
Director of Public Works means the Village Director of Public Works or designee. 
Disrupt the right-of-way means any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
Encasement means provision of a protective casing. 
Engineer means the Village Director of Engineering or designee. 
Equipment means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
Extra-heavy pipe means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, communications and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article, except those owned by the Village. 
Freestanding facility means a facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
Frontage road means a roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway. 
Hazardous materials means any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Village Manager or designee to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or State law, statute or regulation. 
Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic, including rural or urban roads or streets. The term "highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
Highway Code means the Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. 
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
IDOT means the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
ICC means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means, with or without boring. 
Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
Joint use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by 2 or more utilities. 
Major intersection means the intersection of 2 or more major arterial highways. 
Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
Parallel facility means a facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by a street or sidewalk. 
Pavement cut means the removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 90-87 and 90-88. 
Petroleum products pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products, including but not limited to gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Prompt means that which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days. 
Public entity means a legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, State or federal level. 
Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
Right-of-way or rights-of-way means any street, alley, other land or waterway dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, utility purposes, located within the Village, including utility easements in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village. The term "right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement, shoulders and curbs. 
Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Security fund means that amount of security required pursuant to Section 90-93. 
Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
Sound engineering judgment means a decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
Telecommunications includes but is not limited to messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide-area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. The term "telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by the provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. The term "telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. 76.1500 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail. 
Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility. 
Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
Video Service means that term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v). 
Water lines means pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
Wet boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Code 1979, § 38.2; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-83. - Penalties; liability for costs incurred by Village. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit-related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Code 1979, § 38.22; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-84. - Additional remedies. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 38.23; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-85. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from 1 or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the Village Manager or designee as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The Village Manager or designee shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting variance. The Village Manager or designee may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Authority to impose additional conditions. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Manager or designee may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to Reconsideration. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village Manager or designee under the provisions of this article shall have the right to request reconsideration of that action by filing a written request for reconsideration directly with the Village Manager within 30 days of the issuance of the order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Manager shall consider any reports, opinions and recommendations of engineers or other professionals presented on behalf of the Village and those presented on behalf of the utility in rendering a decision on a request for reconsideration. The Village Manager shall timely issue a written decision on a request for reconsideration, which shall constitute the final action and decision of the Village of Skokie on the request for reconsideration. 
(Code 1979, § 38.21; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-86. - Annual registration of utilities. 
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Village Manager or designee, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of 1 or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance, as required in Section 90-91, in the form of a certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1979, § 38.3; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-87. - Permit required; application; fee. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which (i) changes the location of the facility, (ii) adds a new facility, (iii) disrupts the right-of-way, or (iv) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village Manager or designee, and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Filing of application; confidential information. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name, address, telephone, telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, E-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses, telephone, telecopy numbers, and E-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work, the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan, which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in Section 90-91; 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 90-93; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from 1 or more provisions of this article (see Section 90-85); and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village. 
(d)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
(1)  In the case of the installation of new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system installation, evidence shall be included that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
(2)  In the case of natural gas systems, the application shall state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
(3)  In the case of water lines, the application shall indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
(4)  In the case of sewer line installations, the application shall indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, or other local or State entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or 
(5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, the application shall state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, and maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
(e)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. Material changes shall be subject to the approval of the Village Manager or designee. 
(f)  Application fee. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee as reasonably determined by the Village each year, and specified in Section 46-164 of the Village Code. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Law, 35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 38.4; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3606, § 2, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 90-88. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Review of application. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Manager or designee within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Manager or designee shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Manager or designee is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Manager or designee shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. It is the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate compliance. 
(b)  Additional review of applications of telecommunications retailers. 
(1)  Pursuant to 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than 10 working days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Manager or designee shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
(2)  If the Village Manager or designee fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) 10 working days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) 25 working days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specifications by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to Section 90-88, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional Village review of applications of holders of State authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances and regulations. In the event that the Village has responded in writing within 45 days of a utility's submission of an application that further information or changes are needed or suggested, the Village response shall toll the running of the 45 days. 
(Code 1979, § 38.5; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-89. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted. A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on rights-of-way located within the Village, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Preconstruction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Compliance with applicable regulations. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 38.6; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-90. - Submission of revised drawings and as-built plans. 
(a)  If the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with Section 90-85. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(b)  Within 90 days of the completion of the installation of the utility, the utility company shall supply the Village a set of as-built plans submitted on compact disc, meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Compatible with Microsoft Windows XP. 
(2)  AutoCad 2008 (or earlier), Dwg. file. 
(3)  Use of a Wizard-Advanced set-up. 
(4)  Units—Decimal—0.00 precision. 
(5)  Angles—Degrees/minutes/seconds—0°00'00.00? precision. 
(6)  Angle measure—North—0. 
(7)  Angle direction—Clockwise. 
(8)  All positional units shall be in the Illinois State Plane Coordinate System, East Zone. 
(9)  All units are to be in English, with feet being the primary unit of measurement. 
(Code 1979, § 38.7; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-91. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying the right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the Village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, written in occurrence form, which shall include premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any 1 accident; and 
c.  Five million dollars for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Commercial automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing insurance, required by this subsection (a), to protect the contractors and subcontractors and their respective employees performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this Section. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that, when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Submission of copies of policies. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village Manager or designee within 10 days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village Manager or designee. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Clerk with copies to the Village Manager and Corporation Counsel of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 
Within 10 days after receipt by the Village of such notice, and in no event later than 10 days prior to such cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a) of this section, or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act, 820 ILCS 305/1 et seq. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. (All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A. M. Best Company.) 
(Code 1979, § 38.8; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-92. - Indemnification of Village. 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed, and does hereby, to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations under this section shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses proximately caused by the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the Village or its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Code 1979, § 38.9; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-93. - Security fund. 
(a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this article; and 
(3)  The payment by the permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article, including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law. 
(b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the Village Manager or designee in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village Manager or designee or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village Manager or designee. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee; 
(2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and 
(3)  Provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State at which it can be drawn. 
(c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Manager or designee, and may also include reasonable directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in 1 location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Manager or designee may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (c) of this section for any single phase. 
(d)  Withdrawals. The Village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee under this article; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(e)  Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for such withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of the revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of such costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Rights of Village not limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the security fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Code 1979, § 38.10; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-94. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Grounds. The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Noncompliance with this article; 
(3)  The permittee's physical presence or presence of the permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  The permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(b)  Notice to permittee. The Village Manager or designee shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article, stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section. 
(c)  Permittee's alternatives upon receipt of notice. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village Manager or designee, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village Manager or designee within 5 working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village Manager or designee, providing written proof of such removal to the Village within 10 days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The Village Manager or designee may, in the discretion of the Manager or designee, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure of permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: 
(1)  Correct the deficiencies; 
(2)  Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. 
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal. 
(Code 1979, § 38.11; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-95. - Change of ownership of facilities or change in identity of utility. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the Village no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the right-of-way located within the Village. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Code 1979, § 38.12; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-96. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Applicable standards and publications. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
(3)  Highway Design Manual; 
(4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
(5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
(6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
(7)  Flagger's Handbook; 
(8)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations; and 
(9)  Standards for Water Main Construction. 
(b)  Conflicting requirements. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this article, the Village Manager or designee shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply, and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Manager or designee shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(Code 1979, § 38.13; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 6, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-97. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notification of affected persons when access is to be blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section 90-103, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Correction of deficiencies. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 38.14; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-98. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  No interference with Village facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Manager or designee determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village's utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(6)  Approved plan. All utility facilities shall be constructed in compliance with a plan approved by the Village. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
b.  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of 2 feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
c.  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from the pavement edge as practicable, with a minimum distance of 4 feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway, and are not within the clear zone; 
d.  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
e.  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only as follows: 
a.  The facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than 8 feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
b.  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
c.  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than 5 feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line, and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. 
(1)  Protection from future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curblines of Village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Location in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities prohibited. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
(3)  Angle of crossing. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facilities. An overhead power or communication facility subject to Board of Trustees approval may cross a highway only if: 
a.  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
b.  Poles are located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
c.  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facilities. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  The design, materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
b.  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)). 
(d)  Location in rights-of-way other than highways. The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(f)  Facilities installed aboveground. Aboveground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include but are not limited to self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. The location of a new pole shall be approved by the Village prior to its installation and as built plans shall be submitted to the Village. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include but are not limited to underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing and proof of an approved permit by the appropriate agency. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
b.  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
c.  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
d.  The proposed method of attachment; 
e.  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
f.  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
g.  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
h.  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(3)  The Village may require the submittal of a landscape plan indicating the screening of facilities in order to preserve visual quality. 
(Code 1979, § 38.15; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-99. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
(1)  Boring or jacking. 
a.  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village Manager or designee from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by secure fencing. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
b.  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
c.  Borings with diameters greater than 6 inches. Borings over 6 inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than 1 inch (25 mm). 
d.  Borings with diameters 6 inches or less. Borings of 6 inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or the auger and following pipe method. 
e.  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the dripline of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
(2)  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
a.  Length. The length of an open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only ½ of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Village Manager or designee. 
b.  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
c.  Tree preservation. The utility shall not trench within the dripline of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved. 
(3)  Backfilling. 
a.  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
b.  For a period of 3 years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Village Manager or designee, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village Manager or designee. 
(4)  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall not be permitted. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (4) is permitted under Section 90-85, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Village Manager or designee. 
b.  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village. 
c.  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
d.  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last 7 years, or resurfaced in the last 3 years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate. 
(5)  Encasement. 
a.  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by 1-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village. 
b.  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
c.  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
d.  In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
e.  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 
1.  Extra-heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair; and 
2.  Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided. 
f.  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
(6)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
Type of Facility 	Minimum Cover 
Electric lines 	30 inches (0.8 m) 
Communication Cable or Video Service Lines 	18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by the Village) 
Gas or petroleum products 	30 inches (0.8 m) 
Water line 	Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection 
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line 	Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection 
 
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
a.  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission), entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
b.  Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single-pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
c.  Underground facilities. 
1.  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
2.  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: 
i.  The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation; or 
ii.  The installation is by the open trench method, which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
3.  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
4.  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
a.  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
b.  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
c.  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
d.  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village-approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192—Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems, ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. 
(6)  Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending 1 foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Village Manager or designee. With the approval of the Village Manager or designee, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Manager or designee. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the Village Manager or designee when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set forth in Chapter 42, Article III. 
(e)  Identification of location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Utility Facilities Damage Prevention Act, 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 38.16; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-100. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities — Compliance with State laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with ANSI A300 Pruning Standards and ANSI Z133.1 Safety Standards for Tree Care Operations published by the American National Standards Institute, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the Village as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities — tree trimming plan and approval required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to ANSI A300 Pruning Standards and ANSI Z133.1 Safety Standards for Tree Care Operations published by the American National Standards Institute, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the submittal of a tree trimming plan to the Village. No tree trimming for which a plan is required shall be performed unless and until the plan is approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
(1)  Plan for tree trimming. The tree trimming plan shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. The tree trimming plan shall designate an expiration date in the interest of ensuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. The tree trimming plan shall also indicate a public notification process. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Pruning practices not done in accordance with ANSI A300 resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming within the Village and for assessment of damages. The Village may require that trees be pruned or repaired by a qualified contractor who employs an International Society of Arboriculture Certified Arborist at the utility's expense. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers and endorsed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. Under no circumstances shall a utility spray, inject or pour chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village without prior written consent from the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 38.17; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-101. - Removal, relocation or modification of facilities. 
(a)  Temporary removal or relocation. Within 90 days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation. The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way located within the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the Village shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility, and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandoned facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way located within the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Manager or designee determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Code 1979, § 38.18; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-102. - Clean-up and restoration. 
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Manager or designee. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this Section may be extended by the Village Manager or designee for good cause shown. 
(Code 1979, § 38.19; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-103. - Maintenance of facilities required; emergency maintenance. 
(a)  Maintenance required. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Notification of repairs. The Village shall be notified in writing and must give its permission before the permittee undertakes repairs of its facility in the right-of-way. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit, as follows: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way, including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Manager or designee or the Manager's duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing the Manager or designee or agent as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(d)  Notification of emergency repairs. The utility must file with the Village a written description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(Code 1979, § 38.20; Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Sec. 90-104. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-11-C-3563, § 2, 11-19-2007)  
Chapter 94 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, §§ 1, 2, deleted Ch. 94, §§ 94-1—94-10, in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 94, §§ 94-1—94-14, to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 94, §§ 94-1—94-10, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1979, §§ 22.01—22.08; and Ord. No. 04-12-C-3320, § 7, adopted Dec. 6, 2004. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 42; planning and zoning fees, § 46-251 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference— Plat Act, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall hereafter be known, cited, and referred to as the Skokie Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter prescribes rules and regulations governing the subdivision and dedication of land. These regulations are intended to further the orderly layout of land within the Village of Skokie. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all proposed subdivisions of land located within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie and all proposed subdivisions within unincorporated Cook County lying within the planning jurisdiction of the Village of Skokie (1.5 miles from the corporate boundaries). If the unincorporated land is within 1.5 miles of both the Village of Skokie and another incorporated municipality, the jurisdictional boundary line shall be considered to be a line agreed to by both municipalities, pursuant to 65 ILCS 11-12-9. If no such agreement exists, unincorporated areas within 1.5 miles of the corporate boundaries of the Village of Skokie shall be within the jurisdiction of this chapter up to a median line equidistant from the boundaries of the Village of Skokie and the nearest corporate authority. All subdivisions of land within the above area of jurisdiction shall require a subdivision under the regulations provided within this chapter. Additionally, individuals applying for occupancy permits in conjunction with building permits, and applicants for Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission hearings shall be required to subdivide their property into 1 lot of record if their subject site encompasses parcels which happen to lie within multiple existing subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-4. - Interpretation and severability. 
(a)  Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, general welfare, and the purposes provided above. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter upon the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of these regulations or of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations that are more restrictive and impose higher standards or regulations shall govern. 
(b)  Severability. The provisions of this chapter shall be severable in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other subdivision of land not specifically included in said judgment. 
(Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009)  
Sec. 94-5. - Enforcement and filing fees. 
(a)  Enforcement. No plat of subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the provisions of these regulations unless relief is granted in accordance with Section 94-13. No land shall be considered subdivided until the subdivision is approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and filed with and recorded by the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any parcel before a plat of subdivision has been approved by the Village. The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease with the intent of evading these regulations is prohibited. For the purposes of this chapter, a proposed subdivision shall mean a draft of a plat of subdivision, prepared by a licensed surveyor and submitted to the Village in support of a petition for subdivision. 
(b)  Filing Fees. In order to cover the costs of plan examination, filing, publications, recording and other expense incidental to the approval of a subdivision, the petitioner shall pay a fee at the time of application for approval of a plat, as specified in Section 46-251 of the Village Code. Each separate common area and outlot shall be counted as an additional lot. All petitioners filing for subdivisions shall also pay an additional fee to cover the cost of recording the plat with Cook County. 
(c)  Certificate of Insurance. If work is to be performed on public property or if public property is utilized or impacted during construction and or development, the owner shall provide, or shall cause the developer and/or contractor to provide, the Village of Skokie with a certificate of insurance naming the Village of Skokie as additionally insured for any and all claims related to any and all work. The owner shall hold, and shall cause the developer and/or contractor to hold, the Village of Skokie harmless and indemnify the Village for any and all claims for property damage or personal injury related to work on or use of public property. 
(d)  Compliance. The petitioner shall comply with all Federal and State statutes, laws, rules, and regulations and all Village codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-6. - Layout requirements. 
(a)  Rights-of-Way. 
(1)  Design and Arrangement. 
a.  All streets shall be properly interconnected and aligned with the existing and proposed streets, alleys, and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the Village zoning map and the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  The existing rectangular gridiron street pattern shall be adhered to for local and collector streets wherever practical, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be minimized, except where such use will result in a more desirable layout to avoid existing obstructions. 
(2)  Width. All street rights-of-way shall be dedicated to a width that can accommodate, where applicable, traffic lanes, bicycle lanes, turn lanes, sidewalks, and streetscaping. The following table establishes the minimum right-of-way width from right-of-way line to platted centerline, in lineal feet, for streets within the Village of Skokie: 
Street Name 	Required Minimum Right-of-Way Width to platted centerline 
Carpenter Road 	50' 
Old Orchard Road, west of Gross Point Road only 	50' 
Touhy Avenue 	50' 
Church Street 	40' 
Crawford Avenue 	40' 
Dempster Street 	40' 
Golf Road 	40' 
Harms Road, north of Old Orchard Road only 	40' 
Howard Street 	40' 
Main Street 	40' 
Oakton Street 	40' 
Skokie Boulevard 	40' 
All other rights-of-way 	33' 
 
(3)  Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-Ends. 
a.  Rights-of-way terminating in cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets shall provide pedestrian through-access at the dead-end to the next street in the form of a dedication or easement, where practical. 
b.  If a cul-de-sac or dead-end street is constructed without a water main loop, the street shall not exceed 300 feet in length measured along the street right-of-way centerline from the centerline of the nearest cross street right-of-way to the edge of right-of-way furthest from the nearest cross street right-of-way. A cul-de-sac or dead-end street with water main loops present shall not exceed 500 feet in length. 
c.  For subdivisions within residential zoning districts, the diameter of a cul-de-sac turnaround shall not be less than 100 feet (as measured at the right-of-way line). 
d.  For subdivisions not within residential zoning districts, the right-of-way diameter of a cul-de-sac turnaround shall not be less than 120 feet. 
(4)  Intersections. 
a.  Rights-of-way shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. An intersection of new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall be prohibited. 
b.  No more than 2 streets (4 corners) shall intersect at any 1 point. Where possible, rights-of-way shall be laid out so as to contain no more than 4 corners. 
c.  New rights-of-way shall be aligned with or be located more than 200 feet from an existing intersection. Where right-of-way centerlines intersect arterial rights-of-way, their alignment shall be continuous. 
(5)  Alleys. 
a.  Alleys wholly within single-family residential zoning districts shall be 16 feet wide. All other alleys shall be 20 feet wide. 
b.  Blocks shall be laid out so as to enable the alignment of alley rights-of-way with existing alley rights-of-way in adjacent blocks. 
c.  Dead-end alleys are prohibited. 
d.  In residential zoning districts where "T" or "L" alleys are necessary or already present, an additional triangular area 10 feet back from each alley corner shall be dedicated to make the turn more accessible and create a sight distance triangle. 
e.  In districts not zoned residential, a triangular area 15 feet back shall be required to be dedicated where "T" or "L" alleys are necessary or already present. 
(b)  Easements. 
(1)  When required, utility easements (private and municipal) shall wherever possible be centered on rear or side lot lines and be at least 20 feet wide in order to provide adequate access. 
(2)  Proper coordination shall be established between the petitioner and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements. 
(c)  Blocks. 
(1)  Block orientation and shape shall, where possible, adhere to the existing grid system. 
(2)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for 2 tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to arterials, railroads or waterways. 
(3)  Blocks shall be oriented to maximize solar exposure. 
(4)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated; however the maximum length of a residentially-zoned block shall be 600 feet as measured along the longest block face, including any gaps created by openings for alley rights-of-way. Non-residentially-zoned blocks shall not exceed 1300 feet in length as measured along the longest block face, including any gaps created by openings for alley rights-of-way. 
(5)  A 10-foot wide right-of-way dedication for pathway purposes shall be required through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long. Pathway dedications of a greater width may be required by Village staff where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. 
(d)  Lots. 
(1)  The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Article III of the Zoning Chapter. 
(2)  Every lot shall front on or abut a public right-of-way, or provide a permanent easement to permit ingress and egress to lots not abutting the right-of-way. 
(3)  Through lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to overcome specific disadvantages created by existing block orientation. 
(e)  Subdivisions Created by Successive Divisions. 
(1)  Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided into lots containing 1 or more acres, and there are indications that such lots will eventually be subdivided into smaller building sites, the Plan Commission may require that such parcel of land be divided so as to allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-7. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Installation of Improvements. No plat of subdivision shall be approved for the issuance of building permits unless all street and sidewalk pavements, water and sewer mains, street lighting, and parkway trees have been installed or provisions have been made to ensure such installation in compliance with the codes, ordinances and rules and regulations of the Village. A cash bond shall be posted with the Village for 110% of the cost of the required work. 
(b)  Public Utilities. All plats of subdivision shall be laid out so as to adhere to the procedure statement for Underground Utility Placement, available for viewing in the Community Development Department. 
(c)  Flood Plain Regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to hire an appropriate consultant to determine whether any portion of a proposed subdivision is located within a wetland, flood plain, or flood hazard area, and if so, to stake, survey, and include any such locations on the plat of subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-8. - Address numbers and street names. 
All address numbers and street names shall conform to Chapter 89 of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-9. - Plat information required. 
The final plat shall adhere to the requirements listed in the "Plat Requirements" pamphlet, available in the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-10. - Certified survey required; filing of copies of plat. 
No plat of subdivision shall be approved until the plat is properly certified by a surveyor and acknowledged by the owner. The duplicate of such plat shall be kept on file with the Village. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-11. - Payment of taxes and assessments prerequisite to recording of a plat. 
All taxes and assessments on property platted must be paid before the plat shall be recorded, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-12. - Amendments to a plat. 
(a)  Vacation of a Subdivision. Any plat of subdivision or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a plat of vacation of the subdivision, to which a copy of the original plat of subdivision shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. The plat of vacation shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Mayor and Board of Trustees as required by this chapter. The Mayor and Board of Trustees may reject any such plat of vacation, which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its streets or alleys. The plat of vacation shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed in the same manner as the plat of subdivision; and being duly recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
(b)  Certificate of Correction. Any plat of subdivision may have errors corrected after recording by submitting a Certificate of Correction prepared by a surveyor. The Certificate of Correction shall only contain the correction of errors noticed after the recording of the Plat and shall in no instances contain intentional modifications to the plat no matter how minor. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall have the authority to approve or reject the Certificate of Correction. The Certificate of Correction shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed in like manner as the Plat of Subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-13. - Relief. 
At the request of a petitioner, the Plan Commission shall after a public hearing make recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Trustees on relief of subdivision layout requirements for sites 4 acres or greater. For sites less than 4 acres, the Community Development Director shall make recommendations directly to the Mayor and Board of Trustees on relief requests regarding subdivision layout requirements. The Plan Commission or Community Development Director may recommend relief from lot size and dimensions as required in the Zoning Chapter when the development for which the subdivision is requested requires a planned development. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Sec. 94-14. - Appeals. 
A decision by the Mayor and Board of Trustees regarding the approval or denial of a plat of subdivision is the final decision of the Village on that issue. 
(Ord. No. 09-6-C-3683, § 2, 6-15-2009)  
Chapter 95 - RIGHT OF WAY VACATIONS 
 
Sec. 95-1. - Vacation initiated by Village. 
(a)  The vacation of unopened or unimproved public rights of way may be made, as determined by the Village. In the event the Village initiates the process for vacating an unopened or unimproved public right of way as part of the Village's Program to Vacate Unopened and Unimproved Streets or Alleys, the Village shall perform all required steps of the vacation process and pay all costs associated with the vacation case. In such case: (i) the Village will remove any driveway aprons and restore any affected parkway, and (ii) if the vacated land is divided equally amongst all abutting property owners, no compensation will be due to the Village. 
(b)  Compensation shall be paid to the Village for vacated public rights of way if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The entire area is directed to one property owner, then nominal compensation in the amount of $1,000 shall be paid to the Village. 
(2)  Property owners who receive front footage that creates sufficient lot area to subdivide into two buildable lots, shall compensate the Village for the fair market value of the rights of way vacated. Payment shall be due at the time of the subdivision or transfer of title of a buildable portion of the lot, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  The Village Manager or designee shall promulgate rules and procedures for the Village's Program to Vacate Unopened and Unimproved Streets or Alleys, which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3738, § 1, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 19-7-C-4474, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 95-2. - Vacation initiated by abutting property owners. 
(a)  Property owners that petition the Village for the vacation of public rights of way that is not part of the Village's Program to Vacate Unopened and Unimproved Streets or Alleys, shall pay all costs involved in the vacation process and compensate the Village for the fair market value for the rights of way vacated. 
(b)  Any exception to the requirement to compensate the Village for the fair market value of vacated rights of way must meet one of the following conditions and be approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees: 
(1)  When the property adjacent to the public right of way to be vacated was sold within the previous two years and the square foot purchase price for the property is less than the Village's appraised value for the right of way, then the square foot purchase price sale shall be deemed to be the fair market value of the rights of way. 
(2)  When the Village retains an easement for existing Village utilities (not electric or gas) or for the installation of future Village utilities, the fair market value of the rights of way shall be discounted by 60 percent to reflect that a structure cannot be built on the vacated rights of way or there may be other restrictions on the use of the vacated right of way related to the maintenance or installation of Village utilities. 
(3)  When the abutting property owner dedicates new public rights of way equal or greater area than the rights of way being vacated, then the property owner shall not pay compensation for the rights of way vacated. Dedications of portions of streets for widening purposes, radii improvements or other improvements to the public rights of way shall not be considered as a fair market value offset for any rights of way vacated. 
(4)  When the rights of way to be vacated are located in an established redevelopment district, tax increment finance district, or special service area, the compensation due the Village may be reduced if the fair market value of the rights of way is more than 5 percent of the value of the property into which the vacated rights of way will merge. If the fair market value of the rights of way is: 
i.  5 to 10 percent of the value of the property into which the vacated rights of way will merge, then the abutting property owner must pay 75 percent of the appraised value; or if 
ii.  Over 10 percent, then the abutting property must pay 50 percent of the appraised value. 
(5)  Residential property owners receiving front or rear footage that does not create sufficient lot area to subdivide into two buildable lots shall not be required to pay compensation for the property acquired. However, nominal compensation in the amount of $1,000 shall be paid to the Village. This amount shall be used to recover the costs incurred by the Village related to the vacation. 
(6)  The Village Manager or designee shall promulgate rules and procedures, which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3738, § 1, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 19-7-C-4474, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 95-3. - Appraisal for Fair Market Value. 
Whenever compensation for the fair market value of vacated rights of way would be due to the Village, the Village shall retain an appraiser to determine the fair market value of the rights of way. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3738, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Chapter 98 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; financial matters, § 2-991 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; fees, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Revenue, 35 ILCS 5/101 et seq.; levy and collection of municipal taxes, 65 ILCS 5/8-3-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Consumer protection, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the Village's procedures in connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
Corporate authorities means the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village. 
Locally imposed and administered tax and tax mean each tax imposed by the Village that is collected or administered by the Village, not an agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
Local tax administrator. The Village Manager or designee is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this article to give full effect to this article. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this article and the Act. 
Notice means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
Tax ordinance means each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax. 
Taxpayer means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax, and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed, and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the Village. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.1), 1-2-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-33. - Interpretation of article. 
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the Village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this article, the provisions of this article shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.16), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-34. - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given under this article, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than 7 calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows: 
(1)  First class or express mail, or overnight delivery, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or 
(2)  Personal service or delivery. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.2), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-35. - Late payment or filing. 
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: 
(1)  Physically received by the Village on or before the due date; or 
(2)  Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the Village, with adequate postage prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.3), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-36. - Order in which payments applied. 
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: 
(1)  First to the tax due for the applicable period; 
(2)  Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and 
(3)  Third to the penalty for the applicable period. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.4), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-37. - Credits and refunds. 
(a)  The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. 
(b)  The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be 4 years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The Village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the Village. 
(c)  The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows: 
(1)  The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying: 
a.  The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
b.  The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
c.  The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment; 
d.  The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and 
e.  A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given if the taxpayer owes any monies to the Village. 
(2)  Within 10 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either: 
a.  Grant the claim; or 
b.  Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial. 
(3)  If the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 5 percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.5), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-38. - Audit procedure. 
(a)  Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this article. 
(b)  Each notice of audit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The tax; 
(2)  The time period of the audit; and 
(3)  A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor. 
(c)  Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and, if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours. 
(d)  The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than 7 days and not more than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time. If the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
(e)  Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. 
(f)  It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. 
(g)  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 45 days of the Village's determination of the amount of overpayment. 
(h)  If a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.6), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-39. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The reason for the assessment; 
(2)  The amount of the tax liability proposed; 
(3)  The procedure for appealing the assessment; and 
(4)  The obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. 
(b)  A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment. 
(c)  If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within 30 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties. 
(d)  If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice. 
(e)  Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.7), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-40. - Appeal hearing. 
(a)  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under Section 98-39, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. 
(b)  No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 14 days. 
(c)  At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.8), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-41. - Amount of interest and penalties. 
(a)  Payment of tax. If a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the timeframe otherwise indicated. 
(b)  Interest. The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be 5 percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed. 
(c)  Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of 5 percent of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of 5 percent of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 18 percent of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.9), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-42. - Abatement of penalties. 
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.10), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-43. - Installment contracts. 
The Village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.11), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-44. - Statute of limitations. 
(a)  The Village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing. 
(b)  No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 3 years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. 
(c)  If any tax return is not filed or if, during any 4-year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the Village, the tax paid was less than 75 percent of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be 6 years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due or the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed. 
(d)  The statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.12), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-45. - Voluntary disclosure. 
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1 percent per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than 4 years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this article must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.13), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-46. - Publication of tax ordinances. 
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village Clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.14), 1-2-2001)  
Sec. 98-47. - Review of liens. 
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall: 
(1)  Timely remove the lien at the Village's expense; 
(2)  Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and 
(3)  Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. 
(Ord. No. 01-1-F-2964, § 1(3.28.15), 1-2-2001)  
Secs. 98-48—98-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Economic development, § 30-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Economic Development Project Area Tax Increment Allocation Act, 65 ILCS 110/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beneficial interest in real property includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  The beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust; 
(2)  The lessee interest in a ground lease (including any interest of the lessee in the related improvements) that provides for a term of 30 or more years when all options to renew or extend are included, whether or not any portion of the term has expired: and 
(3)  The indirect interest in real property as reflected by a controlling interest in a real estate entity. 
Controlling interest means: 
(1)  Fifty percent or more of the combined voting power or fair market value of all ownership interests or beneficial interests in a real estate entity, whether the interests are owned by 1 or by several persons; or 
(2)  The right of 1 or of several persons to receive at the time of any distribution 50 percent or more of the income or profits of a real estate entity. 
Deed means any deed, any assignment of beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust, any assignment of partnership or limited liability company membership interest, assignment of stock, or articles of merger, or any other assignment, instrument or document of transfer or conveyance reflecting the transfer of or otherwise transferring legal title, equitable title, or both legal and equitable title to any real property or interest therein, the beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust owning any real property or interest therein, or the controlling interest in a real estate entity. 
Grantee means any grantee, transferee, purchaser, assignee or the person accepting or named in a deed as the person to which or to whom any real property or interest therein, any beneficial interest in real property or interest therein or the controlling interest in a real estate entity is transferred by such deed. 
Grantor means any grantor, transferor, seller, assignor or other person executing a deed as the person from which or from whom any real property or interest therein, any beneficial interest in real property or interest therein or the controlling interest in a real estate entity is transferred by such deed. 
Person means any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, or society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, and the United States or any instrumentality thereof. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations or other unincorporated entities shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
Real estate entity means any person (other than an Illinois land trust) including but not limited to any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, or single- or multi-tiered entity, that exists or acts substantially for the purpose of holding directly or indirectly title to or beneficial interest in real property, whether for personal use, the production of rental income, or investment. It shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise, that an entity is a real estate entity if it owns directly or indirectly real property having a fair market value greater than 75 percent of the total fair market value of all of the entity's assets, determined without deduction for any mortgage, lien or encumbrance. 
Recordation and recorded mean the recording of a deed with the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. 
Transfer price means the value of the consideration furnished for the transfer of title to real property, or beneficial interest in real property, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits and property, determined without any deduction for mortgages, liens or encumbrances, and specifically including the amount of any indebtedness or obligation cancelled or discharged in connection with the transfer. In the case where the controlling interest in a real estate entity is transferred, and the real estate entity holds assets in addition to title to or beneficial interest in real property located in the Village, the term "transfer price" means only that portion of the consideration attributable to the transfer of such real property or such beneficial interest. 
Value means the amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer covered under this article, including the amount of any mortgage or other lien assumed by the grantee or purchaser. 
(Code 1979, § 10.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-72. - Penalties. 
In addition to any other provisions of this article, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1979, § 10.15)  
Sec. 98-73. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this article shall be in full force and effect from September 1, 1987; provided, however, that these provisions shall not apply to contracts for the transfer of title to real property executed prior to August 1, 1987. 
(Code 1979, § 10.16)  
Sec. 98-74. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
The Village Manager is hereby authorized to establish and promulgate rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of the provisions contained in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10.19)  
Sec. 98-75. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  A tax is imposed on the transfer of real property located in the Village as evidenced by the recordation or delivery of a deed by any person made after September 1, 1987, whether investing the owner with the beneficial interest in or legal title to the real property or merely the possession or use thereof for any purpose or to secure future payment of money or the future transfer of any such real property. 
(b)  The tax imposed in this article shall also be imposed on the transfer of a controlling interest in a real estate entity for all such transfers made after January 17, 1997. The tax imposed by this article shall be due whether the transfer of a controlling interest in a real estate entity is effected by 1 transaction or by a series of related transactions. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise, that transactions are related if they occur within the same 24-month period. 
(c)  The tax imposed shall be $3.00 for every $1,000.00 of the transfer price or fraction thereof as stated in the declaration. 
(d)  Delivery of any deed shall be deemed to have occurred when the grantee, or the grantee's representative or agent, receives possession of the deed or, in the case of an Illinois land trust, when the trustee receives possession of a valid assignment of a beneficial interest. In the case of other transfers, delivery shall be deemed to occur when the grantee, or the grantee's representative or agent, receives or becomes entitled to receive possession of the deed. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any transaction or privilege which under the Constitution of the United States or the State may not be made the subject of taxation by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 10.02)  
Sec. 98-76. - Liability for payment. 
The primary liability for payment of the tax imposed by this article shall be borne by the grantor involved in any such transaction unless otherwise negotiated by contract; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for the grantee to accept a deed if the transfer tax has not been paid. If the tax has not been paid, then the real property that is the subject of the transfer shall be subject to the lien provided in Section 98-84 and the grantee or purchaser shall be liable for payment of the tax. The tax levied in this article shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(Code 1979, § 10.03)  
Sec. 98-77. - Declaration forms. 
At the time the tax imposed by this article is paid, or an exemption applied for, there shall also be presented to the Village Manager or designee, on a form prescribed by the Manager or designee, a declaration signed by at least 1 of the sellers or grantors and also signed by at least 1 of the grantees involved in the transaction, or by their attorneys or agents, or by a licensed real estate salesperson or broker having knowledge of the terms of the transaction, which declaration shall state the full transfer price for the transfer and shall be deemed a confidential record. Where the declaration is signed by an attorney, agent, licensed real estate salesperson or broker, on behalf of the person or persons who have the power of direction to direct the trustee under a land trust agreement to act, the trustee being the mere repository of record legal title with a duty of conveying the real estate subject to the trust agreement only when and if directed in writing by the person or persons having the power of direction, the attorney, agent, licensed real estate salesperson, or broker need only identify the land trust which is the repository of record legal title and not the person or persons having the power of direction under the land trust agreement. 
(Code 1979, § 10.04)  
Sec. 98-78. - Deeds. 
Every deed shall show the date of the transaction which it evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee, and the common address, permanent real estate tax identification number and legal description of the real property to which it relates. 
(Code 1979, § 10.05)  
Sec. 98-79. - Exempt transactions. 
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following transactions, provided such transaction in each case is accompanied by a certificate setting forth the facts or such other certificate of record or sworn statement as the Village Manager or designee may require at the time of filing of the declaration form: 
(1)  Transactions involving real property acquired from any governmental body; 
(2)  Transactions in which the deed secures debt or other obligations; 
(3)  Transactions in which the deed, without additional consideration, confirms, corrects, modifies or supplements a deed previously recorded; 
(4)  Transactions in which the transfer price covering the sale of any owner-occupied residential unit is less than $100,000.00 and the seller qualifies for Section 8 Housing Assistance Payment Program Income Guidelines of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C.A. § 14375), as amended from time to time; 
(5)  Transactions in which the transfer price is less than $500.00; 
(6)  Transactions in which the deed is a tax deed; 
(7)  Transactions in which the deed releases real property which is security for a debt or other obligation, unless the grantee of the deed intends to own the property which is the subject of the transaction and: (i) lease it or part of it to a third party; (ii) operate a business on it; (iii) construct or rehabilitate any building; or (iv) reside in a building on the property. If the grantee is an agency of the United States of America or the State of Illinois, or a bank, savings and loan or other financial institution that is chartered by a U.S. agency or regulated by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, the transaction remains exempt; 
(8)  Transactions in which the deed is from a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance company or other similar entity, or nominee, custodian, or trustee therefor, to a public officer or commission, or person designated by such officer or commission or by a court, in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part, under State or federal law regulating or supervising such institutions, or upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto; 
(9)  Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of corporations under (i) plans of reorganization where no gain or loss is recognized by a party to a reorganization under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and which meet requirements of Section 368 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time (26 U.S.C.A. § 368), unless such transaction involves the transfer of an indirect interest in real property as reflected by a controlling interest in a real estate entity, or (ii) a confirmed plan of reorganization under Section 1146(c) of Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code of 1978, as amended (11 U.S.C.A. § 1101 et seq.); 
(10)  Transactions from a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee or from such trustee to such receiver, or upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee, trustee or successor thereto; 
(11)  Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary corporation's stock; 
(12)  Transactions wherein there is a contemporaneous exchange of real property involving the same parties, except that the money difference or money's worth paid from 1 or the other shall not be exempt from the tax; 
(13)  Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States; 
(14)  A transfer by lease (other than by means of a ground lease which constitutes a transfer of the beneficial interest in real property); and 
(15)  Transfers made by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir or distributee where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy. 
(Code 1979, § 10.06; Ord. No. 11-5-C-3834, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
Sec. 98-80. - Construction of exemptions. 
All exemptions from the taxes imposed by this article shall be strictly and narrowly construed, and all other provisions of this article shall be broadly construed in order to give effect to the intent of this article, which is to tax all transfers of real property within the Village, unless specifically exempt. 
(Code 1979, § 10.07)  
Sec. 98-81. - Method of collection; revenue stamps required; exempt transaction fee. 
(a)  The tax levied and imposed by this article shall be collected by the Village Manager or designee for the Village through the sale of revenue stamps, which shall be caused to be prepared by the Village Manager or designee in such quantities and denominations as the Village Manager or designee may from time to time prescribe. Such revenue stamps shall be available for sale at and during the regular business hours of the Village offices or at other locations designated by the Village Manager or designee. Upon payment of the tax levied and imposed by this article, the revenue stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other instrument of conveyance. Any person so using and affixing a revenue stamp or stamps shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for use by marking it with the person's initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch. However, the revenue stamp(s) shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its denomination and genuineness. 
(b)  An exempt stamp and compliance with Section 98-88 and all other provisions of this article shall be required for all real estate transfers which are exempt pursuant to Section 98-79. There shall be a fee as provided in Section 46-34 for any exempt transaction. The property owner shall be responsible for payment of the fee provided for in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 10.08)  
Sec. 98-82. - Filing of real estate transfer declaration. 
A signed copy of the real estate transfer declaration filed pursuant to 35 ILCS 200/31-1 et seq. shall be filed with the Village Clerk by the grantee of any deed within 10 days after delivery of the deed or at the time of payment of the tax levied or imposed by this article, whichever first occurs. 
(Code 1979, § 10.09)  
Sec. 98-83. - Acceptance of assignment of interest by trustee of land trust. 
No trustee of an Illinois land trust shall accept or acknowledge an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the Village without first obtaining a real estate transfer declaration from the assignor and assignee and unless Village revenue stamps in the required amount or a Village exemption stamp, as set forth in this article, have been affixed to the assignment. 
(Code 1979, § 10.10)  
Sec. 98-84. - Lien for unpaid tax. 
If a deed is filed for recordation or there is any other transfer of real property or the beneficial interest in real property within the corporate limits of the Village without the Village revenue stamps provided by this article, a lien is declared against the real property that is the subject of the recorded deed or other transfer in the amount of the tax, plus all other amounts due the Village under this article. The fact that the deed does not contain a Village revenue stamp in an amount equal to 6 times the amount of State transfer taxes or a Village exemption stamp shall constitute constructive notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien must be commenced within 3 years after the date of recording the deed or 3 years after the date of the transfer if no deed was recorded. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the Village from bringing a civil action to collect the tax imposed by this article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the tax, including interest and penalties as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10.11)  
Sec. 98-85. - Action for collection of unpaid tax. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes provided for in this article, or any grantee shall accept a conveyance where the tax has not been paid, the Village's Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax, including interest and penalties as provided for in this article, on behalf of the Village, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1979, § 10.12)  
Sec. 98-86. - Interest and penalty on unpaid tax. 
In the event of failure by any person to collect and pay to the Village Manager or designee the tax required under this article when the tax shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon the tax at the rate of 1 percent per month or fraction thereof commencing as of the first day following the day when the tax becomes due. In addition, a penalty of 10 percent of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10.13)  
Sec. 98-87. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid to the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village. All proceeds shall be used for economic and community development funding. 
(Code 1979, § 10.14)  
Sec. 98-88. - Payment of moneys due Village prerequisite to issuance of revenue stamps. 
Prior to the issuance of revenue stamps issued after June 30, 1996, as required by Section 98-81, the Village Manager or designee shall determine the amount of debts pertaining to the property or the owner of the property then in existence on the Village's information system and shall cause such debts to be paid prior to the issuance of Village revenue stamps. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, this section shall not relieve an individual from debts not yet processed by the Village in the normal course of its business, nor shall it relieve an individual from debts or judgments recorded against the real property. 
(Code 1979, § 10.18)  
Secs. 98-89—98-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - 911 PUBLIC SAFETY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, adopted Sept. 17, 2002, provides that art. IV, 911 Public Safety Tax, is repealed effective January 1, 2003, to be replaced by the tax imposed by said ordinance pursuant to the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act. See art. VIII of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Emergency Telephone System Act, 50 ILCS 750/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means the consideration received for telecommunications or the transmission of messages, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting such messages, and without any deduction on account of the cost of service, materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. The term "gross receipts" shall not include charges added to the customers' bills in respect of other taxes. The term "gross receipts" shall not include receipts from any sale to a customer if the taxpayer is prohibited by federal or State Constitution, treaty, convention, statute or court decision from recovering the related tax liability from such customer. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State, or a receiver, guardian, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Service address means the location of telecommunications or message transmitting equipment from which telecommunications or message transmitting services are originated or at which telecommunications or message transmitting services are sent or received. If this is not a defined location, the term "service address" shall mean the location of the primary use of the telecommunications or message transmitting equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, the location where bills are sent or the place of business of the service provider for which the service contract is entered into. 
Telecommunications, in addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes but is not limited to messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable 1-way or 2-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiberoptics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, radio magnetic waves or similar facilities. 
Transmitting messages, in addition to the usual and popular meaning of person-to-person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. 
(Code 1979, § 40.011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-112. - Penalties. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this article be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due and any other penalties provided for by law. 
(Code 1979, § 40.017)  
Sec. 98-113. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
The Village Manager is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of the payment and collection of the tax provided for in this article and any other provisions contained in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 40.018)  
Sec. 98-114. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  A 911 public safety tax is hereby imposed on the act or privilege of transmitting or receiving messages or telecommunications within the corporate limits of the Village. The tax shall be based on service address. 
(b)  The tax imposed shall be 2 percent of the gross receipts from such telecommunications or message transmissions after December 31, 1992. For usage prior to December 31, 1992, the tax rate shall be as provided for in Village Ordinance No. 90-6-F-2145. 
(c)  Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or value or products or services furnished to the Village by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation, and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. 
(d)  Any taxpayer paying to another municipality a tax as provided in this article pursuant to an ordinance adopted by that municipality shall be exempt from paying the tax to the Village as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 40.012)  
Sec. 98-115. - Interstate telecommunications. 
The tax provided for in this article shall not be imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this State or any political subdivision, thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this article for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1. 
(Code 1979, § 40.013)  
Sec. 98-116. - Returns. 
(a)  On or before the last day of every calendar month, each taxpayer shall file a return to the Village Manager or designee for the previous 1-month period. The form of the return shall be as provided by the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  The taxpayer making the return provided for in this section shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village the amount of tax imposed; provided that, in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if the taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based upon the taxpayer's total billing of business subject to the tax during the period of which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(Code 1979, § 40.014)  
Sec. 98-117. - Erroneous payment. 
That if it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment, provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than 3 years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. 
(Code 1979, § 40.015)  
Sec. 98-118. - Time limit for action to recover unpaid tax. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of such tax amount. 
(Code 1979, § 40.016)  
Secs. 98-119—98-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Gross receipts tax on hotels and motels, § 46-79. 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation on gross rental receipts for hotel rooms, 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14; Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-141. - Imposition of tax. 
A tax on all short term rentals at either hotels/motels or private residences is levied as set forth in Section 46-79 for the privilege of renting. For the purposes of this Article, short term rentals shall mean a rental of up to 30 days. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by the user, lessee or tenant of such rooms. The tax levied by this section shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(Code 1979, § 42.201; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 9, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 98-142. - Collection from users. 
The owner and operator of each hotel or motel and the person to whom the certificate of occupancy to operate the hotel or motel shall have been issued by the Village shall bear, jointly and severally, the duty to collect the tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel. In cases where the rental process is managed by a third-party internet booking entity that also collects payments on the behalf of the property owners, such entity shall be responsible to collect the tax and remit to the Village subject to the requirements of this section. Every person or entity required to collect the tax levied shall secure the tax from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that such person collects the price, charge or rent to which it applies. 
(Code 1979, § 42.202; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 9, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 98-143. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax imposed by this article on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Manager or designee to collect all amounts due the Village from the owners, operators and certificate of occupancy holders of motels and hotels in the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 42.203; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 98-144. - Returns. 
A monthly hotel and motel occupancy tax return shall be filed by each owner, operator or certificate of occupancy holders of each hotel, motel or third-party entity administering the rental process in the Village with the Village Manager or designee, on forms prescribed by the Manager or designee, showing all receipts from each renting, leasing or letting of rooms during the preceding month. The date upon which the return is to be filed shall be provided by rules and regulations promulgated by the Village Manager or designee. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due and owning for the month covered by the return; provided, however, that the person making the return may retain an amount of money equal to 2 percent of the tax due as compensation for services rendered in collection and payment of such tax. 
(Code 1979, § 42.204; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 10-8-C-3779, § 1, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 9, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 98-145. - Examination of records. 
The Village Manager or designee may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and records for the proper administration of this article, and for the enforcement of collection of the tax imposed by this article. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Manager or designee in the discharge of such person's duties under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.205; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 98-146. - Action to collect unpaid tax. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes provided for in this article, or when any owner, operator or certificate of occupancy holder of a hotel or motel in the Village shall fail to collect the tax imposed by this article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the tax, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager or designee, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1979, § 42.206; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 98-147. - Suspension or revocation of certificate of occupancy for failure to collect tax. 
If the Village Manager or designee, after a hearing finds that any hotel or motel owner, operator or certificate of occupancy holder has willfully evaded the responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this article, the Village Manager may suspend or revoke the hotel or motel's certificate of occupancy. . Such person shall have an opportunity to be heard at a hearing, to be held not less than 5 days after notice of the time and place thereof, addressed to such person at the person's last known place of business. 
Any suspension or revocation resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due. If the certificate of occupancy holder also holds a Liquor License, the Village Manager may make a recommendation to the Local Liquor Commissioner with regard to the holder's status as a Liquor Licensee. 
(Code 1979, § 42.207; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 98-148. - Interest and penalty on unpaid tax. 
In the event of failure by any hotel or motel owner, operator or certificate of occupancy holder to collect and pay the tax required under this article within 30 days after the tax shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon the tax at the rate of 1 percent per month. In addition, a penalty of 10 percent of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee who shall fail to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 42.208 Ord. No. 08-1-C-3573, § 8, 1-7-2008)  
Sec. 98-149. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 42.209)  
Secs. 98-150—98-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE AND OCCUPATION TAXES 
 
Sec. 98-171. - Municipal automobile renting use tax. 
(a)  Imposed. A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the Village an automobile which is rented from a rentor outside the State and which is titled or registered with an agency of this State's government in the Village, at the rate of 1 percent of the rental price of such automobile while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8. 
(b)  Applicability. The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in the Village. 
(c)  Payment. The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue. 
(Code 1979, § 50.05)  
Sec. 98-172. - Municipal automobile renting occupation tax. 
(a)  Imposed. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the Village at the rate of 1 percent of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7. 
(b)  Reports. Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by 35 ILCS 120/3. 
(c)  Payment. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed by this section on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. 
(Code 1979, § 50.06)  
Secs. 98-173—98-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HOME RULE SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 98-201. - Imposed. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this State's government, at retail in the Village at a rate of one and a quarter percent (1.25%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one and a quarter percent (1.25%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceperson as an incident to a sale of service. Such home rule municipal retailers' occupational tax and the home rule municipal service occupation tax shall not be applicable on the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. 
(b)  The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5. 
(Ord. No. 91-5-F-2218, § 1, 5-20-1991; Ord. No. 03-6-C-3170, § 1, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-7-C-4073, § 1, 7-7-2014)  
Sec. 98-202. - Collection and enforcement by State. 
The taxes imposed by this article, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the State Department of Revenue. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-5-F-2218, § 2, 5-20-1991)  
Secs. 98-203—98-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 98-231. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Amount paid" means the amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid. 
(b)  "Department" means the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
(c)  "Gross charge" means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in such municipality and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within a municipality that has imposed a tax under this Chapter and, charges for the portion of the inter-office channels provided within that municipality. Charges for that portion of the inter-office channel connecting 2 or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of such municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the municipality and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by the inter-office channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this Ordinance, (ii) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges, or (v) charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act. 
(2)  charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality. 
(3)  charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement. 
(4)  charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges. 
(5)  charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. 
(6)  charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service. 
(7)  bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncorrectable, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made). 
(8)  charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices. 
(9)  amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(10)  charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if (i) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are taxable, (ii) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice, and (iii) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications. 
(d)  "Interstate telecommunications" means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this State. 
(e)  "Intrastate telecommunications" means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State. 
(f)  "Person" means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state. 
(g)  "Purchase at retail" means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail. 
(h)  "Retailer" means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion. 
(i)  "Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State", or any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State. 
(j)  "Sale at retail" means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and State universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale. 
(k)  "Service address" means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent. "Service address" shall include all locations located within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie regardless of the location of the post office servicing such locations and shall include, but not be limited to those locations with zip codes of 60203, 60076 or 60077. 
(l)  "Taxpayer" means a person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by the Article. 
(m)  "Telecommunications", in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this Ordinance, "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this Act. For purposes of this Section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in Section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, § 4, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 07-9-C-3547, § 1, 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 98-232. - Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges: 
(1)  The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax. 
(2)  The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this State which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State. 
(3)  The tax imposed by this Ordinance is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, § 4, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 07-8-C-3530, § 1, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 07-9-C-3547, § 1, 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 98-233. - Collection of tax by retailers. 
(a)  The tax authorized by this Ordinance shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Ordinance and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this Ordinance shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided by the Department. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Ordinance shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, § 4, 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 98-234. - Returns to department. 
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this Ordinance on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, Section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement this Act. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, § 4, 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 98-235. - Resellers. 
(a)  If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this Article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Department may reasonably require. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales. 
(c)  Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, § 4, 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 98-236. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Chapter 98, Article VIII, Simplified Telecommunications Tax of the Skokie Village Code, or the application of any provision of this Chapter 98, Article VIII, Simplified Telecommunications Tax of the Skokie Village Code, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this Chapter 98, Article VIII, Simplified Telecommunications Tax of the Skokie Village Code, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter 98, Article VIII, Simplified Telecommunications Tax of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-9-C-3119, § 4, 9-17-2002)  
Secs. 98-237—98-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LOCAL FUEL TAX 
 
Sec. 98-251. - Authority. 
This Article IX and all sections thereof, are enacted pursuant to the home rule authority of the Village granted under Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 98-252. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Department. The Finance Department of the Village, as provided in Chapter 2 of this Code. 
Director. The Finance Director of the Village, as provided in Chapter 2 of this Code. 
Person. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee, conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity. 
Retail vehicle fuel dealer. Any person who is engaged in the business of selling vehicle fuel in the Village to a purchaser for the purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form. 
Sale, resale, or purchase. Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration. 
Sale at retail. Any sale to a person for that person's use or consumption and not for resale to another. 
Use. The exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to the ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle or appropriate containers. 
Vehicle. Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road highway or otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. "Vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, boats, and aircraft. 
Vehicle fuel. Any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a vehicle, or which is used in propelling a vehicle. "Vehicle fuel" includes, but is not limited to, gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, ethanol, motor benzol, motor benzene, propane gas fuel, kerosene and "special fuel" as defined in the Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Law, as amended [ILCS Ch. 35, Act 505 § 1.13], and blends thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 98-253. - Local Fuel Tax imposed. 
(a)  A Local Fuel Tax is hereby imposed on the privilege of purchasing or using, in the Village, vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail commencing on June 1, 2009. The Local Fuel Tax shall be at a rate of five cents ($0.05) per gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate liability for payment of the Local Fuel Tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel. This Article shall not be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this Article for any retail vehicle fuel dealer to fail to add this tax to the retail price of vehicle fuel or to absorb the Local Fuel Tax. The Local Fuel Tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(b)  For purposes of this Article and sections thereof, "using, in the Village" shall be deemed to occur only at the locations in the Village, where the vehicle fuel is transferred into a vehicle or an appropriate container by which it is to be consumed. To the extent that a person has paid the Local Fuel Tax imposed herein on the retail purchase of vehicle fuel, such person shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for said Local Fuel Tax on the use of such fuel. 
(c)  It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the Village are subject to the Local Fuel Tax until the contrary is established, by clear and convincing evidence. The burden of proving that a sale or use is not taxable under this Article, shall be upon the retail fuel dealer, purchaser or user so claiming. 
(d)  The Local Fuel Tax imposed by this Article shall not be applicable to the privilege of purchasing or using vehicle fuel when such fuel is purchased or used, as the case may be, by the federal government, or any of its instrumentalities. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4067, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 98-254. - Collection and remittance of Local Fuel Tax. 
(a)  The Local Fuel Tax shall be collected by each retail vehicle fuel dealer, who shall have the duty to collect the Local Fuel Tax in turn from the purchaser of the vehicle fuel, and thereafter remit such Local Fuel Tax to the Village. 
(b)  If any retail vehicle fuel dealer fails to collect the Local Fuel Tax, such retail vehicle fuel dealer shall remain liable for the Local Fuel Tax not collected and shall pay the amount of the Local Fuel Tax in accordance with this Article. 
(c)  Any purchaser or user who receives or uses vehicle fuel, for which the Local Fuel Tax has not been collected, shall pay the Local Fuel Tax directly to the Village by the last day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel. 
(d)  Any person who collects the Local Fuel Tax shall do so as a trustee for and on account of the Village. 
(e)  Any Local Fuel Tax remittance, due and owing the Village, shall be made to the Department and shall be accompanied by any return form(s) as required by the Department with supporting documentation. Such documentation shall include, but will not limited to, forms filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue (Form ST-1 and Worksheet ST-1, or such similar filing as now or hereafter required by the Illinois Department of Revenue) for the period being reported. Any retail vehicle fuel dealer, purchaser or user who is required to remit the Local Fuel Tax directly to the Village on a recurring basis shall register with the Department in the manner provided in this Article. 
(f)  The Local Fuel Tax return and remittance shall be submitted to the Department on the same filing dates as are established for filing of the required sales and use tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
(g)  Failure by the retail vehicle fuel dealer to file sales and use tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue shall not relieve the retail vehicle fuel dealer from the responsibility to pay the Local Fuel Tax to the Village. 
(h)  Late payments of the Local Fuel Tax shall be subject to such interest and penalties as may be provided in Section 98-41. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 98-255. - Commission on Local Fuel Tax paid when due. 
A retail vehicle fuel dealer remitting the Local Fuel Tax to the Village shall be entitled to retain a commission of one percent of the Local Fuel Tax to be remitted, in order to compensate the retail dealer for the cost of collection, filing returns, and supplying information to the Department, but in no event shall any commission be allowed to any retail dealer on any Local Fuel Tax not remitted when due. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 98-256. - Registration of retail dealers. 
Each retail vehicle fuel dealer doing business in the Village shall register with the Department of the Village no later than 20 days after commencement of business as a retail vehicle fuel dealer, using such registration form as shall be issued by the Department. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 12-4-C-3892, § 1, 4-2-2012)  
Sec. 98-257. - Recordkeeping; inspection of records; audits. 
(a)  Each retail vehicle fuel dealer shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of vehicle fuel and the Local Fuel Taxes collected from purchasers thereof. 
(b)  All retail vehicle fuel dealers shall be subject to inspection and audit of their records, by the Village in the manner provided in Section 98-41 . 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 98-258. - Penalties. 
In addition to any interest, penalty, lien or other remedy available to the Village as provided in Section 98-41, or otherwise available at law or in equity, any person who violates the provisions of this Section, or who submits false information to the Village concerning the Local Fuel Tax, shall be subject the penalties provided for in Section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 98-259. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Article declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, section or subsection of this Article, since the same would have been enacted by the Village without the incorporation of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection. 
(Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, 4-20-2009)  
Secs. 98-260—98-289. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-6-C-4067, § 1, adopted June 2, 2014, repealed § 98-260, which pertained to automatic termination and derived from Ord. No. 09-4-C-3673, § 1, adopted Apr. 20, 2009; and Ord. No. 12-4-C-3892, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 2012.  
ARTICLE X. - UTILITY TAXES  
DIVISION 1. - MUNICIPAL GAS AND WATER UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 98-290. - Tax imposed. 
A Municipal Gas and Water Utility Tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(a)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(b)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-291. - Exceptions. 
No tax is imposed by this ordinance with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or water be subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-292. - Tax in addition. 
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-293. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Division the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Gross Receipts" means the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or water for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that "Gross Receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in Section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(b)  "Persons" means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-294. - Effective date. 
This municipal utility tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the 1st day of May, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-295. - Submission of return. 
(a)  On or before the last day of June, 2010 each taxpayer shall make a return to the Finance Director of the Village (hereinafter "Finance Director") for the month of May, 2010, which shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Taxpayer name; 
(2)  Taxpayer's principal place of business; 
(3)  Taxpayer's Gross Receipts for the month; 
(4)  Amount of tax; 
(5)  Any credits reported as outlined in Section 98-296; 
(6)  Amount of tax after credits; 
(7)  Such other reasonable and related information as may be required by the Finance Director. 
(b)  On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Finance Director for the previous one month period. 
(c)  The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Finance Director, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based upon taxpayer's total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-296. - Overpayment or underpayment. 
If it shall be determined that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Division, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous overpayment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited, unless an act of fraud has occurred. If it is so determined that an underpayment was made due to any reason, then the amount underpaid shall be remitted with the next return sent to the Finance Director. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-297. - Action to recover. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this ordinance shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount unless an act of fraud has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 1, 2-16-2010)  
Secs. 98-298—98-309. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX 
 
Sec. 98-310. - Municipal gas use tax. 
The tax imposed by this Division shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of Skokie, County of Cook, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 2, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-311. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Division, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Person" means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(b)  "Public Utility" means a public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. 
(c)  "Public Utilities Act" means the Public Utilities Act as amended from time to time (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). 
(d)  "Retail Purchaser" means any Person who purchases gas in a Sale at Retail. 
(e)  "Sale at Retail" means any sale of gas by a retailer to a Person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any Person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 2, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-312. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this Division, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a Sale at Retail, at the rate of 5 cents ($.050) per therm. 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the Retail Purchaser, and nothing in this Division shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas. 
(c)  The Retail Purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the Retail Purchaser's premises, to the Public Utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section 98-313 of this Division on or before the payment due date of the Public Utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Finance Director of the Village (hereinafter "Finance Director") on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the Retail Purchaser if no Public Utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section 98-313 of this Division, or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a Public Utility so designated. 
(d)  Nothing in this Division shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the Village. 
(e)  A Person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this Division with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the Finance Director, on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. 
(f)  The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the Retail Purchaser is billed by a Public Utility on or after May 1, 2015. 
(g)  If it shall be determined that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due according to the provisions of this Division, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be (i) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous overpayment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded, unless an act of fraud has occurred. If it is so determined that an underpayment was made due to any reason, then the amount underpaid shall be remitted with the next return sent to the Finance Director. 
(h)  No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount unless an act of fraud has occurred. 
(i)  To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Village by a Retail Purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Division if the gross receipts from the Sale at Retail of such gas to the Retail Purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the Municipal Utility Tax, Article X, Division 1. authorized pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2). 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 2, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 15-3-C-4125, § 1, 3-16-2015)  
Sec. 98-313. - Collection of tax by public utility. 
The Village shall enter in to a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this Division with a Public Utility providing gas service in the Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions: 
(1)  the Public Utility will collect the tax from Retail Purchasers as an independent contractor; 
(2)  the Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the Finance Director no more often than once each month; 
(3)  the Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the Finance Director; 
(4)  the Public Utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any tax not actually collected from a Retail Purchaser; and 
(5)  such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 2, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-314. - Books and records. 
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this Division. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 2, 2-16-2010)  
Secs. 98-315—98-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX 
 
Sec. 98-320. - Municipal electric utility tax. 
The tax imposed by this Division shall be known as the Municipal Electric Utility Tax and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of Skokie, County of Cook, and the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-321. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(1)  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.61 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(2)  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.40 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(3)  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.36 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(4)  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.35 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(5)  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.34 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(6)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.32 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(7)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(8)  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.31 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(9)  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 
0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(10)  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt- hours in a month; 
0.30 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(b)  Effective Date. This Municipal Electric Utility Tax shall take effect May 1, 2010 and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the rates outlined in Section 98-321(a) and actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the 1st day of May, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-322. - Exceptions. 
None of the taxes authorized by this Division may be imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this State or any political sub-division thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this Division for those transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by Section 8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this Division be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-323. - Additional taxes. 
The tax imposed by this Division shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its business. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-324. - Collection. 
The tax authorized by this Division shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Division and any such tax collected by such person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by such person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering the electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Village in the manner prescribed by the Village. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this paragraph shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the Village the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this Division. Any partial payment not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-325. - Submission of return. 
(a)  On or before the last day of June, 2010 each taxpayer shall make a return to the Finance Director for the Village (hereinafter "Finance Director"), for the month of May, 2010, which shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Taxpayer name; 
(2)  Taxpayer's principal place of business; 
(3)  Taxpayer's gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
(4)  Amount of tax; 
(5)  Any credits or debits reported as outlined in Section 98-326; 
(6)  Amount of tax after credits or debits; 
(7)  Such other reasonable and related information as may be required from the Finance Director. 
(b)  On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Finance Director for the previous one month period. 
(c)  The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Finance Director, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-326. - Overpayment or underpayment. 
If it shall be determined that an amount of tax has been either paid which was not due under the provisions of this Division, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous overpayment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited, unless an act of fraud has occurred. If it is so determined that an underpayment was made due to any reason, then the amount underpaid shall be remitted with the next return sent to the Finance Director. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 3, 2-16-2010)  
Secs. 98-327—98-329. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 98-330. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this Division shall be applicable to all of Article X. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 4, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-331. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases of this Article, since the same would have been enacted by the Village without the incorporation of any such invalid or unconstitutional section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 4, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-332. - Penalty. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Article and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 4, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 15-3-C-4125, § 2, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-3-C-4125, § 2, adopted Mar. 16, 2015, repealed former § 98-332, which pertained to automatic termination and derived from Ord. No. 10-2-C-3741, § 4, adopted Feb. 16, 2010. Ord. No. 15-3-C-4125 also renumbered § 98-333 as § 98-332.  
Secs. 98-333—98-336. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MUNICIPAL PREPARED FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX 
 
Sec. 98-337. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic liquor means spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes. 
Alcoholic liquor facility means any establishment licensed under the provisions of the Skokie Village Code and that sells alcoholic liquor at retail. 
Catered event means a private gathering of people for which a person is hired to provide food and beverages (including alcoholic and non-alcoholic) for immediate consumption and the monetary value of the prepared food is $5,000.00 or greater. 
Person means any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity. 
Prepared food: 
(1)  Means and includes any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and non-alcoholic liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used for human internal consumption, whether simple, compound or mixed and which has been prepared for immediate consumption. 
(2)  "Prepared food" may be purchased for consumption within or upon the premises where it is sold or it may be purchased for consumption off the premises where it is sold. 
"Prepared food" does not mean or include any food which is sold in a closed or sealed bottle, can, carton or container of the manufacturer or wholesaler or which has not been prepared for immediate consumption. 
Prepared food facility: 
(1)  Any person or establishment subject to licensing pursuant to the Skokie Village Code, which sells at retail food which has been prepared for immediate consumption and whether or not such Prepared Food Facility use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premises or business establishment. 
(2)  A "Prepared food facility" includes, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly called an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tearoom, delicatessen, movie theater, mobile food or beverage or ice cream vehicle, hotel, motel, or club, or any other establishment which sells at retail food which has been prepared for immediate consumption. 
(3)  A "Prepared food facility" does not include churches, public or private schools, boarding houses, day care centers, nursing homes, retirement centers or similar residential care facilities, or programs for the central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of invalids or the elderly, or other facilities of not-for-profit associations or corporations. 
Purchase at retail means to obtain for use or consumption in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale. 
Retailer means any person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-338. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  A tax shall be imposed upon the purchase of Prepared Food at retail at any Prepared Food Facility (hereinafter referred to as "PFF") or Alcoholic Liquor Facility (hereinafter referred to as "ALF") within the Village, at a rate of two percent (2%) of the purchase price of such Prepared Foods, the ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser. 
(b)  For Prepared Food served as part of a Catered Event, a tax shall be imposed at the rate of one percent (1%) of the purchase price of such Prepared Food, and the ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser. 
(c)  This tax shall be known as the Municipal Prepared Food and Beverage Tax, (hereinafter referred to as "MPFBT"). 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-339. - Collection of tax by retailer. 
The owner and the operator of each PFF and ALF within the Village shall have the duty to collect and account for the MPFBT from each purchaser at the time the purchase is made. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-340. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax imposed by this article on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Manager or designee to collect all amounts due the Village. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-341. - Books and records. 
The owner or operator of each PFF and each ALF within the Village shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross receipts for sales of prepared food and alcoholic liquor and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the Village for examination and for audit by the Village upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-342. - Returns. 
A monthly food and beverage tax return shall be filed by each owner or operator of a PFF or an ALF in the Village. Each monthly return shall list all gross receipts for all Prepared Foods sold during the preceding month, and the taxes due to the Village as outlined in this Article. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due and owing for the month covered by the return, and a copy of the PFF's or ALF's Sales and Use Tax return form, (Illinois Department of Revenue form ST-1) as filed with the State of Illinois for the month covered by the return. All returns required by this Article shall be due by the 20th of the month following the month described in the return. A late fee of 3% of the monies due and owing for a monthly return shall be assessed on the last day of the month, if not received by the Village and for every month thereafter until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-343. - Action to collect unpaid tax. 
Whenever any person fails to pay any taxes provided for in this Article, or when any owner or operator of a PFF or a ALF in the Village fails to collect the tax imposed by this article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the tax, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager or designee, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-344. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 of the Skokie Village Code, in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due and any other penalties provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Sec. 98-345. - Effective date. 
The effective date for the Prepared Food and Beverage Tax shall be September 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 15-7-C-4162, § 1, 7-6-2015)  
Secs. 98-346—98-349. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY REGISTRATION AND TAX 
 
Sec. 98-350. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply: 
Accepted Ride — any ride utilizing TNCS which originates, terminates or both in the Village of Skokie. 
Individual Ride — any Accepted Ride other than a Shared Ride. 
Shared Ride — any Accepted Ride in which the rider requests a TNC to share the ride with one or more riders, and each rider is charged a fare that is calculated in whole or in part based on the rider(s) request to share all or part of the ride with one or more riders, regardless of whether the rider actually shares all or part of the ride. 
Transportation Network Company ("TNC") — entity operation in the State of Illinois that uses a digital network or software application service to connect passengers to transportation network company services provided by transportation network company drivers. A TNC is not deemed to own, control, operate or manage the vehicles used by the TNC drivers and is not a taxicab association or for hire vehicle owner. 
Transportation Network Company Driver ("TNCD") — an individual who operates a motor vehicle that is: 
(a)  owned, leased or otherwise authorized for use by the individual; 
(b)  not a taxicab or for-hire public passenger vehicle; and 
(c)  used to provide transportation network company services. 
Transportation Network Company Services ("TNCS") — transportation of a passenger between points chosen by the passenger and prearranged with a TNCD through the use of a TNC digital network or software application. TNCS shall begin when a TNCD accepts a request for transportation received through the TNC's digital network or software allocation series continues while the TNCD transports the passenger in the TNCD's vehicle and ends when the passenger exits the TNC driver's vehicles. TNCs are not taxicabs, for-hire vehicles, or street hail service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-351. - Transportation Network Company tax imposed. 
A tax is imposed and levied on all TNCs operating TNC services performed by TNCD for all Accepted Rides; an Individual Ride at a rate of thirty-five cents ($0.35) and a Shared Ride at the rate of fifteen cents ($0.15). The incidence of the tax and the obligation to pay the tax are imposed upon the TNC operating services for any Accepted Ride. This tax is in addition to any and all other taxes imposed. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-352. - Registration. 
Every TNC must register with the Village within thirty days (30) days after the date of commencing TNCS in the Village. If a TNC is already operating TNCS in the Village, any such company must register with the Village on or before August 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-353. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, the tax must be collected by each TNC operating TNCS in the Village. The TNC must remit the tax and file returns in accordance with this Section. 
(b)  Each TNC must collect the tax from each TNCD operating a transportation network vehicle in the Village. 
(c)  If a TNC fails to collect the tax imposed by this Section from a TNCD, then the TNCD must file a return and pay the tax directly to the Village on or before the date required by Sec. 98-356 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-354. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee will administer and enforce the tax imposed and levied by the Village and will collect all amounts due to the Village from the transportation network companies operating TNCS in the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-355. - Books and records. 
Every TNC required to collect the tax imposed by this Article must keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents, books of entry, and/or digital records, denoting the transaction that gave rise, or may have given rise, to the tax liability or any exemption that may be claimed. All such books and records must be legibly kept in the English language. All books and records regarding the tax imposed and levied are subject to, and must be available for inspection by, the Village Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-356. - Transmittal of tax revenue. 
(a)  A TNC must file tax returns with the Village showing tax receipts received with respect to every transaction for every ride accepted during each and every quarterly calendar period. These returns will be on forms prescribed by the Village Manager or designee. The quarterly return for each completed period is due within twenty (20) days of the completion of the applicable calendar quarter period ending March 31, June 30, September 30, or December 31, as the case may be. At the time of filing such tax returns, the transportation network company must pay to the Village all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. 
(b)  If any tax is not timely paid when due, a penalty at the rate of three percent (3%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the day of delinquency, will be added and collected. The Village may file an action to enforce the payment and collection of the tax imposed by this Section, as well as any penalty that is added. The Village Manager may suspend or revoke the Village registration of any TNC that refuses or fails to pay the tax imposed by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-357. - Deposit of funds. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-358. - Penalties. 
Any TNC, TNCD, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the penalties outlined in Section 1-9 of the Skokie Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-5-C-4462, § 1, 5-20-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-359. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MUNICIPAL PACKAGED LIQUOR TAX 
 
Sec. 98-360. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic liquor means spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes. 
Alcoholic liquor establishment means any establishment licensed, pursuant to the provisions of the Skokie Village Code, to sell alcoholic liquor at retail. 
Packaged Liquor means alcoholic liquor sold unopened at retail in its original package or container, and only for consumption off the retail premises. 
Person means any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity. 
Purchase at retail means to obtain for use or consumption in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money, credits or any other form of consideration, and not for resale. 
Retailer means any person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-361. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  A tax shall be imposed upon the purchase of Packaged Liquor at retail at any Alcoholic Liquor Establishment (hereinafter referred to as "ALE") within the Village, at a rate of two percent (2%) of the purchase price of such Packaged Liquor, the ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser. 
(b)  This tax shall be known as the Municipal Packaged Liquor Tax, (hereinafter referred to as "MPLT"). 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-362. - Collection of tax by retailer. 
The owner and the operator of each ALE within the Village shall have the duty to collect and account for the MPLT from each purchaser at the time the purchase is made. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-363. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager, or designee, is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax imposed by this Article on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Manager or designee, to collect all amounts due the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-364. - Books and records. 
The owner or operator of each ALE within the Village shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross receipts for sales of Packaged Liquor and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the Village for examination and for audit by the Village upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-365. - Returns. 
A monthly Packaged Liquor tax return shall be filed by each owner or operator of an ALE in the Village. Each monthly return shall list all gross receipts for all Packaged Liquor sold during the preceding month, and the taxes due to the Village as outlined in this Article. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due and owing for the month covered by the return, and a copy of the ALE's Sales and Use Tax return form, (Illinois Department of Revenue form ST-1 inclusive of multi-location form ST-2) as filed with the State of Illinois for the month covered by the return. All returns required by this Article shall be due by the 20th of the month following the month described in the return. For all returns filed and paid when due, the ALE retailer may retain an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the tax amount due for the month, as compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of such surcharge. For returns not received by the Village when due, a late fee of three percent (3%) of the monies due and owing for a monthly return shall be assessed on the last day of the month, and for every month thereafter until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-366. - Collection of unpaid tax. 
Whenever any person fails to pay any taxes provided for in this Article, or when any owner or operator of an ALF in the Village fails to collect the tax imposed by this Article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the tax, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager or designee, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Sec. 98-367. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 of the Skokie Village Code, in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due and any other penalties provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4471, § 1, 7-15-2019)  
Secs. 98-368, 98-369. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - MUNICIPAL AMUSEMENT SURCHARGE 
 
Sec. 98-370. - Definitions. 
Admission Fee or Charge: Any fee or charge made or received for admission to any amusement , including when no ticket or admission stub or receipt of any kind is issued. An admission fee or charge includes, but is not limited to, all fees or charges for seats, chairs, tables, benches, space to stand or sit, special seating areas, tents, structures, booths, or other similar accommodations made as afore described for which there is a fee or charge. For purposes of this Article, an admission fee or charge shall include charges in the form of subscriptions, group tickets, promotional tickets, hotel or restaurant packages, or fixed or variable fees or charges paid in advance of accessing the amusement, upon payment of which the amusement patron would be entitled to access to the amusement for a defined period of time. 
Amusement: Any event, activity, exhibition, performance, presentation or show for entertainment purposes which is exhibited, produced or held in the Village, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Any comedic, theatrical, dramatic, musical, opera, sale or exhibition, demonstration, videogaming competition, spectator performance, production, or similar live or recorded entertainment; 
b.  Any show, speech or lecture, including but not limited to antique, cooking, arts and hand crafts; 
c.  Any animal show, animal act, circus, or rodeo; 
d.  Any athletic contest, sport, game, competition or exhibition such as boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, baseball, basketball, softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling, billiard and pool games, laser tag, miniature golf, and rounds or games of golf; 
e.  Any hologram, motion picture film, or video projection, broadcast or presentation; 
f.  Any amusement devices such as virtual reality games, video games, internet cafe games, pinball machines, or arcade games. 
Amusement Owner: Any person or entity who has an ownership, management or leasehold interest in such amusement or any person or entity who has a proprietary interest in the amusement so as to entitle such a person or entity to all or a portion of the proceeds from the operation, conduct or presentation of such amusement, excluding rental proceeds and from sales of tangible personal property. 
Amusement Operator: Any person or entity who, through agreement or otherwise with the Amusement or Property Owner, is charged with the operation, management supervision or presentation of the amusement and necessary activities pertaining to such amusement. 
Amusement Patron: 
a.  Any person who is admitted to any amusement in the Village for which an admission fee or charge is imposed; 
b.  Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires a ticket or pass of any kind from a place other than the location where such ticket or pass is purchased or acquired for admission to any amusement within the Village; 
c.  Any person who pays a fee or charge to participate in any amusement. 
Property Owner: With respect to the place where an amusement is being held, any person or entity with ownership or leasehold interest in a building, structure, vehicle, boat, area or other place who presents, conducts or operates an amusement in such a place or who allows, by agreement or otherwise, another person to present, conduct or operate an amusement in such a place. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-371. - Imposition of surcharge. 
(a)  A surcharge shall be imposed upon the Admission Fee or Charge, for every Amusement Patron for the admission or access to any Amusement in the Village, at the rate of two percent (2%). The ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of which shall be borne by the Amusement Patron. 
(b)  The surcharge imposed by subsection (a) of this Section shall not apply to the witnessing or participating in any Amusement sponsored or conducted exclusively by and the proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of religious, educational, charitable institutions, or organizations, and governmental entities, subject to the limitations specified in subsection (c) of this Section; 
(c)  The exemptions as listed in subsection (b) of this Section shall not apply to any Amusement presented by the management of and at the North Shore Center for the Preforming Arts. Any such Amusement shall be subject to the surcharge imposed by subsection (a) of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-372. - Collection of surcharge. 
The Amusement Owner and/or the Amusement Operator of any amusement within the Village shall have the duty to collect and account for the municipal amusement surcharge from each amusement patron at the time the amusement fee or charge is collected. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-373. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the surcharge imposed by this Article on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Manager or designee, to collect all amounts due the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-374. - Books and records. 
The Amusement Owner or Amusement Operator shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross receipts from amusement charges and the surcharge collected each day, which shall be made available to the Village or its designee for examination and for audit by the Village or such designee upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-375. - Returns. 
A monthly Amusement Surcharge return form, made available by the Village of Skokie, shall be filed by each Amusement Owner or Amusement Operator of an amusement in the Village. Each monthly return shall include the gross receipts from the amusement, the number of admission tickets or passes sold and issued, and the amount of amusement surcharge collected. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all surcharges due and owing for the month covered by the return. All returns required by this Article shall be due by the 20th of the month following the month described in the return. If the Amusement Owner or Amusement Operator is required to file Illinois Sales and Use Tax form with the Illinois Department of Revenue (form ST-1 inclusive of multi-location form ST-2), a copy of said form must be filed with the Village of Skokie at the same time the monthly Amusement Surcharge return is filed. For all returns filed and paid when due, the Amusement Owner or Amusement Operator may retain an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the surcharge due for the month, as compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of such surcharge. For returns not received by the Village when due, a late fee of 3% of the monies due and owing for a monthly return shall be assessed on the last day of the month that the return is due, and for every month thereafter until any outstanding amounts are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-376. - Collection of unpaid surcharge. 
Whenever any person fails to pay any surcharges and fees provided for in this Article, or when any Amusement Owner or Amusement Operator fails to collect the surcharge imposed by this Article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the surcharge, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager or designee, bring or cause to be brought an action against the Amusement Operator, Amusement Owner, or Property Owner, to enforce the payment of the surcharge on behalf of the Village, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-377. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 of the Skokie Village Code, in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of surcharge due and any other penalties provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 19-7-C-4470, § 1, 7-15-2019, eff. 8-1-2019)  
Secs. 98-378, 98-379. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - MUNICIPAL SELF-STORAGE FACILITY SURCHARGE 
 
Sec. 98-380. - Definitions. 
Gross Rental Charge means any amount of consideration imposed by the owner of a self-storage facility upon any person for the privilege of renting individual storage space at the self-storage facility in the Village. Gross rental charge can be periodic (daily, monthly, quarterly, etc.) or a single lump-sum charge required prior to, during, or after the rental of the individual storage space. 
Individual Storage Space means any space rented or leased by a person for the purpose of storing personal property within the self-storage facility. 
Occupant means person, his sublessee, successor or assigns, entitled to the use of the storage space at a self-storage facility under a rental agreement to the exclusion of others. 
Owner means the owner, operator, lessor or sublessor of a self-storage facility, his agent, or any other person authorized by him to manage the facility, or to receive rent from all occupants under a rental agreement. 
Person means any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity. 
Personal Property means movable property not affixed to land and includes, but is not limited to, goods, merchandise, household items, tools, machinery and equipment. 
Rental Agreement means any agreement or lease, written or oral that establishes or modifies the terms, conditions, rules or any other provisions concerning the use and occupancy of a self-storage facility. 
Self-Storage Facility means any real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to occupants who are to have access to such for the purpose of storing and removing personal property. A "self-storage facility", as defined in this Section, is not a warehouse for the purpose of Article 7 of the Uniform Commercial Code. In the event an owner issues any warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document of title for the personal property stored, the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code do not apply. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-381. - Imposition of surcharge. 
A surcharge of five percent (5%) is imposed upon the gross rental charge for the rental or leasing of any individual self-storage space in the Village of Skokie. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the surcharge imposed by this Section shall be borne by the occupant of any such individual storage space. This surcharge shall be in addition to any and all other surcharges or taxes. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-382. - Collection of surcharge. 
The owner of any self-storage facility within the Village shall have the duty to collect the municipal self-storage surcharge from each occupant of individual self-storage space at the time when gross rental charges are collected. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-383. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village Manager or designee is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the surcharge imposed by this Article on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Manager or designee, to collect all amounts due the Village. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-384. - Books and records. 
The owner of any self-storage facility shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross receipts from rental charges and the surcharge collected each month, which shall be made available to the Village or its designee for examination and for audit by the Village or such designee upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-385. - Returns. 
A monthly Self-Storage Surcharge return form, made available by the Village of Skokie, shall be filed by each owner of a self-storage facility in the Village. Each monthly return shall include the gross receipts from rental charges and the amount of self-storage surcharge collected. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all surcharges due and owing for the month covered by the return. All returns required by this Article shall be due by the 20th of the month following the month described in the return. If the owner of a self-storage facility is required to file Illinois Sales and Use Tax form with the Illinois Department of Revenue (form ST-1 inclusive of multi-location form ST-2), a copy of said form must be filed with the Village of Skokie at the same time the monthly Self-Storage Surcharge return is filed. For all returns filed and paid when due, the owner of as self-storage facility may retain an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the surcharge due for the month, as compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of such surcharge. For returns not received by the Village when due, a late fee of 3% of the monies due and owing for a monthly return shall be assessed on the last day of the month that the return is due, and for every month thereafter until any outstanding amounts are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-386. - Collection of unpaid surcharge. 
Whenever any person fails to pay any surcharges and fees provided for in this Article, or when any owner of a self-storage facility fails to collect the surcharge imposed by this article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the surcharge, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon request of the Village Manager or designee, bring or cause to be brought an action against the owner to enforce the payment of the surcharge on behalf of the Village, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Sec. 98-387. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 of the Skokie Village Code, in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of surcharge due and any other penalties provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 19-8-C-4477, § 1, 8-5-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)  
Secs. 98-388, 98-389. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 19-9-C-4487, adopted Sept. 16, 2019, states: That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law, provided however, that the tax provided for herein shall take effect for all sales January 1, 2020. 
Cross reference— Cannabis, § 11-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-390. - Imposition of tax; rate. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling cannabis (hereinafter "Cannabis Retailer") other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village of Skokie at the rate of 3% of the gross receipts from sales made in the course of business. This tax shall be in addition to any and all other surcharges or taxes which may be imposed. 
(b)  The imposition of the tax is in accordance with the provisions of Sections 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22). 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4487, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 98-391. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Any Cannabis Retailer, within the Village shall have the duty to collect the municipal cannabis retailer's occupation tax and remit it to the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
(b)  Any remittance by a Cannabis Retailer required by this Article shall be done in accordance with the rules and forms promulgated by the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
(c)  Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Article shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4487, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 98-392. - Administration and enforcement. 
The tax imposed under this Article and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and endorsed by the Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article and the Village retains its rights to legal action including the revocation of certificates of operation to enforce the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 19-9-C-4487, § 1, 9-16-2019)  
Chapter 102 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS, CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Telecommunications and technology commission, § 2-891 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 118; district regulations for antennas, § 118-83. 
State Law reference— Community antenna television systems, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 102-1. - General requirements, existing franchises, additional remedies. 
(a)  Telecommunications retailers. All telecommunication retailers shall be required to comply with all requirements for payment of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 98, Article VIII, of this Code. 
(b)  Applicability to existing franchise ordinances and agreements. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and the Cable and Video Consumer Protection Law of 2007, the provisions of this chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until: 
(1)  The expiration of the franchise ordinance or agreement; or 
(2)  Amendment of an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date. 
(3)  The franchisee elects to terminate its agreement with the Village and obtain a State-issued authorization under the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/21-301. 
(c)  Additional remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 40.02; Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Secs. 102-2—102-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-12-C-3571, § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 2007, deleted Art. II, §§ 102-31—102-39, in its entirety and enacted a new Art. II, § 102-31, to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 102-31—102-39, pertained to infrastructure maintenance fee and derived from Code 1979, §§ 39.01—39.08, 39.10. 
 
Sec. 102-31. - Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law. 
(a)  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries. 
(b)  Amendments. Any amendments to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities, shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the Village Manager or designee. 
(c)  Enforcement. The Village does hereby, pursuant to law, declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the Village. 
(d)  Penalties. The Village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
(1)  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(2)  The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(3)  A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in (2). 
(e)  Customer credits. The Village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of a violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(f)  Severability. If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(g)  Effective date. This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law. The provisions of this chapter as to incumbent cable operators take effect January 1, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3571, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Secs. 102-32—102-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE 
 
Sec. 102-41. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
(b)  Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
(c)  Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the Village. 
(1)  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
(i)  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
(ii)  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
(iii)  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
(iv)  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges. 
(v)  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order and service termination charges. 
(vi)  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
(vii)  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with the Village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the Village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
(viii)  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (ix). 
(ix)  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
(x)  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
(2)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
(i)  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
(ii)  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
(iii)  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
(iv)  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
(v)  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
(vi)  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
(vii)  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(3)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
(d)  Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
(e)  PEG means public, education and governmental. 
(f)  PEG access support fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(g)  Service means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
(h)  Service provider fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(i)  Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 102-42. - Cable/video service provider fee imposed. 
(a)  Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent of the holder's gross revenues. 
(c)  Notice to the Village. The holder shall notify the Village at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village. 
(d)  Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the Village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village. 
(e)  Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village in which a fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 102-43. - PEG access support fee imposed. 
(a)  PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to section 102-42. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the Village or its designee for PEG access support in the Village. 
(c)  Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the Village or to the entity designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 102-42(d). 
(d)  Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(e)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that the operator owes under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 102-44. - Applicable principles. 
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 102-45. - No impact on other taxes due from holder. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provider by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 102-46. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(a)  Audit requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the Village's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 102-47. - Late fees/payments. 
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-C-3572, § 2, 12-17-2007)  
Chapter 103 - SMALL CELL ANTENNAS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-7-C-4402, § 1, adopted July 16, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 103, §§ 103-1, 103-2, and enacted a new Ch. 103 as set out herein. The former Ch. 103 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 17-1-C-4263, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2017. 
Cross reference— Small wireless facility fees, § 46-138; street, sidewalk, and right-of-way work, § 46-161 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 110; zoning, ch. 118. 
 
Sec. 103-1. - Illinois Public Act 100-0585 cited as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act adopted. 
Pursuant to authority granted by 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, the Village hereby adopts by reference the Illinois Public Act 100-0585 cited as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, excepting those provisions that are modified or deleted as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-7-C-4402, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
State Law reference— Municipal Adoption of Codes and Records Act, 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 103-2. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any provision of the Illinois Public Act 100-0585 is in conflict with any provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, the provisions of the Illinois Public Act shall prevail and the conflicting provision of any code, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Village, shall have no force or effect. 
(Ord. No. 18-7-C-4402, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
Sec. 103-3. - Amendments to Illinois Public Act 100-0585 for Small Wireless Facilities Deployment. 
The Illinois Public Act 100-0585 for Small Wireless Facilities Deployment, adopted by reference in this article shall be modified as follows: 
(1)  Section 10. Definitions — Insert: 
a.  Landscape screening means the installation at grade of plantings; shrubbery, bushes or other foliage intended to screen the base of a wireless facility from public view. 
b.  Variation means a grant of relief by the Village Manager or designee from specific limitations of this section. 
c.  Village or governmental owned infrastructure means infrastructure including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, towers or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the Village or governmental unit. 
(2)  Section 15. Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities — Insert: 
a.  Village/governmental-owned infrastructure. Wireless facilities shall only be mounted to Village/governmental-owned infrastructure including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signal, towers or buildings, if authorized by a license agreement between the owner and the Village/governmental entity. The license agreement for wireless facilities in the public right of way shall be subject to the requirements of Illinois Public Act 100-0585. The license agreement for wireless facilities on Village/government owned property shall be subject to the owners' requirements. 
b.  New monopole, utility pole or tower. No new monopole, utility pole or tower to exclusively support wireless facilities shall be installed on rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village without a variance. 
c.  Attachment limitations. No wireless antenna or facility shall be attached to a utility pole or Village/governmental-owned infrastructure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  Surface area of antenna. The antenna, including antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas, shall not have a surface area of more than 7 feet and no single dimension exceeding 7 feet. Omnidirectional or whip antennas may not extend more than 10 feet, not including any pole extension. 
2.  Size of above-ground personal wireless telecommunication facility. The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and appurtenances comprising a wireless facility, exclusive of the antenna itself, cannot exceed 25 feet. 
3.  Wireless facility equipment. The operator of a wireless facility shall, whenever possible, locate the base of the equipment or appurtenances at the highest height possible on the monopole, utility pole or tower, but no lower than 8 feet above grade. 
4.  Wireless facility equipment mounted at grade. In the event that the operator of a wireless facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or appurtenances are to be installed at grade, screening shall be installed to minimize the visibility of the facility. 
5.  Height. The top of the highest point of the antenna may not extend more than 10 feet above the highest point of the utility pole or Village owned infrastructure. 
6.  Color. A wireless facility, including all related equipment and appurtenances, shall be a color that blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure or infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate cover or cable shield. 
7.  Antenna panel covering. A wireless facility antenna shall include a radome, cap or other antenna panel covering or shield and shall be of a color that blends with the color of the pole on which it is mounted. 
8.  Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the facility shall be installed in accordance with the version of the National Electric Code and National Electrical Safety Code adopted by the Village and in force at the time of the installation of the facility. In no event shall wiring and cabling serving the facility interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video service operator, electric utility, telephone utility or Village/government. Where utilities are underground all electrical power and connections to the wireless facility must be placed underground. Where the utility pole has interior wiring all wiring for the wireless facility must be located inside the pole in a separate conduit. Where the wiring is on the exterior of the pole all wiring for a wireless facility must be covered with an appropriate cover or cable shield. 
9.  Grounding. A wireless facility shall be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the most current edition of the National Electrical Code adopted by the Village and in force at the time of the installation of the facility. 
10.  Guy wires. No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with a wireless facility unless the facility is proposed to be attached to an existing utility pole or Village/governmental-owned infrastructure that incorporated guy wires prior to the date that an applicant has applied for a permit. 
11.  Pole extensions. Extensions to utility poles and Village/governmental-owned infrastructure, utilized for the purpose of connecting a wireless facility, shall be fabricated from non-metallic material of a neutral color approved by the Village, and shall have a degree of strength capable of supporting the antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of withstanding wind forces and ice loads in accordance with the structural integrity standards set forth in 12. below. An extension shall be securely bound to the support pole, perpendicular to the ground or Village-owned infrastructure in accordance with applicable engineering standards for the design and attachment of such extensions. No extensions fabricated from wood shall be permitted. 
12.  Structural integrity. A wireless facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment shall be designed to withstand a wind force of at least 90 miles per hour, and be designed to withstand a wind force of at least 40 miles per hour, which includes at least ¾ of an inch of ice all without the use of guy wires. For any facility attached to Village/governmental-owned infrastructure or, in the discretion of the Village, for a utility pole, the operator of the facility shall provide the Village with a structural evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation that the proposed installation passes the standards described above. The evaluation shall be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois. 
d.  Signage. Other than signs required by federal law or regulations, a wireless facility shall not have signs installed thereon. 
e.  Screening. If screening is required under subsection 6 above, it shall be natural landscaping material or a fence subject to the approval of the Village and shall comply with all regulations of the Village. In lieu of the operator installing the screening, the Village, at its sole discretion, may accept from the operator of the facility a fee of $2,500.00 for the acquisition and installation of landscaping material by the Village. Appropriate landscaping shall be located and maintained and shall provide the maximum achievable screening, as determined by the Village, from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than 9 feet in height. Landscape screening, when permitted in the right-of-way, shall be provided with a clearance of 3 feet in all directions from the facility. The color of housing for ground-mounted equipment shall blend with the surroundings. For a roof-mounted facility, the maximum reasonably achievable screening shall be provided between such facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or private streets. 
f.  Permission to Use Utility Pole. The operator of a wireless facility shall submit to the Village copies of the approval from the owner of a utility pole to mount the personal wireless telecommunication facility on that specific pole, or structure, prior to commencement of the installation. The utility company's approval shall also indicate that the occupation of the pole by the wireless facility will not limit the ability of the utility company, or any other public utility currently utilizing the pole, to expand their facilities on the pole in the future. Approval by the utility company to allow the installation of a wireless facility shall also include a guarantee by the utility company that the utility company will either cause the removal of abandoned equipment in accordance with subsection (12) below or remove the equipment themselves. 
g.  Licenses and permits. The operator of a wireless facility shall submit to the Village copies of all licenses and permits required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said facility and shall maintain such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted. 
h.  Variance requirements. Each location of a wireless facility within a right-of-way shall meet all of the requirements of this section. Variances may be requested pursuant to the procedure and standards set forth in Sec. 90-85. 
i.  Abandonment and removal. Any wireless facility located within the corporate limits of the Village that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months, shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the owner of such abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return-receipt-requested, by the Village to such owner at the last known address of such owner. In the case of wireless facilities attached to a Village owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility through the terms of the applicable license agreement or through whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery. 
j.  Construction in right-of-way. All construction and installation work related to wireless facility shall be in compliance with [Chapter 90,] Article III, Construction of Utility Facilities in Rights-of-Way. 
k.  Governmental wireless telecommunication facilities. This section shall not apply to wireless facility owned by the Village. 
l.  Permits and application fees. Permits for placement of wireless facilities are required. Except as otherwise provided for by this section, the procedures for the application for, approval of and revocation of such a permit shall be those required in Article III, Sec. 90-87. Any applications shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, or federal, State or local law, all applications for permits pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established in Sec. 46-164. The application fee is to reimburse the Village for regulatory and administrative costs with respect to the work being performed, which costs the Village represents have been or will be incurred, and is not deemed to be compensation for the use of the rights-of-way as herein defined in this section. 
m.  Authority (Village/Governmental) Agreement. The Village and other local units of government shall have the authority to require compliance with regulations and require a reoccurring rate to collocate a wireless facility on an Authority utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 18-7-C-4402, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
Chapter 106 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic Safety Commission, § 2-651 et seq.; placing handbills on or in vehicles, § 6-38; possession of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicle, § 10-8; vehicles of catchbasin cleaners, § 26-222; abandoned or inoperable vehicles, § 42-40; noise from motor vehicle equipment and operation, § 42-79; fees relating to motor vehicles and traffic, § 46-221 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 62; obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic, § 70-121; solicitations from persons in motor vehicles, § 78-97; signs that are traffic hazards, § 82-19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 114. 
Federal law reference— Highway safety, 23 U.S.C.A. § 401 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of the use of streets, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-1 et seq.; Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.; rules of the road, 625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.; powers of local authorities, 625 ILCS 5/11-207 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 106-1—106-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, 625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.; powers of local authorities, 625 ILCS 5/11-207 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 106-31. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means a motor vehicle standing or parked on the public way which either: 
(1)  Is in such state of disrepair as to be incapable of being driven in its condition; or 
(2)  Has not been moved or used for more than 7 consecutive days and is apparently deserted. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets. When streets are continuous or not typical, a block is defined as 600 lineal feet of frontage from the nearest intersection. 
Bus stand means a designated area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers. 
Bus terminal means a terminal used by public carrier buses. 
Bus zone means a designated point in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb set aside for the expeditious loading and unloading of passengers only. 
Crossing guard means an adult civilian officially authorized to supervise and expedite the crossing of school children or other pedestrians at hazardous or congested traffic points. 
Driveway means a strip of land improved for the purpose of providing access from private property to the main travelled portion of the public right-of-way. 
Fire lane means an area established by ordinance to be designated as a fire lane in order to accommodate Fire Department or other emergency apparatus in the event of a fire or other emergency. 
Funeral procession means a procession consisting of motor vehicles which are designed and used for a funeral hearse and floral cars, or combination thereof, with any of the following added: foot units, equestrian units, and passenger vehicles, proceeding to a place of burial. 
Holidays means New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
Limousine and livery mean a privately owned first division vehicle intended to be used for the transportation of persons for hire when the payment is not based on a meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination. 
One-way street or alley means a public right-of-way on which traffic is permitted to travel in only 1 direction. 
Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Parking (to park) means the standing of an operational and licensed vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway, for a period of time greater than is reasonably necessary either for loading or unloading or in obedience to traffic regulations or official traffic signs or signals. 
Parking meter means any mechanism which, upon deposit of a coin or coins of the United States in the amount indicated thereon, displays a signal showing parking from the time of depositing such coin or coins until the expiration of the time fixed for parking in the parking meter zone in which it is located, and upon expiration of such time indicates by sign or signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired. 
Parking meter zone means a certain designated and marked-off section of the public right-of-way within marked boundaries where a vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for such period of time as the parking meter attached thereto may indicate. 
Passenger curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Public passenger vehicle or taxicab means any motor vehicle equipped with a taximeter and operated for transportation of passengers for hire, available indiscriminately to all persons as may offer themselves for transportation. 
Public passenger vehicle stand means a designated area in the roadway alongside and parallel to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers. 
Public way means any sidewalk, alley, street or other public thoroughfare open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of travel. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails. 
Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
Recreation vehicle means every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or van camper, all as defined in 625 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq., used primarily for recreational purposes and not used commercially or owned by a commercial business. 
Service drive means a portion of a public way open to vehicular traffic for the purpose of providing access to abutting property between intersections and separated by physical means from through traffic, if the latter exists, on the same public way. 
Taxicab. See public passenger vehicle. 
Taxicab stand means a designated area in the roadway alongside and parallel to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers. 
Terminal means a special area, including buildings, structures and equipment, located at the origin or destination of a transportation movement and used for the transferring, handling, delivering and receiving of passengers and property. 
Truck loading zone means a designated space adjacent to a curb for the use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
(b)  Other definitions shall be as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1979, § 51.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, 625 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.  
Sec. 106-32. - Penalties. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined an amount not to exceed the maximum penalty provided in Section 1-6, except those violations that are subject to, and prosecuted through, the administrative adjudication system specified in Chapter 2, Article XII, of this Code shall be fined in accordance with amounts specified in that Article XII. However, the penalties for violation of the state size and weight law, 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq., shall be those set forth therein. The Corporation Counsel may file a civil action to recover any penalty or fine against any such person; provided, however, that the filing of such a civil action shall preclude incarceration or imprisonment. 
(Code 1979, § 51.54; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 4, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-33. - Stipulated settlements. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to accept the amounts specified in Section 1-7 in settlement for violations of the specified Code sections and to establish settlement dates for each such violation. For violations where a showing of compliance is applicable, settlement as provided for this section shall only be authorized upon a showing of compliance. 
(Code 1979, § 51.57)  
Sec. 106-34. - Illegal cancellation of violation notice. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic, parking, standing or compliance violation notice or complaint in any manner other than as provided in this article or through an established Village policy and procedure. 
(Code 1979, § 51.53; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 4, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-35. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the Village or of the State vehicle laws of which any person has been charged. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The record shall accumulate during a 5-year period and, from that time on, the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent 5-year period. 
(b)  All forms of records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the issuance of all such forms. 
(Code 1979, § 51.58)  
Sec. 106-36. - Traffic violation forms. 
(a)  Traffic violation forms for citing violators to appear and answer to charges of violating laws and ordinances in the Circuit Court of the County, Second Municipal District, shall be in the form prescribed and approved jointly by the judges of the Circuit Court of the County, Second Municipal District, and the Chief of Police. 
(b)  The Chief of Police or designee shall be responsible for the issuance of violation books and shall maintain a record of every book issued to members of the Police Department. 
(Code 1979, § 51.59)  
Sec. 106-37. - Disposition of traffic violation notices. 
(a)  Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic violation citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of the State or of any traffic ordinance of the Village, shall follow the procedures of the Police Department and the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Second Municipal District. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such traffic violation complaint in the Circuit Court of the County, Second Municipal District, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the complaint may be disposed of only by trial in the Court or other official action by a judge of the Court, including forfeiture of bail, or by payment of a fine to the Court. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any police officer or other officer or public employee to dispose of a traffic violation notice or copies thereof, a traffic violation complaint, or the record of the issuance of a traffic violation notice in a manner other than in accordance with this article, applicable state statutes, and rules and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 51.60)  
Sec. 106-38. - Illinois Vehicle Code and Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted. 
(a)  The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., is hereby adopted and made a part of this article by reference and shall be applicable in the Village. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code within the Village shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 1-6, except those violations that are subject to, and prosecuted through, the administrative adjudication system specified in Chapter 2, Article XII, of this Code shall be fined in accordance with amounts specified in that Article XII. 
(c)  The standards and regulations contained in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1979, § 51.02; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 4, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-39. - Violation of provisions of Illinois Vehicle Code or Skokie Park District ordinance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., or the Skokie Park District Ordinance: 
5/11-1001 	Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and traffic regulation. 
5/11-1006 	Pedestrians soliciting rides or business. 
5/11-1007 	Pedestrians walking on highways. 
5/11-1401 	Unattended motor vehicles. 
5/11-1403 	Riding on motorcycles. 
5/11-1403.1 	Riding motorized pedalcycles. 
5/11-1404 	Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles. 
5/11-1405 	Required equipment on motorcycles. 
5/11-1406 	Obstruction of driver's view of driving mechanism. 
5/11-1407 	Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
5/11-1411 	Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
5/11-1412 	Crossing fire hose. 
5/12-101 	Operating a motor vehicle which is in an unsafe condition or improperly equipped. 
5/12-201(a) 	Daytime light on motorcycle. 
5/12-202 	Clearance identification and side marker lamps. 
5/12-204 	Lamp or flag on projecting load. 
5/12-205 	Lamps on other vehicles and equipment. 
5/12-208 	Signal lamps and signal devices. 
5/12-210 	Use of head lamps. 
5/12-211 	Number of driving lamps required or permitted. 
5/12-401 	Restrictions as to tire equipment. 
5/12-502 	Mirrors required. 
5/12-503 	Windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with wipers. 
5/3-413a 	Proper display of registration plates. 
5/3-701 	Operation of vehicles without evidence of registration. 
5/12-602 	Prevention of noise with mufflers. 
5/12-603 	Use of safety belts. 
5/12-604 	Television receivers visible to driver prohibited. 
5/12-607 	Modification of vehicle suspension system restricted. 
5/12-608 	Required bumpers. 
5/12-610 	Use of headset receivers by driver restricted. 
5/12-610.5 	Tinted registration plate covers. 
5/12-611 	Sound amplification systems. 
5/12-702 	Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning devices. 
5/12-710 	Required splash guards. 
5/12-714 	Radar detection devices in commercial vehicles. 
5/15-109 	Spilling loads on highway. 
5/15-109.1 	Required covers or tarpaulins. 
5/15-110 	Towed vehicles—connecting devices. 
25/4 and 25/4(a) 	Child Passenger Protection Act 
Skokie Park District Ordinance 95-007, Section 1C-19-M 	Park District parking violations 
 
(Code 1979, § 51.63)  
Sec. 106-40. - Existing traffic regulations continued. 
All ordinances which establish loading zones, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, through streets, one-way streets and alleys, and load restrictions on certain streets, or which regulate the turning of vehicles on certain streets, heretofore passed, shall remain in force and effect. 
(Code 1979, § 51.03)  
Sec. 106-41. - Authority of Village Manager to implement traffic ordinances; temporary or experimental regulations; testing of traffic control devices. 
(a)  The Village Manager or designee is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the Village and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee may test traffic control devices and techniques under actual conditions. 
(Code 1979, § 51.04)  
Sec. 106-42. - Display of vehicle license sticker. 
The Village vehicle license sticker issued in accordance with Article III of this chapter shall be placed and positioned to be clearly visible, maintained in a clearly legible condition, and permanently affixed on the lower inner corner of the driver's side. No person required to have such vehicle license shall operate the vehicle on the Village streets unless such license tax sticker is so displayed. 
(Code 1979, § 51.05)  
Sec. 106-43. - Obedience to officers. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer, a Fire Department official, or any other authorized officer. 
(Code 1979, § 51.06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-203.  
Sec. 106-44. - Temporary street closings. 
(a)  Driving on closed street. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part thereof is closed, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residence is within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(b)  Approval of street closing. No street shall be closed without prior written approval from the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 51.07) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 106-45. - Duty of police to enforce traffic regulations; authority to direct traffic. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce all Village street traffic codes, ordinances, rules and regulations and State vehicle laws. 
(b)  Officers of the Police Department, other authorized personnel, or crossing guards as assigned or authorized by the Village Manager or designee are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, codes, ordinances, statutes or rules and regulations. In the event of a fire, other emergency, to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws, codes, ordinances statutes or rules and regulations. 
(c)  Members of the Fire Department, when at the scene of an emergency, may direct or assist police personnel in directing traffic at the scene or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1979, § 51.08)  
Sec. 106-46. - Installation of traffic control devices. 
(a)  General authority of Village Manager. The Village Manager or designee shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when required by Village or State codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations. The Village Manager or designee may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as deemed necessary as authorized by the Mayor and Board of Trustees to regulate traffic under the traffic codes, ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations of the Village and State or to guide or warn traffic. 
(b)  Crosswalks and safety zones. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in the opinion of the Manager or designee there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as the Manager or designee may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as the Manager or designee may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(c)  Traffic lanes. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway where in the opinion of the Manager or designee a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(d)  Traffic signal timing. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner. 
(e)  Turning markers. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to place markers or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(f)  Restricted turns. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee is authorized to determine and erect appropriate signs at intersections, alleys, and driveways at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn. 
(2)  The Village Manager or designee is authorized to determine and erect appropriate signs upon streets or parts of streets where drivers of vehicles shall not turn such vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction except as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(3)  The making of such right or left turn or turns in the opposite direction may be prohibited between certain hours of the day and permitted at other hours, in which event such hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed or covered by the Village Manager when such turns are permitted. 
(g)  Designation of one-way streets. The Village Manager or designee is authorized, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, to determine and erect appropriate signs designating one-way streets and alleys. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection and alley where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 51.09) 
State Law reference— Traffic signs, signals and markings, 625 ILCS 5/11-301 et seq.  
Sec. 106-47. - Stop and yield signs. 
(a)  Stop signs at through streets. After a determination is made that a stop sign is required and the appropriate ordinance is adopted, the Village Manager or designee shall place and maintain a stop sign on each street intersecting such through street or intersecting that part thereof described and designated as such by an ordinance, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled by traffic control signals. However, that at the intersection of a through street and a heavy-traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either or both of such streets as may be determined by the Village Manager or designee upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(b)  Stop signs at other intersections. The Village Manager is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at 1 or more entrances to any stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(c)  Yield signs. The Village Manager is authorized to determine and designate intersections where yield right-of-way signs shall be erected, and shall erect yield right-of-way signs at every such place where a yield right-of-way sign is required. 
(Code 1979, § 51.10)  
Sec. 106-48. - Negligent driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicles upon a public way negligently, heedlessly and without due caution or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. 
(Code 1979, § 51.11) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, 625 ILCS 5/11-503.  
Sec. 106-49. - Turns. 
(a)  U-turns limited. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, upon any street or part of any street where such turns are permitted, at any point closer than 100 feet to any street intersection or when such turn cannot be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  No-turn signs. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or turn in the opposite direction is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1979, § 51.12) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit U-turns, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(11).  
Sec. 106-50. - One-way streets. 
(a)  Upon those streets, parts of streets and alleys designated as one-way, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated on signs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in violation of markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed to designate street, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day. 
(Code 1979, § 51.13) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(4); one-way roadways, 625 ILCS 5/11-708.  
Sec. 106-51. - Duties of pedestrians. 
(a)  Use of crosswalks. Whenever, upon the basis of an engineering or traffic investigation it is determined that pedestrian crossing between intersections shall be prohibited in the interest of public safety, pedestrians shall not cross between intersections except at a marked crosswalk. Such regulations against pedestrians crossing between intersections shall become effective when appropriate signs are erected. 
(b)  Crossing roadway in mixed-use or business zoning district. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any mixed-use or business zoning district. 
(c)  Crossing limited access street. No pedestrian shall cross the roadway of a limited access street or highway other than by means of those facilities which have been constructed as pedestrian crossing or at those points where marked crosswalks have been provided. 
(d)  Use of pedestrian bridges. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway where a public bridge with a sidewalk has been provided other than by such sidewalk and as designated by the erection of appropriate signs or fencing. 
(e)  Passing through railroad gate. No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(f)  Direction of crossing. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. 
(g)  Walking into path of vehicle. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or turn into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(Code 1979, § 51.14; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit pedestrian crossings at other than designated and marked crosswalks or at intersections, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(12); pedestrians' rights and duties, 625 ILCS 5/11-1001 et seq.  
Sec. 106-52. - Vehicles or equipment damaging street or sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to propel, drive, or operate, or cause to be propelled, driven, or operated any type of motor vehicle, or any type of mechanical device of any nature whatsoever, over, upon, along or across any street, sidewalk, curb, alley or parkway, in such manner as to break, crack, damage, or injure the street, sidewalk, curb, alley or parkway. 
(Code 1979, § 51.15) 
Cross reference— Damage to streets or sidewalks, § 90-40. 
State Law reference— Liability if highway or structure damaged, 625 ILCS 5/15-318.  
Sec. 106-53. - Authority to restrict use of streets. 
The Village Manager, with respect to streets under the jurisdiction of the Village, is authorized, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, to determine and designate those streets or parts of streets upon which the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles shall be prohibited or upon which the use of such vehicles shall be restricted by imposing limitations as to the weight of such vehicles. The Village Manager or designee shall erect and maintain appropriate signs. 
(Code 1979, § 51.16) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict use of streets, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(7).  
Sec. 106-54. - Permit for vehicles of excess size and weight. 
(a)  Authorized. When in the Village Manager's judgment an emergency exists, the Village Manager, with respect to streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the Village, may, in the Manager's discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, pursuant to the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/15-301, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the laws of the State or otherwise not in conformity with the provisions of this article upon any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the Village. 
(b)  Application. The application for any such permit shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved and the particular streets or highways for which the permit to operate is requested, and whether such permit is requested for a single trip or for continuous operation. 
(c)  Issuance; conditions. The Village Manager is authorized to issue or withhold such permit at the Manager's discretion. Any permit is issued in accordance with this section may limit the number of trips, establish seasonal or other limitations within which the vehicles described may be operated on the streets or highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of such vehicle or vehicles, when necessary to ensure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces, or structures. Any permit issued may require security as may be deemed necessary by the Village Manager or designee to compensate for any damage to any roadway or load structure. 
(d)  Permit for single trip. Whenever the application for such a permit is for the transportation of a single article which cannot be divided and which exceeds 24,000 pounds total on any axle or exceeds 60 feet in total length or 102 inches in maximum width, the Village Manager or designee may issue a permit for a single trip for the load to be transported. The person making such application shall have paid to the Village a fee as set forth in Section 46-222 for such permit and shall have furnished a bond to the Village in an amount determined by the Village Manager or designee. Any permit issued in accordance with this subsection shall be conditional so as to save the Village harmless from any claim, loss or damage that may result from the granting of such permit or that may arise from or on account of any work done thereunder, and further conditioned that the permittee shall restore, at the permittee's own cost, to a condition satisfactory to the Village Manager or designee, any pavement, subway, tunnel, sewer, pipe, conduit, or other public utility that may be injured by reason of the transportation of such article under such permit. 
(e)  Permit to be carried in vehicle; compliance with terms of permit. Every permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer, and no person shall violate any of the terms or conditions of such special permit. 
(Code 1979, § 51.17)  
Sec. 106-55. - Projecting loads. 
(a)  Passenger vehicles. No passenger vehicle shall be operated on any roadway with any load thereon extending more than 6 inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right and left sides thereof. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles. No commercial vehicle shall be operated on any roadway with any load extending to the rear 4 feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle unless there shall be displayed at the extreme end of the load, during the periods when lighted lamps are required, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear and sides. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. During all other times, there shall be displayed at the extreme end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square. This flag or cloth shall be visible to the driver of any vehicle approaching from the rear or sides. 
(Code 1979, § 51.18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/15-105 et seq.  
Sec. 106-56. - Trailers and towed vehicles. 
(a)  Any trailer being operated on any roadway while attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle, leading trailer or semi-trailer shall, in addition to the regular coupling device, have attached to the corners of the trailer frame adequate safety chains or devices sufficient to pull the trailer and its maximum load. 
(b)  Any trailer having a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or less, including the weight of the trailer and its maximum load, may be coupled to the towing vehicle by means of clamp-on hitches. Such hitches must be of sufficient strength to hold and control the trailer when fully loaded. Such trailers shall be equipped with 2 safety chains or cables which are permanently affixed to the tongue of the trailer. 
(Code 1979, § 51.19) 
State Law reference— Towed vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/15-110.  
Sec. 106-57. - Public carrier stops and stands. 
The Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, shall erect appropriate signs establishing bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as the Village Manager or designee shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. 
(Code 1979, § 51.20) 
Cross reference— Public passenger vehicles, § 114-31 et seq.  
Sec. 106-58. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs. 
(a)  The driver of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than at a designated bus stand or bus terminal. 
(b)  The driver of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers other than at a designated bus stop, bus stand, passenger loading zone, or bus terminal, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The driver of a bus shall enter a bus zone or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers, shall be in position with the right front wheel of such bus not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 51.21; Ord. No. 07-8-C-3539, § 1, 8-20-2007)  
Sec. 106-59. - Cruising by public passenger vehicles. 
No operator of a public passenger vehicle shall solicit business in such manner as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 51.22) 
Cross reference— Public passenger vehicles, § 114-31 et seq.  
Sec. 106-60. - Riding coasters, roller skates and similar devices on roadway. 
No person operating or riding roller skates, in line skates, skateboards, any coaster, toy vehicle, scooter, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street set aside as a play street as authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 51.23)  
Sec. 106-61. - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
Persons riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, scooter, toy vehicle, or other similar device shall not attach the vehicle or themselves to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1979, § 54.06)  
Sec. 106-62. - Parades and processions. 
No parade or procession, except a funeral procession, the armed forces of the United States, the military forces of the State and forces of the Police Department and Fire Department of the Village, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Village Manager or designee and such other regulations as are set forth in this Code which may apply. 
(Code 1979, § 51.24) 
Cross reference— Parades and public assemblies, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(3); funeral processions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1420.  
Sec. 106-63. - Driving on wet paint markings. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive on or across any freshly painted roadway marking when such marking is clearly evidenced to still be wet by virtue of painting equipment in operation upon or near such markings. The temporary placement or rubber marking cones or similar devices along upon any pavement marking shall similarly give evidence that such markings are wet. 
(Code 1979, § 51.25)  
Sec. 106-64. - Railroad trains blocking streets. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the train in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than 5 minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1979, § 51.26)  
Sec. 106-65. - Picking up pedestrians soliciting ride. 
No person operating a private vehicle shall pick up any person standing in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride. 
(Code 1979, § 51.27) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, 625 ILCS 5/11-1006.  
Sec. 106-66. - Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1979, § 51.28)  
Sec. 106-67. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1979, § 51.29)  
Sec. 106-68. - Permit for parking of vans and buses in residential areas. 
(a)  The Village Manager or designee shall have the authority to issue special permits for the parking of vans or buses in residential areas if the Manager or designee finds the following facts: 
(1)  The van or bus is designed for 15 persons or less, has no commercial markings except as required by the State, is not more than 18 feet 11 inches in length and 6 feet 9 inches in height, and is properly licensed by the State and the relevant municipality. 
(2)  The van or bus is provided by an employer for the purpose of conserving energy or carpooling. 
(3)  The van or bus will be used on a regular daily basis to transport 5 or more individuals, including the driver, who are employees of the employer who provides the bus, to and from their homes and the employer's premises or to participate in a prescribed program of a public transit agency. 
(b)  The permits so issued shall be of not more than 6 months' duration, and each renewal shall require new findings by the Village Manager or designee as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The applicant shall receive a sticker which shall be placed upon the windshield and shall specify the termination date. 
(Code 1979, § 51.62)  
Sec. 106-69. - Notification of eligibility of driver's license suspension. 
(a)  The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized to cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension to be sent, to any person who has failed to satisfy amounts owed for ten or more citations, issued and processed pursuant to procedures in place prior to the commencement of the administrative adjudication system established in Chapter 2, Article XII, incurred as a result of violations of the Village's parking regulations set forth in chapter 106 of the Skokie Village Code, after the exhaustion of judicial review procedures. 
(b)  The Traffic Compliance Administrator or designee, as defined in Chapter 2, Article XII, shall send a notice of impending driver's license suspension to any person who has failed to pay any fine and penalty due and owing as a result of ten or more unpaid Final Determinations of Violation Liability for violation notices issued for violations of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulations established in this Code and processed pursuant to Chapter 2, Article XII. The Traffic Compliance Administrator or designee shall also send a notice of impending driver's license suspension to any person that has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owning as a result of five or more offenses for Automated Traffic Law Violations as defined in Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(c)  Notice of impending driver's license suspension; notice to Illinois Secretary of State. 
(1)  Pursuant to the authority or requirements stated in paragraph (a) or (b) of this Section, a notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the person at the address recorded with the Secretary of State. Any such notice shall include a list of the citations, or violation notices, as the case may be, the dates of the violations, and amounts owed. The notice shall specify procedures whereby the person may request a copy of the violation notice, or citation, as the case may be. 
(2)  If within 45 days of the date of the notice referred to in subsection 106-69(c)(1), the amounts owed listed in the notice remain unpaid, the Village Manager or designee, or the Traffic Compliance Administrator or designee, as the case may be, shall notify the Secretary of State, by filing a certified report, that the person's driver's license is eligible for suspension pursuant to Chapter 625 Section 5/6-306.5 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(d)  The person named in the certified report filed with the Secretary of State, who failed to pay the fines or penalties, may file a written challenge contesting the accuracy of the certified report. The written challenge must be filed with the Chief of Police or designee within 14 days of the date that the Secretary of State notified the person that their driver's license will be suspended. The failure to file the written challenge shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to challenge the accuracy of the certified report. The written challenge shall include a telephone number where the person may be reached and the hearing will be scheduled within seven days unless another date is agreed to by the person and the Chief of Police or designee. The only grounds to challenge the accuracy of the certified report are: 
(1)  the person was not the owner, as defined by Section 2-1091 of this Code, of the vehicle or vehicles receiving (A) ten or more standing, parking, or compliance violation notices, or citations, as the case may be, on the date or dates that such violation notices, or citations were issued, or (B) five or more Automated Traffic Law Violation notices on the date or dates that such notices were issued; or 
(2)  the person, or another person, previously paid the fines and penalties for the ten or more standing, parking, or compliance violations, or citations, as the case may be, or for five or more Automated Traffic Law Violations. 
In the event a person proves by a preponderance of the evidence that one or both of the above stated grounds make the certified report inaccurate to the extent that suspension would not be appropriate, then the Chief of Police or designee shall notify the Traffic Compliance Administrator and the appropriate report or correction shall be filed with the Secretary of State. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3102, § 2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 4, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-70. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases used in this Division shall have the following definitions: 
(a)  "Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System" means a system that utilizes a device as defined in Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. Specifically, it means the utilization of a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red signal indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar provision of the Skokie Village Code. 
(b)  "Automated Traffic Law Violation" means a violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or similar provision of the Skokie Village Code, which is recorded and documented by an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System. 
(c)  "Fine" means the amount owed for a violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar provision of the Skokie Village Code. Fine shall also have the same meaning as "civil penalty" as used in Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(d)  "IVC" means the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. 
(e)  "Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters, and shall include every vehicle defined by Section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(f)  "Owner" means: (1) a person who holds legal title of a vehicle; or (2) in the event (i) a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or (ii) a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. For the purposes of determining the identity of an owner, the records of the Illinois Secretary of State, or such similar office of another state, shall be presumed to be true and correct. Any person may, with the owner's written permission, perform any act that the owner is authorized to perform. 
(g)  "Recorded Images" means images recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system on: (1) 2 or more photographs; (2) 2 or more microphotographs; (3) 2 or more electronic images; or (4) a video recording showing the motor vehicle. On at least one image or portion of the recording, the registration plate number of the motor vehicle must be clearly identified. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-71. - Authorization; location. 
The Village of Skokie is authorized to operate an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System at intersections within the boundaries of the Village in a manner consistent with the requirements with Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The Village Manager shall select the locations at which Automated Traffic Law Enforcement Systems shall be located. The Village Manager shall notify the Mayor, Clerk and the Trustees of the locations selected for the Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System. The Village Manager may take any and all action necessary to construct and operate the System. The Village may contract with a private company to construct and operate the Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System. Before any citations are issued, potential violations shall be subject to a final review and approval by a dedicated Skokie Police Officer, who shall review any and all evidence of a violation to determine whether or not the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 13-11-C-4016, § 1, 11-18-2013)  
Sec. 106-72. - Violation notice. 
A Violation Notice shall be issued for a violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle Code, or a similar provision of the Skokie Village Code, if the images recorded by the Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System demonstrate that a vehicle entered the intersection contrary to the red light. The owner of the vehicle appearing on the recorded image shall be liable for the fine and late penalties associated with an Automated Traffic Law Violation. A Violation Notice may be commonly referred to as a ticket or citation and such reference shall not affect the enforcement of the Violation Notice. The Violation Notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the owner of the vehicle within 30 days after the Secretary of State, or similar office in another state, notifies the Village of the identity of the owner, but in no event later than 90 days after the alleged violation. 
(a)  A Violation Notice shall, at a minimum, state the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner; 
(2)  The date, time and place of the violation; 
(3)  The specific regulation violated; 
(4)  The fine that is assessed and the date by which it should be paid; 
(5)  The state registration number of the motor vehicle; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded images; 
(7)  A statement that recorded images are evidence of a violation of a red light signal; 
(8)  A warning that failure to pay the fine or to contest liability within a timely manner is an admission of liability and may result in suspension of the driving privileges of the owner of the motor vehicle or immobilization of any vehicle owned by the owner of the motor vehicle; and 
(9)  A statement that an owner may elect to proceed by: (A) paying the fine; (B) contesting the violation by requesting an administrative hearing or by filing a written contest. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-73. - Procedures. 
The procedures stated in Chapter 2, Article XII of this Code, and specifically Section 2-1096, including, but not limited to, the deadlines, rights, duties, and enforcement, collection and other procedures relating to administrative adjudication, shall be applicable to violations alleged under this Division. The words and phrases used in Article XII of Chapter 2 shall have the same meaning in this Division. If any provision of Article XII of Chapter 2 is in direct conflict with this Division, then the provisions of this Division shall be interpreted to govern the specific issue or procedure. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-74. - [Images.] 
Images produced by an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System and the facts stated in the Violation Notice shall be: (i) prima facie evidence demonstrating the facts attendant to the alleged violation; (ii) admissible in any legal proceeding without any further foundation; and (iii) presumed true and correct of the facts shown on the recorded image and the facts stated in the Notice. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-75. - [Defenses.] 
In addition to the defenses available to the owner as stated in section 2-1097 of this Code, the Hearing Officer may find the owner not liable if it is demonstrated that the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either: (i) in order to yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle; or (ii) as part of a funeral procession. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 106-76. - Fine. 
The owner of a motor vehicle that is found liable for a violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or similar provision of the Skokie Village Code, pursuant to an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System shall be fined $100. In the event an owner is sent a Late Notice as provided for in Section 2-1096(e) of Article XII of Chapter 2, then an additional late penalty shall be added increasing the total fine owed to $150. If the owner is found liable at a subsequently scheduled administrative hearing, under no circumstances will the owner be fined less than $125.00. An owner that does not pay the total fine after 21 days of the Late Notice, and does not appear at the scheduled administrative hearing, shall be liable for a total fine and late penalty amount of $200. An owner that does not pay the total fine after 21 days of the Late Notice may be liable for fines and late penalties up to $200. An owner that does not appear at the scheduled administrative hearing may be liable for fines and late penalties up to $200. 
(Ord. No. 08-12-C-3651, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 13-11-C-4016, § 1, 11-18-2013)  
Sec. 106-77. - Appeals. 
Any owner of a motor vehicle found liable may appeal from an adverse ruling to the Circuit Court of Cook County in accordance with the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, all applicable Cook County Circuit Court rules and the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 13-11-C-4016, § 1, 11-18-2013)  
Secs. 106-78—106-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Parking on parade route, § 74-3(c); off-street parking and loading facilities, § 118-201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 106-91. - Registered owner of vehicle presumed responsible for violations. 
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the provisions of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. 
(Code 1979, § 51.55)  
Sec. 106-92. - Placement of violation notice on vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking and there is no person in attendance upon such parked vehicle to be served immediately with a traffic violation notice with an opportunity to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation, any police officer or authorized personnel observing such violation may attach to the vehicle used in such violation a traffic violation notice requiring that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered request a court date or pay the amount approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees by the adoption of an ordinance. However, any violation notice issued pursuant to Chapter 2, Article XII, shall be subject to the issuance, service and other procedures in said Article XII. 
(b)  When any vehicle is parked in a private parking lot in violation of section 106-104 and there is no person in attendance upon such parked vehicle to be arrested or served immediately with a traffic violation notice to appear in court to answer the charge of such violation, any police officer or authorized personnel, upon a written complaint signed by the owner or proprietor of the lot, or by the owner's or proprietor's authorized agent, that the vehicle is not entitled to the privileges of the parking lot may attach to the vehicle a traffic violation notice as provided in this section. However, any violation notice issued pursuant to Chapter 2, Article XII, shall be subject to the issuance, service and other procedures in said Article XII. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the driver of the vehicle to which the notice is attached, to remove the notice from the vehicle. 
(Code 1979, § 51.56; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3605, § 5, 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 106-93. - Impoundment authorized; vehicles subject to impoundment. 
Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from any public way to the Village vehicle pound or authorized garage as determined and designated by the Village Manager or designee under the following circumstances: 
(a)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or viaduct, or upon any approach thereto, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(b)  When a vehicle upon any public way is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(c)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any public way and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(d)  When an abandoned vehicle is found on any public way. 
(e)  When any vehicle illegally occupies a parking meter space for an unreasonable period of time. 
(f)  When any vehicle is parked in violation of Section 106-105. 
(g)  When any vehicle is parked in violation of Section 106-107. 
(h)  When any vehicle is parked in violation of official signs indicating that parking, standing, or stopping is prohibited at all times or during designated hours or prohibited for a longer time than indicated on such sign. 
(i)  When a vehicle pursuant to Section 106-131 et seq. has been immobilized by the Skokie Police Department. 
(j)  When a driver of a vehicle is in violation of Section 106-142. 
(k)  When a vehicle pursuant to Section 106-151 et seq. has been immobilized by the Skokie Police Department. 
(Code 1979, § 51.49; Ord. No. 02-6-C-3104, § 1, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 2, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-94. - Relocation of vehicles in emergencies. 
When any emergency arises necessitating the removal of any vehicle upon any public way, the Village Manager or designee is authorized to remove or have removed any such vehicle from 1 location to any other location. 
(Code 1979, § 51.50)  
Sec. 106-95. - Impoundment procedures. 
(a)  Records. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to safely keep any impounded vehicle until such vehicle shall have been repossessed by the owner or person legally entitled to possession thereof or otherwise disposed of as provided in this section. The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept an accurate record of the description of such vehicle, including the name of the officer from whom such vehicle was received, the officer employed to tow or deliver the vehicle to the pound or authorized garage, the date and time when received, the place where found, seized or taken possession of, the make and color of the car, style or body, kind of power, motor number, serial number, number of cylinders, year built, state license number, if any, wheel tax license number, if any, equipment and general description of condition, the name and address of the person redeeming the vehicle, the date of redemption, and the manner and date of disposal of the vehicle in case the vehicle shall not be redeemed, together with the towing and storage charge. Such record shall be in form prescribed by the Chief of Police to keep weekly reports of all such vehicles delivered to the Chief of Police, which reports shall be kept in the office of the Chief available for the inspection of any interested party at all reasonable hours of the day. 
(b)  Removal of vehicle. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause every vehicle removed from any public way as provided in Section 106-93 to be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the Police Department to a vehicle pound or authorized garage. 
(2)  The Village Manager or designee shall make such arrangements as are necessary for towing vehicles for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Notice to owner. Whenever the Police Department has impounded or relocated any vehicle, the Police Department shall ascertain from the registration records of the State or the Village the name and address of the owner and shall as soon as practicable give or cause to be given written notice of the removal, the impounding, the reason, and the place to which the vehicle has been removed. When the vehicle is impounded pursuant to Division 4 of this Chapter, the notice shall be provided as stated in that Division. 
(d)  Vehicle pound. The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized to establish or designate a vehicle pound or pounds to which motor vehicles may be removed by police officers in the manner provided in this section. Such pound shall be located at such places as may be designated by the Village Manager or designee and operated by the custodian of lost and stolen property, under the direction of the Village Manager or designee. 
(e)  Notice to Secretary of State when owner is unknown. Whenever the Police Department has impounded any vehicle as provided in this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in this section, and if the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of 3 days, the Police Department shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal and impounding by mail to the Illinois Secretary of State. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal and the address of the vehicle pound or authorized garage where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1979, § 51.51; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-96. - Designation of restricted parking zones. 
(a)  No parking zones. The Village Manager is authorized, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, to determine and designate by erecting the appropriate signs those streets upon which parking shall be prohibited or upon which parking shall be prohibited on 1 side only. 
(b)  Limited stopping, standing and parking zones. The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, to determine and designate by erecting the appropriate signs those streets or parts of streets upon which stopping, standing, or parking shall be prohibited within certain hours or permitted for a limited time. 
(c)  Parking meter zones. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee shall cause parking meters to be installed in such numbers and at such places in parking meter zones as established by the Mayor and Board of Trustees as in the judgment of the Manager or designee may be necessary for the regulation, control, and inspection of the parking of vehicles. The Manager or designee shall have supervision of the installation, operation, maintenance, regulation and use of such meters, and shall have charge of the collection of coins deposited in the meters. 
(2)  Parking meters shall be installed immediately adjacent to the individual parking places designated. Each parking meter shall be set in such manner as to display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall indicate the parking time established, and when operated shall indicate the duration of the period of legal parking, and on expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
(3)  The Village Manager or designee shall have markings painted or placed upon the pavement adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parking adjacent to any parking meter shall park within the lines of markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or markings or to park the vehicle in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1979, § 51.30)  
Sec. 106-97. - General parking limitations on streets and Village property; signs. 
(a)  Compliance with signs. When signs have been erected upon any street or other Village property indicating that stopping, standing or parking is prohibited during designated hours, prohibited for a longer time than is designated or that parking is by permit only, no person shall park any vehicle on such street or other Village property in violation of such signs. 
(b)  Temporary signs. For the purpose of facilitating snow removal or the cleaning of streets and roadway construction, the Village Manager or designee is authorized to erect temporary signs designating the days of the week and hours of the day and the part of street in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited during the periods and at the locations designated on the signs, as provided in this section. 
(c)  Effective days and hours. The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall apply at all times, at those times therein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(d)  Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of any ordinance imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1979, § 51.36)  
Sec. 106-98. - Diagonal and parallel parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park a vehicle diagonally to the edge of the roadway except where such diagonal parking is permitted by suitable signs and markings. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park a vehicle on any diagonal parking zone except diagonally to the edge of the roadway and within the pavement markings. 
(c)  The Village Manager is hereby authorized to establish diagonal parking zones, and to designate such zones by placing and maintaining suitable signs and markings. Such diagonal parking zones shall be established only after appropriate engineering studies and surveys have indicated that diagonal parking will not be hazardous, and that such diagonal parking shall leave at all times not less than 20 feet of available roadway for the ingress and egress of vehicles between the rows of such parked vehicles. The parking of vehicles diagonal to the roadway may be permitted only on streets at their termini beyond the last cross-street intersection and on streets which serve only as service drives. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this article. Double parking is prohibited. 
(Code 1979, § 51.31)  
Sec. 106-99. - Authority to prohibit stopping, standing or parking at hazardous or congested places. 
The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized to determine and designate, by appropriate signs, places not exceeding 150 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 51.32)  
Sec. 106-100. - Establishment of curb loading zones, no parking zones and fire lane zones. 
The Village Manager or designee, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, no parking zones and fire lanes and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating such zones and stating the hours, if applicable, during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1979, § 51.33)  
Sec. 106-101. - Establishment of prohibited parking space in front of specific buildings. 
No sign shall be erected upon the special request of the owner, agent, or lessee of any building for the specific purpose of designating a prohibited parking space in front of the entrance to such building or in front of the property on which such building is located, unless in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee such sign is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the persons and the property in and about the area. A sign may be permitted to be erected upon the special request of the owner, agent, or lessee of any building for the specific purpose of designating a curb loading zone and fire zone in front of the entrance to such building or in front of the property which such building is located if in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee such sign is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the persons and the property in and about the area. The Village Manager or designee shall not maintain any such sign after 1 year from the date of erection unless the owner, agent, or lessee shall pay the fee set forth in Section 46-223 annually for the maintenance of each such sign, and the Manager or designee shall remove such sign when the payment of yearly maintenance fees on such sign shall be 30 days in arrears. The Village Manager or designee may also remove such sign whenever public convenience or necessity warrants such removal after 15 days notice of such intended removal is given to the owner, agent, or lessee. The fees required in this section shall not apply to the erection of signs in front of any public building, or in front of any school or house of worship. No fee shall be required for any sign erected under the provisions of this section when in the opinion of the Village Manager such sign is required for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Code 1979, § 51.34)  
Sec. 106-102. - Obstructing traffic. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 15 feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic on a two-way street or less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic on a 1-way street. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle shall not operate or allow the vehicle to remain upon any street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. 
(Code 1979, § 51.35) 
Cross reference— Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic, § 70-121.  
Sec. 106-103. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a police officer or official traffic sign or signal: 
(1)  Within an intersection or alley intersection. 
(2)  On a crosswalk. 
(3)  Upon any bridge, or viaduct thereto. 
(4)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone. 
(5)  Within 30 feet of an official traffic signal or stop sign on the approaching side. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  At any curb within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, such distance to be measured from that point on the curb perpendicular to the exact location of the fire hydrant. 
Cross reference— Obstructing hydrants, § 50-50. 
(8)  At any place within 20 feet of the entrance to any fire station, and on the side of any street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance. 
(9)  Within 8 feet in a residential district and 15 feet in a commercial district from the point where the curbline running parallel to the road meets a line perpendicular to the road drawn from the edge of the driveway at its narrowest point. The prohibition of parking within eight feet of a driveway does not apply to an occupant of a detached, duplex or townhouse residence parking his or her vehicle within eight feet of a driveway used solely by the occupant of such residence in R1, R2, R3 and R4 Residential districts. 
(10)  Within any sidewalk area. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  At any place where official traffic signs have been erected prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking. 
(14)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(15)  Within any designated bus zone, where such zone is marked by signs or pavement markings. 
(16)  In any alley within 20 feet of the inner sidewalk line projected across such alley. 
(17)  Under the lowest portion of any fire escape. 
(18)  Upon a railroad track or between a railroad track and a line parallel with and 10 feet distant from the outer rail thereof. 
(19)  Upon any parkway except in case of emergency. 
(20)  Within any designated fire lane zone. 
(21)  On a road, within 15 feet of an alley, measured from the point where the curbline running parallel to the road meets a line perpendicular to the road drawn from the edge of the alley at its narrowest point. 
The Village Manager shall designate the locations of the areas mentioned in subsections (a)(3), (4), and (15) of this section by curb markings or by the erection of appropriate signs. 
(b)  Narrow roadways. Whenever, upon engineering investigation, the width of a roadway is found to be insufficient to meet requirements set forth in Section 106-102, the Village Manager or designee is authorized to erect signs giving notice of prohibition of parking. 
(c)  Alleys. 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any alley for a period of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle. 
(2)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(3)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to prevent the full use of the driveway or entrance to any abutting property. 
(d)  Parking adjacent to schools and playgrounds. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property or playground when such parking would, in the Manager or designee's opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(2)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property or playground, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(e)  Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any property owned by the Village and used for the transaction of public business where such parking is prohibited or limited by order of the custodian of the property. This section shall not apply to Village-owned vehicles or to other vehicles whose operation is useful or essential to the proper functioning of the department, board or commission occupying the property. The custodian of the property shall post signs indicating the prohibition or limitation. 
(f)  Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, in a private drive or driveway or on private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(g)  Skokie Swift parking lots. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the Skokie Swift parking lots unless the vehicle shall be parked in a designated numbered parking space and the person shall pay the sum set forth in Section 46-228 for the parking space in which the vehicle is parked through one of the approved payment options. The Skokie Swift parking lots are comprised of a South Lot, located contiguous to the CTA Swift Station and south of Dempster Street, and the North Lot, located north of Dempster Street across from the CTA Swift Station. 
(2)  Failure to make the appropriate payment shall be a violation of this Code. 
(h)  Residential permit parking lots. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a lot designated by the Mayor and Board of Trustees as a residential permit parking lot unless the vehicle bears an official sticker issued by the Village and the sticker is clearly visible in the lower lefthand corner of the rear windshield. The fee for the sticker is set forth in Section 46-227. 
(i)  Parking of customer vehicles. All customer vehicles driven to a business shall be parked on the subject site or at a remote private parking area in designated parking spaces and shall not be parked on public streets. 
(Code 1979, § 51.37; Ord. No. 03-9-C-3204, § 1, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 08-12-C-3656, § 1, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3658, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4034, § 1, 2-3-2014; Ord. No. 14-5-C-4055, § 1, 5-5-2014) 
State Law reference— Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic, § 70-121.  
Sec. 106-104. - Parking in private lots. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not entitled to do so to park a vehicle in a private parking lot, which has been established voluntarily or pursuant to the Zoning Chapter (Chapter 118), to provide off-street parking facilities for tenants or employees of the owner of lot. Public passenger vehicles shall be allowed to park in the parking lots of private properties in all mixed-use, business, and industrial zoning districts with a Village permit. 
(Code 1979, § 51.47; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3577, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
Sec. 106-105. - Parking of trucks and commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in Section 106-68, no person shall stand or park any commercial truck, tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, bus or commercial vehicle on any street in a residential, business, mixed use or industrial district for a longer period than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle, except that a driver of a bus may park such bus in a designated bus stand as provided in this article. Between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., no motor vehicle shall, for the purpose of loading or unloading, be parked, stopped, left with its engine or refrigeration idling or stored on any alley, street or parking lot adjacent to or within 150 feet of any dwelling. 
(b)  Vehicles allowed in residential, mixed-use or business zoning district. Except as provided in [subsection] 106-105(d), only the following motor vehicles shall be allowed to stand or park on any street in a residential, mixed-use or business zoning district: 
(1)  Motorcycles. 
(2)  Passenger vans with RV license plates. 
(3)  Non-commercial vehicles under 8,000 pounds with passenger or Class B license plates. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles. For the purpose of this section, those factors that determine a commercial vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  More than single rear wheels. 
(2)  Signs, advertisements, business identifications or business license plates. 
(3)  Attached auxiliary equipment on the outside of the vehicle including, but not limited to trailers, plows, equipment racks or roof racks containing ladders or other construction equipment or materials or open storage boxes or lockers. 
(4)  Any debris, construction materials or equipment intended for commercial or business use in the open or uncovered bed of the vehicle . 
(5)  Any trailer of any size, whether enclosed or unenclosed, even if empty. 
(d)  Time limit. No person shall stand or park any commercial truck, tractor, semi-trailer, trailer bus, public passenger vehicle, commercial vehicle or any vehicle as defined in Section 106-106 on any street in the Village except for such time as is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle and as long as the vehicle is attended by its driver. Notwithstanding the forgoing sentence, commercial vehicle parking, including, but not limited to, tractor trailer and semi-trailers, is allowed in legally authorized off-street parking spaces or areas in M1, M2, and M3 industrial districts with the express permission of the property owner and as otherwise complies with all Village codes. 
(e)  Enforcement. Any truck, tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, bus, commercial vehicle or any vehicle as defined in Section 106-106 parked in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which may be abated by any police officer by ticketing and/or removing such vehicle to the Village vehicle pound or to any authorized garage or otherwise securing the vehicle for further investigation and upon presentation of reasonable cause, obtain a search warrant or upon risk of immediate harm to persons or property, open the vehicle to inspect the vehicle. 
(f)  Storage of vehicles on street. No person shall store any truck, tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, bus, commercial vehicle or any vehicle as defined in Section 106-106 on any street in an industrial zoning district. 
(Code 1979, § 51.38; Ord. No. 02-5-C-3089, § 1, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 07-8-C-3539, § 2, 8-20-2007; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 18-4-C-4372, § 1, 4-2-2018)  
Sec. 106-106. - Parking of boats, boat trailers and recreational vehicles. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, a recreational vehicle is a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. A recreational vehicle shall include the following: travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, camping trailer, and any other recreational vehicle or recreational trailer bearing a recreational license plate, i.e., "RV," "RT," or "TA." 
(b)  No boat, boat trailer, or recreational vehicle shall be permitted to park, stand or load on any street or alley in any residential, business or industrial district except with the prior written approval by the Chief of Police or designee. This approval shall be granted for loading or unloading purposes only and shall specify the date and time of its applicability. This prohibition shall not apply to stock vans bearing "RV" or passenger license plates which have not been modified in such a manner as to increase their length, width or height. 
(c)  Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance, which may be abated by any police officer by removing such vehicle to the Village vehicle pound or to any authorized garage. 
(Code 1979, § 51.441; Ord. No. 18-4-C-4372, § 1, 4-2-2018)  
Sec. 106-107. - Parking restrictions after snowfall. 
(a)  Restrictions. Whenever there is an accumulation of 2 inches or more of snow as determined by the Village Manager or designee, the following alternate side street parking restrictions shall apply on all roadways within the Village: 
(1)  On even-numbered days of the month, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., motor vehicles shall only be parked on the side of the street bearing even-numbered addresses. 
(2)  On odd-numbered days of the month, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., motor vehicles shall only be parked on the side of the street bearing odd-numbered addresses. 
(b)  Exempt roadways. The following streets are exempted from the provisions of this section on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays: 
Birchwood Avenue, 4600 block. 
Bronx Avenue, 8800, 8900, 9000 and 9100 blocks. 
Carol Street, 4800, 4900 and 5000 blocks (to terminal). 
Central Park Avenue, 8000 and 8100 blocks. 
Cleveland Street, 3300, 3400, 4600 and 4700 blocks. 
Conrad Street, 4800 and 4900 blocks (to terminal). 
Crain Street, 4800, 4900 and 5000 blocks (to terminal). 
Davis Street, 4600, 4700, 4800, 4900, 5000 and 5100 blocks. 
Dobson Street, 4700 block. 
Elm Street, 4800 block. 
Enfield Avenue, 4800, 4900, 5000 and 5100 blocks (to terminal). 
Greenleaf Avenue, 4800 block. 
Greenwood Avenue, 4800, 4900, 5000 and 5100 blocks (to terminal). 
Grove Street, 4700, 4800, 4900, 5000 and 5100 blocks (to terminal). 
Hull Street, 4800 and 4900 blocks. 
Jarvis Street, 3800 and 3900 blocks. 
Karlov Avenue, 7900 block. 
Keating Avenue, 8000, 8100, 8200 to 8350 and 9000, 9100 and 9200 blocks. 
Kedvale Avenue, 7900 block. 
Keeney Avenue, 4600 and 4700 blocks. 
Kilpatrick Avenue, 8000, 8100, 8200, 8300, 9000, 9100 and 9200 blocks. 
Kimball Avenue, 8300 block. 
Kirk Street, 4800 and 4900 blocks. 
Knox Avenue, 7600, 8000, 8100, 8200 and 8300 blocks. 
LaCrosse Avenue, 7900, 8800, 8900, 9000 and 9100 blocks. 
Lamon Avenue, 7800, 7900, 8800, 8900, 9000 and 9100 blocks. 
Lavergne Avenue, 8800, 8900, 9000, 9100, 9200, 9300, 9400 and 9500 blocks. 
Lawler Avenue, 9100, 9200, 9300, 9400 and 9500 blocks. 
Lee Street, 4800 block. 
Long Avenue, 7800, 7900, 8000, 8100 and 8200 blocks. 
Louise Street, 4800 and 4900 blocks. 
Madison Street, 4600 and 4700 blocks. 
Monticello Avenue, 8000 and 8100 blocks. 
Mulford Street, 4800, 4900, 5400 and 5500 blocks. 
Niles Avenue, 7750, 7800 and 7900 blocks. 
Ridgeway Avenue, 8000 and 8100 blocks. 
St. Louis Avenue, 8300, 8600 and 8700 blocks. 
Suffield Terrace, 5000 block. 
Trumbull Avenue, 8600 and 8700 blocks. 
Washington Street, 4600 and 4700 blocks. 
Wright Terrace, 4800 block. 
(c)  State and County roadways, for which jurisdiction and snow removal responsibility remains with the respective governmental entity, are exempt from the provisions of Section 106-107 at all times. The Village Manager shall promulgate rules and regulations for parking of motor vehicles on exempt roadways. Those State and County roadways, for which jurisdiction and snow removal responsibility has been transferred to and accepted by the Village of Skokie remain subject to this Section 106-107. 
(d)  Applicability of parking regulations during snow removal operations. During snow removal operations when there is an accumulation of 2 inches or more of snow, all parking restrictions in the Village shall be suspended except for the following: 
(1)  Posted "No Parking Here To Corner." 
(2)  Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant (Section 106-103(a)(7)). 
(3)  Parking at any place where the standing of any vehicle will prevent the full use of any driveway (Section 106-103(a)(9)). 
(4)  Parking within a designated bus loading zone (Sections 106-107(d) and 106-103(a)(15)). 
(5)  Parking provisions for disabled persons (Section 106-110). 
(6)  Parking on all roadways under the jurisdiction of the State and the County. 
(7)  Posted "No Stopping, Standing, or Parking" (Sections 106-97 and 106-103(a)(13)). 
(8)  Parking not to obstruct traffic (Section 106-102). 
(e)  Towing of vehicles. The Village Manager or designee shall have authority to tow any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section and to collect towing fees from the owner of such a vehicle. 
(Code 1979, § 51.40; Ord. No. 05-12-C-3404, § 1, 12-19-2005)  
Sec. 106-108. - Parking for loading or unloading; use of loading zones and bus stands. 
(a)  Parking in passenger curb loading zone. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone or prohibited parking space during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone or prohibited parking space are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed 3 minutes. 
(b)  Backing vehicle to curb for purpose of loading or unloading. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to issue special permits to allow the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permit may be issued to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant such person the privileges as therein stated and authorized therein, provided that such permit shall be either in the possession of the operator or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(c)  Parking in truck loading zone. 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a truck loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(d)  Parking in bus stand. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus zone, bus stand or bus terminal when any such stop or stand has been officially designated by appropriate signs, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for purposes of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1979, § 51.41)  
Sec. 106-109. - Parking meters. 
(a)  Parking meter zones. The operator of a vehicle shall not park such vehicle in a parking meter zone as established by order of the Board of Trustees except as provided in this section. The Board of Trustees shall by order designate the hours of the day and the days of the year when parking in a parking meter zone may be permitted without compliance with the provisions of this section. Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply. 
(b)  Establishment of time limits and parking fees. Time limitations for parking in parking meter zones shall be established from time to time by the Board of Trustees. Parking fees in parking meter zones shall be as established by the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  Overtime parking; posting of time limits. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle, having placed a parking meter in operation, to park such vehicle in such parking zone for a period of time longer than is designated on the meter for the value of the coin or coins deposited in such meter. 
(2)  Stickers shall be affixed to each meter indicating that parking in a metered space for longer than the time specified on the meter shall be a violation of this Code. 
(d)  Deposit of coin. When any vehicle shall be parked in any parking meter zone, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin of the United States in such parking meter, of the denomination indicated, and put such meter in operation. Failure to deposit such coin and put the meter in operation shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(e)  Tampering with meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(f)  Use of slugs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into the coin receptacle of any parking meter, any slug, button or other object, or to manipulate or operate, or to attempt to manipulate or operate, in any manner whatever, any parking meter or any mechanism or device connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to park in a parking meter zone without paying therefor. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into the coin receptacle of any parking meter, any slug, button, wire hook, or other implement or substance with the intent to obtain from such coin receptacle any object theretofore deposited. 
(Code 1979, § 51.42)  
Sec. 106-110. - Permit parking in residential areas. 
(a)  Establishment of restrictions; posting of signs. The Village Manager or designee is authorized, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, to determine and designate zoned permit residential parking restrictions, and the Manager or designee shall erect and maintain appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Parking permit. Any resident on a street designated in a zoned permit residential parking area may obtain a street parking permit for a passenger motor vehicle which is owned by such resident and registered from the address of the resident's dwelling unit or for such a vehicle which is leased to the resident at this address or leased to the resident's employer and assigned to the resident. The fee for the permit is set forth in Section 46-226. The permit shall be valid only during the calendar year in which it is issued. 
(c)  Visitor passes. 
(1)  Any resident on a street included in the program may obtain visitor passes for passenger motor vehicles for visitor parking in a zoned residential permit area at the cost set forth in Section 46-226. The purchase of the visitor passes shall be limited to adults with vehicle registration or proof of residence on a street included in the program. Each visitor pass shall only be valid for the date specified on the pass. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resell the visitor passes. Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(d)  Applicability of parking time restrictions. The posted time limitation on any street in the area shall not pertain to an automobile displaying a current permit for the applicable zone, if the sign has a supplemental plate indicating that vehicles bearing a Zone 1, Zone 2, Zone 4, Zone 5, or Zone 6, whichever is applicable, permit are exempt. All other parking regulations shall be complied with. 
(Code 1979, § 51.43; Ord. No. 01-5-C-2981, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 12-4-C-3894, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 18-6-C-4381, § 1, 6-4-2018)  
Sec. 106-111. - Reserved parking for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Purpose; applicability. It is the intention of this section to restrict designated parking places on municipally owned or operated properties, on residential streets and on private parking lots for the exclusive use of persons with disabilities as defined in this section. 
(b)  Reserved parking on municipal properties. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee shall designate parking places on municipally owned or operated properties for the exclusive use of persons with a disability. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a space reserved for the use of persons with disabilities unless the motor vehicle displays an authorized disability parking decal and the authorized holder of the decal enters or exits the vehicle at the time the parking space reserved for persons with disabilities is being utilized. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle parked on any such space which does not contain a visible indication of its official designation by a unit of government for the usage of persons with a disability shall be presumed to be parked in violation of this section. 
(c)  Reserved parking on residential streets. 
(1)  The provisions for reserved residential parking on streets shall not be applicable to any household or any person therein if any member thereof owns, rents or has regular use of private driveways, carports or garages that give convenient access to the dwelling of the person with a disability. 
(2)  Any resident licensed driver of the Village who has obtained official designation of their vehicle based on permanent disability may apply for a determination by the Village Manager or designee that such person is a person with a disability, or any member of such person's household may similarly make an application if their vehicle constitutes the primary mode of transportation for the person with a disability. Upon determination by the Village Manager or designee that this permanent disability exists and upon payment of the fee set forth in Section 46-224 for installation, the Village Manager shall install 2 signs, a maximum of 25 feet apart, on a residential street at the point determined to be most accessible to the dwelling of the person with a disability, which will designate the space between the signs as reserved for the sole use of the person with a disability. The application shall contain such information as the Village Manager may require to make a determination. 
(3)  The number of reserved disability parking spaces on any 1 residential street shall not exceed 25 percent of the available parking spaces on each side of a block. 
(4)  Reserved residential parking will be renewed each year by reapplication and by payment of an annual renewal fee set forth in Section 46-224, due on the anniversary of installation. If a renewal is not requested, or the annual fee not paid 31 days after it becomes due, the signs will be removed. 
(5)  Any vehicle parked in a reserved residential parking space as described in Subsection c of the Section, shall be considered to be illegally parked unless it belongs to the person for whom the space is reserved. 
(d)  Reserved parking on private lots. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a space serving the general public if the space has been reserved by signs for the use of persons with disabilities, unless the motor vehicle displays an authorized disability parking decal and the authorized holder of the decal enters or exits the vehicle at the time the parking space reserved for persons with disabilities is being utilized. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle parked on any such space which does not contain a visible indication of its official designation by a unit of government for the usage of persons with disability shall be presumed to be parked in violation of this section. 
(e)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessible parking means parking spaces located closest to the nearest entrance using a convenient route. 
Official designation means any motor vehicle which bears registration plates, placards, decals, or similar designation issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616 or 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609. 
Person with disabilities means a natural person who, as determined by a licensed physician, by a physician assistant who has been delegated the authority to make this determination by his or her supervising physician, or by an advanced practice nurse who has written collaborative agreement with a collaborating physician that authorizes the advanced practice nurse to make this determination: 
(1)  Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive device; 
(2)  Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that the person's forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for 1 second, when measured by spirometry, is less than 1 liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest; 
(3)  Uses portable oxygen; 
(4)  Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association; 
(5)  Is severely limited in the person's ability to walk due to an arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition; 
(6)  Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of one of the above 5 conditions; or 
(7)  Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand or arm. 
Resident means an individual who lives at the Skokie address for a minimum of 185 days per year. 
(f)  Temporary disability parking identification card. Any resident of the Village may apply for a determination by the Village Manager or designee that such person possesses a disability, as defined in paragraph (e) of this Section, of at least 3 months' duration, or any member of such person's household may similarly make an application if the person's vehicle constitutes the primary mode of transportation for the person with a disability. Upon determination by the Village Manager or designee that this disability exists, the Village Manager shall issue a disability parking identification card valid for no more than 90 days. A resident may apply for another card, when necessary. 
(g)  Signs and markings for spaces on private lots. Parking spaces on private lots for the exclusive use of persons with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the State of Illinois Accessibility Standards. The Village Manager shall cause to be installed the appropriate signage and place the pavement symbols for these designated disability parking spaces. The owner, agent, or lessee shall pay the fee set forth in Section 46-224 for each such sign installed, which shall include maintenance for such sign for a period of 1 year from the date of installation. The owner, agent or lessee shall also be responsible for the annual maintenance fee as set forth in Section 46-224. 
(Code 1979, § 51.44; Ord. No. 07-7-C-3520, § 2, 7-2-2007; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4033, § 1, 2-3-2014)  
Sec. 106-112. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway: 
(1)  To display such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  To grease or repair such vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  To sell merchandise from such vehicle. 
(b)  Auto repair businesses. The operator of any auto repair business shall not park or cause to be parked any vehicle serviced, to be serviced or used in conducting such business on a roadway. 
(Code 1979, § 51.45)  
Sec. 106-113. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no lights need to be displayed upon such vehicle. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1979, § 51.46)  
Sec. 106-114. - Village parking lots. 
(a)  Manner of parking. Vehicles parking in any parking lot maintained by the Village shall be parked in accordance with the painted lines upon the surface of the parking lot and in accordance with the posted signs. 
(b)  Vehicles permitted. The parking of motor vehicles in any Village parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth within the zoning districts for the specific parking lot. 
(c)  Time limit. No vehicle shall be parked in a Village parking lot for a longer period of the posted time or more than 24 hours without specific consent of the Chief of Police. 
(d)  Supervision. The Village Manager or designee shall have supervision over all the Village parking lots. 
(Code 1979, § 51.48)  
Secs. 106-115—106-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION FOR CITATIONS ISSUED PRIOR TO ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION 
 
Sec. 106-131. - Program of vehicle immobilization. 
On March 17, 2008, Village Ordinance Number 08-3-C-3605 was adopted creating an administrative adjudication system for the enforcement of violations of parking, standing, compliance and Automated Traffic Law regulations, as more fully detailed in Chapter 2, Article XII. Subsequent to the effective date of the commencement of the administrative adjudication system, vehicle immobilization for all violation notices issued pursuant to that system will be governed by Division 5 of Article III of this Chapter, and Article XII of Chapter 2. Vehicle immobilization for citations issued prior to the commencement of the administrative adjudication shall be governed by this Division 3 of Article III of this Chapter. 
The Village Manager or designee, is hereby authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization as provided in this division. This program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle upon a public way, public property, or private property with consent of the property owners, by placement of a wheel restraint device, in such a manner as to prevent its operation, or if the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of the Chapter 106 of the Village Code concerning obstruction of traffic, access or egress from driveways, alleys, firelanes, hydrants or station, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or a hazard, the Village Manager or designee may cause the eligible vehicle to be towed by the Village or an authorized agent thereof, to a Village vehicle pound or an approved vehicle storage facility pursuant to Section 106-93 et seq., of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-C-9-3205, § 1, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 3, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-132. - Definitions. 
Unless the context shall otherwise require, terms used in this Division shall have the meaning as set forth below. Any term in this division not defined in this section, shall then have the meaning as defined in the Skokie Village Code or the Zoning Ordinances of the Village of Skokie. 
(1)  State registration number shall mean license plate number issued to a vehicle by the Illinois Secretary of State, or comparable issuing body, if the vehicle is registered outside Illinois. 
(2)  Registered owner shall refer to the person(s) or entity in which the Illinois Secretary of State or comparable issuing body, if the vehicle is registered outside Illinois, has as the recorded owner of the subject vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 106-133. - Eligibility for immobilization. 
(a)  All vehicles eligible for immobilization shall be included on the immobilization eligibility list. Those vehicles eligible for the immobilization list shall include: 
1.  Any vehicle or vehicles registered to a registered owner, who has accumulated five or more parking citations on any vehicle or vehicles registered to that same owner, for which payment has not been made after the time allotted in the final notice and court dates have not been requested, shall be eligible for immobilization. 
2.  The State registration number of any vehicle(s) registered to an owner who accumulated five or more parking citations as set forth in Section 106-133(a)1, as described in 106-133(a)1 shall be included on the immobilization eligibility list. 
(b)  Notice of impending immobilization of an owner's vehicle or vehicles shall be sent to the registered owner by first class mail to the address of the registered owner as recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State, or in the case of a vehicle bearing a registration of a state other than Illinois, the address of the registered owner recorded in that state's registry of motor vehicles. Said notice shall be sent at least thirty (30) days prior to placing the State registration number of the vehicle or vehicles described in 106-133(a) on the immobilization eligibility list. Prior to sending Notice of impending immobilization, the Village shall verify with the Illinois Secretary of State or a comparable keeper of records in another state, the ownership of vehicles of the of the registered owner that was issued the citations. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-C-9-3205, § 2, 9-15-2003)  
Sec. 106-134. - Notice of impending immobilization, pre-immobilization hearings. 
(a)  Notice of impending immobilization. Notice as required by 106-133(b), to a registered owner, as described in 106-133(a), shall advise them that any vehicle registered to them is eligible for immobilization. Said notice shall also include the State registration numbers of the vehicle or vehicles to which the outstanding citations were issued, the nature of the ordinance(s) violated, the section number(s) and the issue dates of the outstanding citations. The notice shall also advise that the registered owner may challenge the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by requesting, in writing, a pre-immobilization hearing. 
(b)  Pre-immobilization hearings. The registered owner of a vehicle, who has received notice of impending immobilization or whose vehicle's registration number has been placed on the immobilization list, shall have the right to a pre-immobilization hearing to determine whether the vehicle was properly included on an immobilization list. The registered owner may file a written demand for hearing, on a form provided by the Village. The Village Manager or designee shall conduct a pre-immobilization hearing, within two business days of the receipt of the demand for a pre-immobilization hearing, unless otherwise mutually agreed by 
parties. A sole issued to be determined in a pre-immobilization hearing provided by this section is whether the registered owner was liable for the citations outlined in the notice of impending immobilization. 
The registered owner may appear in person and may submit evidence, which tends to conclusively disprove liability, such as the following: 
(1)  That the person was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued; 
(2)  That the amount owed for the violations cited in the notice of impending immobilization were paid. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-C-9-3205, § 3, 9-15-2003)  
Sec. 106-135. - Post immobilization. 
(a)  Notice. Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be to be affixed on the vehicle. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. This notice shall include information specifying the procedure to secure the release of the vehicle from the immobilizing restraint. Additionally, the notice will include on how the registered owner can pursue a post immobilization hearing pursuant to this Section 106-135(c) of this Code. 
(b)  Impoundment. Unless the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilization restraint has not been released pursuant to Section 106-135(c), within (72) hours of its placement, the restraint may be released and the vehicle towed and impounded pursuant to Section 106-93 et seq. 
(c)  Vehicle release. The registered owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle by: 
(1)  Paying the immobilization fee, as specified in section 106-138 and any towing and storage fees, if applicable, and 
(2)  Taking one the of the following actions: 
a.  Paying the entire amount owed as specified in the notice of impending vehicle immobilization; or 
b.  Requesting a court date for all outstanding citations specified in the notice of impending vehicle immobilization and depositing bond in the amount of 100% of the total amount owed as specified in the notice of impending vehicle immobilization. The bond shall be in the form of U.S. currency, money order, cashier's check or certified check. No personal checks shall be accepted; or 
c.  File a written demand for a post immobilization hearing as provided for in Section 106-136 of this Code and depositing a bond in the amount of 100% of the total amount owed as specified in the notice of impending vehicle immobilization. The bond shall be in the form of U.S. currency, money order or certified check. No personal checks shall be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 106-136. - Post immobilization hearing. 
The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a post immobilization hearing. The owner may file a written demand for hearing, on a form provided by the Village, within seven days of the immobilization. A post immobilization hearing shall be conducted by the Village Manager or designee, within two business days of the receipt of a written demand for hearing unless other wise mutually agreed by the parties. Failure to request a hearing within the specified period of time or attend a scheduled post immobilization hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of a violator's failure to appear, any amount deposited pursuant to subsection 106-135(c)(2)c., of the Village Code, shall be forfeited to the Village and there shall be no right for refund. The sole issued to be determined in a post immobilization hearing provided by this section is whether the owner was liable for the citations outlined in the notice of impending immobilization. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 106-137. - Removal of immobilized vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilizing device without the approval of the Village Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 106-138. - Immobilization fee. 
The fee for immobilization shall be as set forth in Section 46-230. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 106-139. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates or aids and abets in a violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002)  
Sec. 106-140. - Rules, regulations and agreements. 
(a)  The Village Manager or designee is authorized to establish rules, regulations, procedures and forms for the implementation of this Section 106-131 et seq. 
(b)  The Village Manager is hereby authorized to enter into agreements, subject to the approval of the Corporation Counsel, with property owners in the Village of Skokie, to enable the Skokie Police Department to enter on to the property owner's private property for purpose of immobilizing eligible vehicles under this division. 
(Ord. No. 02-6-C-3101, § 2, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 03-C-9-3205, § 4, 9-15-2003)  
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 106-141. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases used in this Division shall have the meaning as set forth below. 
(a)  Business day means any day in which the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Skokie is open to the public for a minimum of seven hours. 
(b)  Motor vehicle or vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters, and shall include every vehicle defined by Section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(c)  Owner means a person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. Any person may, with the owner's express permission, perform any act that the owner is authorized to perform. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-142. - Acts subjecting vehicle to seizure and impoundment; administrative and public safety fee. 
(a)  A motor vehicle that is driven, used, or operated, by a person in connection with any of the following violations shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the Village: 
(1)  Driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound(s), or a combination thereof, as prohibited in Section 5/11-501(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a) or as prohibited by a similar law in another state; 
(2)  Driving a motor vehicle while driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, regardless of whether the revocation or suspension was of an Illinois driver's license or the driver's license from another state; 
(3)  Driving a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a valid driver's license; or 
(4)  Driving a motor vehicle when the driver's license has been expired for more than one year, or the driver's permit, restricted driver's permit or other driving privilege has expired, regardless of whether such expired license, permit, restricted driver's permit or other driving privilege was previously issued by the State of Illinois or another state. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to paragraphs (a)(3) and (4), above, if the driver was driving pursuant to certain exceptions to the licensing requirements, as allowed in Section 5/6-102 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(c)  In the event a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this Division, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative and public safety fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), in order to cover the costs incurred by the Village in ensuring that the motor vehicle is properly removed from the scene of the incident and the vehicle, and personal property enclosed therein, is secured and safeguarded. All owners of a motor vehicle shall be jointly and severally liable for the administrative and public safety fee. 
(d)  Upon demonstration that it has the right to possession of a seized motor vehicle, a lessor, whether a rental agency or otherwise, or lien holder of a motor vehicle shall have the right to pay the administrative and public safety fee and be issued a release from the Skokie Police Department authorizing it to gain possession of the vehicle. 
(e)  The administrative and public safety fee is separate and distinct from, and in addition to, any fees or costs owed by the owner to a private towing company for the towing and storage of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-143. - Seizure and impoundment procedures. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to Section 106-142, above, the police officer shall order that the vehicle be seized and impounded. The Skokie Police Department shall utilize the services of a private towing company. If towed, the motor vehicle must be impounded and stored in a secure facility owned, leased, or operated by the private towing company. 
(b)  The police officer shall inform the person being arrested for the offenses identified in Section 106-142, or any owner of the vehicle at the scene of the arrest, of the circumstances, rights and obligations related to the: 
(1)  Seizure and impoundment of the vehicle; 
(2)  Owner's right to retrieve the vehicle by payment of the administrative and public safety fee to the Village and towing and storage fees and costs to the private towing company; and 
(3)  Availability of posting a bond in the full amount of the administrative and public safety fee and to request a hearing before an administrative hearing officer to determine whether or not the seizure and impoundment was proper. 
(c)  The police officer shall allow for another properly licensed and otherwise fit person to drive the vehicle, if insured, from the scene of the arrest if that person is the owner, or is authorized by the owner, and such person is present at the scene prior to the arrival of the tow truck. The police officer shall not be under any duty or requirement to: 
(1)  Inform the person being arrested that he or she may contact another person to remove the vehicle from the scene of the incident; 
(2)  Allow a driver being arrested to make or send a telephone call, electronic message or other attempt to contact a person to drive the vehicle from the scene of the arrest; and 
(3)  Initiate such call, message or contact another person on behalf of the arrestee. 
(d)  Upon the arrest of a driver for violations referenced in Section 106-142 above, the vehicle shall not be removed from the scene by any owner, or another person authorized by the owner, if the police officer determines that the vehicle should not be released due to the applicability of Section 106-149, below. 
(e)  The imposition of the administrative and public safety fee shall not apply if the vehicle driven by a person arrested in connection with the offenses identified in Section 106-142, was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-144. - Release of motor vehicle. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle that is seized and impounded pursuant to this Division may regain possession of the vehicle by first: (i) paying to the Village the $500 administrative and public safety fee; or (ii) posting a bond in the full amount of the fee, pursuant to Section 106-145. The fee or bond shall be paid at the Skokie Police Department. The fee or bond shall only be paid with cash, credit card, cashier's or certified check, or other type of payment acceptable to the Village that has the legal effect of being equivalent to the aforementioned methods of payment. 
(b)  Upon payment of the fee or bond, the Department shall provide the owner with a document authorizing the release of the vehicle from the private towing company. No release shall be granted unless proof of insurance is provided. The owner may present the Department-issued document authorizing release to the private towing company, and upon payment of any fees and costs to company for towing and storage of the vehicle, shall regain possession of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-145. - Right to a hearing; posting of bond. 
(a)  Any owner, or lien holder or lessor of record, shall have the right to a hearing before an administrative hearing officer to contest whether the seizure and impoundment was proper. All requests for a hearing shall be made in person at the Skokie Police Department. If a request for a hearing is made, a bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) must be posted with the Skokie Police Department and it shall be held by the Village until the administrative hearing officer makes a final decision. 
(b)  Administrative hearings shall be held at the time and date as the Village may schedule for the conduct of business by the administrative hearing officer. If a request for a hearing is not made at the time the administrative and public safety fee is paid or the bond is posted, the owner shall be deemed to have waived the right to an administrative hearing. No party shall have a right to a hearing unless requested within 10 days of the date of the notice referenced in Section 106-146. 
(c)  Administrative hearing procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present testimony and evidence at the administrative hearing. Continuances of the administrative hearing date must be made in person before the administrative hearing officer and may be granted upon a showing of good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible, subject to the discretion of the administrative hearing officer. 
(2)  The Village shall not be required to produce any police officer or other witness at the administrative hearing. The Village may file any and all documents, records or other tangible items prepared or maintained in the normal course of business that it desires the administrative hearing officer to consider at the hearing. The filing of the documents, records or items shall be accompanied by a certification from a Skokie police officer of a rank of Commander or higher, certifying that the records, documents or items were prepared or maintained in the normal course of business. Any records, documents or items filed and certified, shall be admitted as evidence at the hearing, and the facts and contents contained therein shall be presumed true and correct without the need for any additional foundation. 
(3)  If an owner appears at the administrative hearing and the administrative hearing officer determines that the seizure and impoundment was proper, the case will be disposed of at that time. If the owner does not appear at the hearing, then the administrative hearing officer, upon a review of the file, shall make a determination on the question of whether the seizure and impoundment was proper. 
(4)  If the administrative hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the seizure and impoundment was proper, the administrative hearing officer shall enter a final order finding the owner of the vehicle liable to the Village for the administrative and public safety fee in the amount of $500.00. In the event a bond was posted, it will be retained by the Village as final payment of the administrative and public safety fee. If the administrative hearing officer finds that the seizure and impoundment was not proper, the bond will be returned to the owner and the Department shall issue a release for the vehicle, if still impounded. A finding that the seizure and impoundment was not proper shall not have any bearing on whether the owner is obligated to pay the towing and storage fees and costs, and the owner must pay all fees and costs owed to the private towing company. 
(5)  The decision by the administrative hearing officer on the issue of whether the seizure and impoundment was proper, shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. (2006), as now or hereafter amended. A party must exhaust its administrative remedies prior to seeking judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 106-146. - Notice of seizure and impoundment. 
(a)  The Village shall, within five (5) business days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this Division, send a written notice by first class mail to all owners of the vehicle. Copies of the notice shall be sent to any lien holder or lessee or lessor, if determinable using reasonable efforts. 
(1)  The notice shall: (i) state that the motor vehicle was seized and impounded; (ii) contain all pertinent facts relating to the date, time and reason for the seizure and impoundment; (iii) specify the procedures by which possession of the vehicle may be regained; (iv) state that the failure to regain possession of the vehicle, pursuant to the provisions of this Division, shall result in the vehicle being disposed of pursuant to law; and (v) explain the right to request an administrative hearing. In the event an administrative hearing was requested, then the notice shall provide the date and time of the scheduled hearing and the identity of the person requesting the hearing. 
(2)  The notice shall not be mailed if: (i) the administrative and public safety fee has been paid, and possession of the vehicle has been regained by an owner, within five (5) business days after the vehicle is seized and impounded; or (ii) possession of the vehicle may not be regained due to the vehicle being retained by the Skokie Police Department pursuant to the provisions of Section 106-149, below. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 106-147. - Collection of unpaid administrative and public safety fee. 
If an administrative and public safety fee is imposed pursuant to this Division, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village of Skokie. The Village may collect on the debt using all means permitted by law, including, without limitation, obtaining a judgment on the debt and enforcing such judgment against the owner, or disposing of the vehicle as unclaimed vehicle. 
The Village may commence legal proceedings to collect an unpaid administrative and public safety fee, or take actions to dispose of the impounded vehicle: (i) 35 days after a determination was made at the requested administrative hearing that the seizure and impoundment was proper, and no petition was filed in the Circuit Court seeking judicial review of the administrative hearing officer's determination; (ii) 30 days after a final order is rendered by a judge of the Circuit Court whenever a petition seeking judicial review was filed by a party; or (iii) 15 days after the notice referenced in Section 106-146, above, was mailed and no administrative hearing was requested. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3667, § 1, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 106-148. - Lien holders. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, no owner, lien holder, lessor, or other person, shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this Division, until the administrative and public safety fee has been paid or a bond is posted. However, whenever a lien holder against the impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, then possession of the vehicle shall be given to lien holder without the requirement that the administrative and public safety fee be paid or bond posted, conditioned upon the lien holder agreeing in writing to pay to the Village the fee from the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-149. - Release of motor vehicle not allowed. 
The provisions of this Division authorizing an owner, or other party, to regain possession of a motor vehicle are not applicable when vehicle or asset forfeiture proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws or Article 36 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961. In such case, the Village shall not release, or dispose of, the vehicle to any person, except as consistent with those proceedings. 
In the event the Skokie Police Department determines that the vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this Division should not be released to its owner or other persons, or disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle, due to the need to retain the vehicle as part of a continuing criminal investigation, or as evidence in a crime, then the Village shall notify the owner that the vehicle will be retained and not released except as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 106-150. - Multiple owners. 
Whenever in this Division the word owner is used, it shall apply to all owners. This Division presumes that all owners have equal rights to a seized and impounded vehicle. In instances of multiple owners of a vehicle, the Village shall not have any duty or responsibility to inquire or determine whether all owners concur with, or object to, any action taken, or omissions, by any one owner in relation to the vehicle seized and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 08-2-C-3593, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
DIVISION 5. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION PURSUANT TO ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, adopted Apr. 7, 2008, supplied provisions to be added to the Code as §§ 106-151—106-159. In order to maintain the existing numbering system and ease of use of the Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 106-150.1—106-150.9 to read as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 106-150.1. - Program of vehicle immobilization. 
Chapter 2, Article XII, establishes procedures and processes for the administrative adjudication for violations of vehicular parking, standing, compliance and Automated Traffic Law regulations (hereinafter referred to as "Administrative Adjudication System"). This Division 5 creates a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of facilitating enforcement of those regulations. This Division authorizes the immobilization of eligible vehicles for unpaid final determinations of violation liability. 
The Traffic Compliance Administrator, as defined by Section 2-1092, or designee, in conjunction with the Skokie Chief of Police, or designee, are hereby authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization as provided in this Division. This program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle upon a public way, public property, or private property with consent of the property owners, by placement of a wheel restraint device in such a manner as to prevent the vehicle's operation. 
In the event an eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of Chapter 106 concerning obstruction of traffic, access or egress from driveways, alleys, fire lanes, hydrants or station, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or a hazard, the Chief of Police or designee may cause the eligible vehicle to be towed, without the need to first immobilize the vehicle or provide notice to the owner prior to such towing, by the Village or an authorized contractor thereof, to a Village vehicle pound or an approved vehicle storage facility pursuant to Section 106-93 et seq., of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-150.2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context shall otherwise require, words, terms and phrases used in this Division shall have their meaning as defined or stated in Chapter 2, Article XII. The definitions of the words, and the descriptions of the procedures, contained in Chapter 2, Article XII, are hereby incorporated into this Division as if stated in full. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-150.3. - Eligibility for immobilization. 
(a)  All vehicles eligible for immobilization shall be included on the immobilization eligibility list prepared by the Administrator. In the event an owner or vehicle accumulates five or more unpaid final determinations of liability, then all vehicles which are registered to that owner, or to the owner or owners of that vehicle, shall be eligible for immobilization. Specifically, those vehicles eligible for immobilization shall include: 
(1)  Any vehicle or vehicles registered to an owner, subsequent to the owner accumulating five or more unpaid final determinations of violation liability for parking, standing, compliance or Automated Traffic Law violations rendered pursuant to the Administrative Adjudication System on any vehicle or vehicles currently or previously registered to that same owner shall be eligible for immobilization. 
(2)  The State registration number or vehicle identification number of any vehicle registered to an owner who accumulated five or more unpaid final determinations of violation liability for parking, standing, compliance or Automated Traffic Law violations pursuant to the Administrative Adjudication System shall be eligible for immobilization. 
(3)  The name and address of any person that has accumulated five or more unpaid final determinations of violation liability for parking, standing, compliance or Automated Traffic Law violations pursuant to the Administrative Adjudication System shall be eligible for immobilization. 
(b)  In order to determine whether a subject vehicle is eligible for immobilization under this Division, the Administrator shall take into consideration and total all unpaid final determinations of violation liability: (i) in which the subject vehicle was the subject of the violation; (ii) whereby the owner of the subject vehicle has outstanding unpaid final determinations issued against the owner regardless of the identity or description of the vehicle for which the violation notice was issued against; and (iii) in relation to other vehicles which are, or were at the time of the violation notice, registered to the same owner of the subject vehicle. Each and every owner of a vehicle is deemed to be responsible for every violation notice issued in relation to that vehicle, regardless of whether a specific owner was named as a Respondent in the violation notice, the Late Notice, the Hearing Officer's Determination, or the Notice of Final Determination of Violation Liability. 
(c)  Notice of Impending Immobilization of an owner's vehicle or vehicles shall be sent by the Administrator or designee to the owner by first class mail to the address of the owner as recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State, or in the case of a vehicle bearing a registration of a state other than Illinois, the address of the owner recorded in that state's registry of motor vehicles. The Notice shall be sent at least thirty (30) days prior to placing the vehicle, the owner, other vehicles registered to the owner, or the State registration number or vehicle identification number of the vehicle or vehicles on the immobilization eligibility list. Prior to sending Notice of Impending Immobilization, the Administrator or designee may verify with the Illinois Secretary of State, or a comparable keeper of records in another state, the address of record of the owner, however, the Administrator or designee has no duty to so verify such address due to the requirement placed on the owner in Chapter 2, Article XII, to keep the Administrator informed of the owner's current address. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-150.4. - Notice of impending immobilization, pre-immobilization hearings. 
(a)  The Notice required by 106-150.3(c) shall advise the owner that any vehicle registered to that owner is eligible for immobilization. The Notice shall also include the State registration numbers of the vehicle or vehicles to which the unpaid final determinations of violation liability were issued, the identification and nature of the regulations violated, and the issue dates of the violation notices. The Notice shall inform the owner that a challenge to the validity of the owner's inclusion on the immobilization list may be made to the Skokie Chief of Police or a designee by requesting, in writing, a pre-immobilization hearing. 
(b)  An owner of a vehicle who has received Notice of Impending Immobilization or whose vehicle has been placed on the immobilization list may be removed from the list by appearing at the Skokie Police Department and pay the amount owed in the Notice. The owner shall have the right to a pre-immobilization hearing to determine whether the owner or a vehicle was properly included on an immobilization list. The owner may file a written request for a hearing with the Chief of Police or designee and include a telephone number at which the person may be contacted. The Chief of Police or designee shall contact the person by telephone. A pre-immobilization hearing shall be conducted within seven business days of the receipt of the request for a pre-immobilization hearing, unless another date is mutually agreed upon by the owner and the Chief of Police or designee. The sole issue to be determined in a pre-immobilization hearing is whether the owner or a vehicle was properly included on the immobilization list. 
(c)  The owner may appear in person and may submit evidence at the pre-immobilization hearing, which would conclusively prove that the owner was not liable for the unpaid final determinations of violation liability for the parking, standing, compliance, or Automated Traffic Law violations listed in the Notice of Impending Immobilization. A person or a vehicle shall not be placed on the immobilization list if the Chief of Police or designee concludes that the number of unpaid final determinations that should not be considered would reduce the total below five unpaid final determinations, based upon the following: 
(1)  That the person was not the owner of the vehicle on the date or dates a violation notice was issued; or 
(2)  That the amount owed for a violation referenced in the Notice of Impending Immobilization was paid. 
(d)  Any vehicle eligible to be immobilized may be immobilized if payment of the amounts owed as stated in the Notice of Impending Immobilization is not made within 30 days of the date of said Notice. Subsequent to the mailing of a Notice of Impending Immobilization, no owner has the right to pay for any of the unpaid final determinations of violation liability without payment being made for all unpaid final determinations of violation liability listed in the Notice and any unpaid final determinations of violation liability that have arisen after the date of the Notice. The acceptance by a Village employee of payment for less than the full amount owed as stated in the Notice of Impending Immobilization plus amounts owed on unpaid final determinations arising subsequent to the Notice, does not impact the enforceability of the Village's right to immobilize eligible vehicles and the Village may proceed with the immobilization process. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 106-150.5. - Post-immobilization. 
(a)  Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a Notice of Immobilization shall be affixed to the vehicle. The Notice shall state that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage or damage to the immobilizing restraint device. The Notice shall include the date and time that the immobilizing restraint device was affixed to the vehicle and provide information specifying the procedure: (i) to obtain the release of the vehicle from the immobilizing restraint device; and (ii) to pursue a post-immobilization hearing, should the owner desire such a hearing. 
(b)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle from the immobilizing restraint device by: 
(1)  Paying the immobilization fee, as specified in Section 46-230 of this Code, and any towing and storage fees, if applicable, and 
(2)  Taking one of the following actions: 
(A)  Paying the entire amount owed for the unpaid final determinations as specified in the Notice of Impending Immobilization plus an amount for any unpaid final determinations that arose subsequent to date of the Notice of Impending Immobilization to the Skokie Police Department; or 
(B)  Filing a written demand for a post-immobilization hearing and depositing a bond with the Skokie Police Department in the amount of 110% of the total amount owed in clauses (1) and (2)(A) above. 
All payments and bonds shall be in the form of U.S. currency, money order or certified check. No personal checks or credit cards shall be accepted. 
(c)  In the event the immobilizing restraint device has not been released pursuant to this Section within 72 hours of its placement, the restraint may be released and the vehicle towed and impounded pursuant to Section 106-93 et seq. In the event an owner has made a request for an post-immobilization hearing within 72 hours, then the vehicle shall not be towed and impounded until such time as the owner has had the opportunity to attend the post-immobilization hearing, but in no event shall this delay in towing and impounded exceed five days beyond the date that the request for a hearing is received by the Chief of Police or designee. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-150.6. - Post-immobilization hearing. 
(a)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a post-immobilization hearing. The owner may file a written request for hearing with the Skokie Chief of Police or designee within seven days of the immobilization. The person filing the request shall include a telephone number and the Chief of Police or designees shall contact that person by telephone to schedule the hearing. 
(b)  A post-immobilization hearing shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or designee within 48 hours of the receipt of a written request unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the owner and the Chief of Police or designee. Failure to request a hearing within seven days of the immobilization or attend a scheduled post-immobilization hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(c)  In the event an owner does not appear at a post-immobilization hearing, any bond posted pursuant to subsection 106-150.5(b)(2)(A) shall be forfeited to the Village. 
(d)  The sole issue to be determined in a post-immobilization hearing is whether the inclusion of the owner or vehicle onto the immobilization list was proper. If the Chief of Police or designee concludes that a sufficient number of unpaid final determinations referenced in the Notice of Impending Immobilization should not be considered, based upon the same reasons stated in Section 106-150.4(c)(1) and (2), and the resulting number of unpaid final determinations would be reduced below a total of five unpaid final determinations, then the person's vehicle shall be released without cost and the person or vehicle shall be removed from the immobilization list. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 09-5-C-3677, § 1, 5-18-2009)  
Sec. 106-150.7. - Improper tampering with an immobilized vehicle. 
It is a violation of this Code to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilizing device. It is a violation of this Code to tamper with, remove, destroy or damage any immobilizing restraint device used in the immobilization of a vehicle. Any person that withholds an immobilizing restraint device from the Village or destroys or damages said device shall be liable for the cost to replace or repair the device. In addition to paying costs associated with the replacement or repair of the device, the person violating this Section shall be subject to a fine in the maximum amount allowed by this Code. Any person aiding or abetting in a violation of this Section shall be liable to the Village for damages and subject to the fine. Any citations, tickets or violation notices written for a violation of this Section shall be assigned to the administrative adjudication hearing process established pursuant to Chapter 2, Article X, of this Code. This Section shall not apply to a contractor performing its duties pursuant to an agreement with the Village. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-150.8. - Immobilization fee. 
The fee for immobilization shall be as set forth in Section 46-230. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
Sec. 106-150.9. - Rules, regulations and agreements. 
(a)  The Chief of Police or designee, and the Administrator or designee, are authorized to establish rules, regulations, procedures and forms for the implementation of this Division. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized to enter into agreements, subject to the approval of the Corporation Counsel, with property owners in the Village of Skokie, to enable the Skokie Police Department to enter on to the property owner's private property for purpose of immobilizing eligible vehicles under this Division. 
(Ord. No. 08-4-C-3608, § 4, 4-7-2008)  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicle license fees, § 46-221. 
State Law reference— Authority to license and tax motor vehicles of residents, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-4. 
 
Sec. 106-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Moped means a motor vehicle capable of being powered by either the muscular power of man or as a motor vehicle at the discretion of the operator. For the purpose of licensing, a moped shall be licensed as a motor bicycle or motor tricycle. 
Motor vehicle includes automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, and semi-trailers drawn by motor vehicles, traction engines, road rollers, motor bicycles, motorcycles, motorscooters, and all other vehicles drawn, towed or propelled otherwise than by muscular power, excluding, however, cars of electric and steam railways and other motor vehicles running only upon fixed rails or tracks. This article does not apply to or affect bicycles or tricycles or other such vehicles as are propelled exclusively by human muscular power. 
Newly acquired vehicle includes vehicles acquired from date of acquisition up to and including 60 days thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 52.01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-152. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation residing within the Village, or maintaining and conducting such person's or its principal place of business in the Village, to own, use or cause to be used any motor vehicle unless such vehicle is licensed as provided in this article. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. The Corporation Counsel may file a civil action to recover any penalty or fine against any such person; provided, however, that the filing of such civil action shall preclude incarceration or imprisonment. 
(Code 1979, § 52.02)  
Sec. 106-153. - Application. 
Any person, firm or corporation requiring a license for any vehicle shall make application to the Village Manager or designee upon a form provided by the Village setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle for which the license is desired. Upon making application as provided in this section, and upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee specified to the Village Manager or designee, a license shall be issued authorizing the use of such vehicle within the Village until the expiration date of such license. The license fee shall be as set forth in Section 46-221. 
(Code 1979, § 52.03)  
Sec. 106-154. - State license required. 
No motor vehicle shall be licensed by the Village unless the vehicle shall have been licensed by the Illinois Secretary of State under 625 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 52.04)  
Sec. 106-155. - Numbering; reserved numbers. 
All vehicle licenses issued by the Village shall begin with the numerical number "1" and will be numbered consecutively thereafter. Those vehicles licenses bearing numbers "1" to "8" inclusive shall be reserved unto the following Village officials to the following manner: 
(1)  Vehicle license number 1 shall be reserved to the Village Mayor. 
(2)  Vehicle license number 2 shall be reserved to the Village Clerk. 
(3)  Vehicle license numbers 3 to 8 shall be reserved to the Board of Trustees and shall be reserved to such officials in alphabetical order as determined by the last name of each Trustee. 
(Code 1979, § 52.05)  
Sec. 106-156. - School buses. 
Upon notification that any school bus or vehicle, after being licensed pursuant to this article, has been used for any purpose other than for a school bus, the Village Manager or 
designee may revoke the license, in which event there shall be no further operation upon any street or highway prior to further licensing and the payment of the regular license fee established in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1979, § 52.06)  
Sec. 106-157. - Term; display. 
(a)  All licenses required in this Article shall be for a term of 1 year, except those licenses issued after July 31 shall be for a term of less than 1 year. All licenses required by this article expire on July 31 of the calendar year. 
(b)  All license stickers issued pursuant to this article shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle the sticker is issued for on the lower inner corner of the windshield on the driver's side. 
(Code 1979, § 52.07; Ord. No. 19-2-C-4444, § 10, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 106-158. - Transfer of vehicle. 
Whenever the owner of any vehicle licensed under this article shall, before the expiration of such license, dispose of such vehicle, the owner may make application the Village Manager or designee for the transfer of such license to a newly acquired vehicle, if any, whereupon the owner shall pay a fee as set forth in Section 46-221 for the transfer of such license to such newly acquired vehicle plus any additional fee by reason of increase in the classification of the vehicle. It shall be unlawful to transfer any license from 1 vehicle to another except as provided in this section, and it shall be unlawful to transfer any license from 1 person to another under any circumstances as set forth in Section 46-221. 
(Code 1979, § 52.08)  
Sec. 106-159. - New residents. 
For purposes of this section, the term "new resident" shall be defined as any person, firm or corporation that has taken a residence or established a place of business or other activity within the corporate limits of the Village within the last 60 days. New residents of the Village shall purchase a current vehicle license at a fee as set forth in Section 46-221; provided, however, that the motor vehicle for which the license is to be purchased has been properly registered elsewhere in the State, and that proof of such registration is given to the Village Manager or designee. In all other instances, however, new residents shall purchase vehicle licenses at the current applicable rate. 
(Code 1979, § 52.09)  
Sec. 106-160. - Issuance of windshield sticker. 
Upon the execution of an application and payment of fees as provided in this article, the Village Manager or designee shall deliver to the applicant a metal plate, or windshield sticker or other form or tag, the form and size of which shall have been approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 52.10)  
Sec. 106-161. - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate vehicle license may be issued by the Village Manager or designee upon affidavit by the owner that the owner's vehicle tag has been lost or stolen and upon payment of the fee required in Section 46-221. 
(Code 1979, § 52.11)  
Secs. 106-162—106-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Riding on motorcycles and motorized pedalcycles, 625 ILCS 5/11-1403 et seq. 
 
Sec. 106-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Area means the geographical boundaries within which an operating motorcycle or operating motor-driven cycle can be heard. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designated to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
Motorized scooter shall mean every board or other device or object having wheels, utilizing a platform, with or without a seat and which is propelled by some type of motor and steered in some manner by an individual. 
Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle including every device propelled by a motor, which produces not to exceed 5 horsepower which has a seat for the operator to sit, and every bicycle with motor attached. 
Nonresident means every person who is not a resident of the State. 
Nonresident's operating privilege means the privilege conferred upon a nonresident by the laws of the State pertaining to the operation by such person of a motor vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person in the State. 
Operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a street or who is exercising control of or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
Personal assistive mobility device means a motorized self-balancing unit, designed to transport individuals, including but limited to those who have limited mobility. 
Racing of motor means sudden acceleration or deceleration of the motor of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way, including alleys publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Stunting means operating a vehicle in a manner causing it to weave or suddenly change course, or the loss of body contact with the seat by a driver or passenger, and not for the purpose of safe operation of such vehicle. 
Touring means any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a disturbance or is done with the intent of calling attention to an operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle. 
(Code 1979, § 53.01; Ord. No. 03-2-C-3152, § 1, 2-3-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-192. - Operation generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon any street within the Village except in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Driver's license. The operator of such vehicle shall have in the operator's possession a valid driver's license issued by the State (or, if such operator is a nonresident, such operator shall have in the operator's possession evidence of a nonresident's operating privilege) and which has not been suspended, limited or cancelled. 
(2)  Compliance with vehicle standards. Such vehicle shall at such time of operation be capable of performing in accordance with the standards then fixed by the motor vehicle laws of the State and by the ordinances of the Village. 
(3)  Compliance with traffic regulations. The operator shall operate the vehicle in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of the State and ordinances of the Village. 
(4)  Exhaust system and muffler. Such vehicle shall be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order, sufficient to prevent excessive or unusual noises. No such vehicle shall be equipped with any muffler cutout, or removable exhaust pipe cover, or any bypass in a muffler, or any muffler from which the baffle plates, screens, or other original internal parts have been removed or altered. No such vehicle shall be equipped with an exhaust system which has been modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by the exhaust system originally installed on the vehicle. No such vehicle shall be equipped with an exhaust system which has been modified or altered in any way from that furnished by the vehicle manufacturer; provided, however, that equipment equivalent to that originally installed may be substituted when parts are replaced. 
(5)  Proficiency in operation. Before operating a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon a public street, the operator thereof shall have first become sufficiently proficient in the operation thereof to control the vehicle without unreasonable danger to others. If the vehicle is rented, leased or borrowed from another, the operator shall first have demonstrated to the lessor, renter or lender of such equipment that the operator is sufficiently proficient to operate such vehicle upon a public street without unreasonable danger to others. 
(6)  Carrying passengers. A person operating a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless such vehicle is designed to carry more than 1 person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for 2 persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. Where a seat designed to carry a person in addition to the operator is at attached to the rear of the operator, 2 footrests must be firmly attached to each side of the vehicle for the use of such person. 
(7)  Riding in tandem. Not more than 2 motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be operated side by side in any 1 lane of traffic upon any street. 
(8)  Causing disturbance; touring, stunting or racing of motor. No motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be operated in any manner so as to cause a disturbance in any area of the city. Touring, stunting, or racing of motors is prohibited. 
(9)  Dangerous operation. No operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall engage in maneuvers, stunting or other operations dangerous to the operator or the operator's passenger or to the persons or property of others, and an operator must at all times keep body contact with the saddle or seat of such vehicle. The operation of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on 1 wheel is prohibited. 
(10)  Maximum height of handlebars. No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle having handlebars exceeding 15 inches in height measured from the lowest point of the saddle to the highest point of the handlebars. 
(11)  Required equipment. The operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle and every passenger thereon shall be protected by glasses, goggles or a transparent shield in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1404. Every motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with a rearview mirror, electrical horn, fenders, headlights and rear lights, and front and rear brakes. 
(Code 1979, § 53.02)  
Sec. 106-193. - Operation by persons under 18 years of age. 
No person under 18 years of age shall purchase, rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless such person has first obtained written consent from either of the person's parents, or the person's legal guardian. No such person under 18 years of age shall take possession of and operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless, on the occasion of such purchasing or on the occasion of such renting, leasing or borrowing of such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, such person under 18 years of age obtains and files with such seller, renter, lessor or lender a consent in writing on a form furnished by the Village, signed by either parent of such minor, or such minor's legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by such lessor, renter or lender, or the duly authorized agent of the lessor, renter or lender, to the effect that permission is granted for such child to purchase a vehicle, or to rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle from such renter, lessor of lender, and that such parent or guardian consents to such sale and/or consents to the renting, leasing or lending of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle to such child, and assumes full legal responsibility for acts or actions of such child in the operation of any such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle then or thereafter sold, rented, leased or lent to such child, and such responsibility and commitment of such parent or guardian shall continue for a period of 60 days. The written consent must be renewed every 60 days thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 53.03)  
Sec. 106-194. - Suspension or revocation of business license and certificate of occupancy for violation of article. 
In addition to any fines or penalties imposed by this Code, the Village Manager may suspend or revoke the license and certificate of occupancy of any person engaged in the business of selling motorcycles or motor-driven cycles violating the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 53.06; Ord. No. 11-12-C-3866, § 1, 12-5-2011)  
Sec. 106-195. - Operation of a motorized scooter. 
No person shall use, operate or be in control of a motorized scooter on a public or private street, parking lot, sidewalk, bike path or other area open to the public. Operation of a motorized scooter may be permitted on private property with the permission of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 03-2-C-3152, § 2, 2-3-2003)  
Sec. 106-196. - Parental responsibility for violations by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the age of 17 years to permit such person under the age of 17 years to violate any provisions of this article. The commission of any such act by a minor who is living with the minor's parents or guardian shall raise the presumption that the parent or guardian has neglected to restrain such minor from committing such act. It shall be an affirmative defense for the parent or guardian to prove that such parent or guardian exercised the parent's or guardian's duty to restrain the minor from committing such act complained of in the pending action, but that such action on the part of the parent or guardian to attempt to restrain the minor, although exercised with due care, was unsuccessful. 
(Ord. No. 03-2-C-3152, § 2, 2-3-2003)  
Sec. 106-197. - Operation of personal assistive mobility devices. 
(a)  Personal assistive motorized devices shall be prohibited on any public right-of-way, including but not limited to, parking lots, sidewalks, bike paths or other areas open to the public, except when utilized, subject to the conditions outlined in Section 106-197(b) and by an individual or individuals described as follows: 
(1)  Those who have limited mobility, including but not limited to the elderly and disabled individuals; or 
(2)  The United States Postal Service for purpose of the delivery of the United States Mail; or 
(3)  Governmental entities for public safety purposes. 
(b)  Personal assistive motorized devices when utilized by individuals, pursuant to section 106-197(a)(1) through 106-197(a)(3) may be operated on public sidewalks when utilized in a generally safe manner and in such a way that their use does not impede pedestrian traffic. The speed of any such device may not exceed 10 m.p.h. 
(c)  Sections 106-197(a) and (b) do not apply to motorized wheelchairs, as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 03-2-C-3152, § 2, 2-3-2003)  
Secs. 106-198—106-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate the operation of bicycles, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(8); bicycles, 625 ILCS 5/11-1501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 106-221. - Applicability of traffic laws to persons riding bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the Village applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1979, § 54.01)  
Sec. 106-222. - Parental responsibility for violations by children. 
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article applicable to bicycles. 
(Code 1979, § 54.13)  
Sec. 106-223. - Areas where article is applicable. 
The regulations in this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or public sidewalk or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 54.13)  
Sec. 106-224. - Registration. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any resident to operate or use, or permit to be operated or used, or rent for use, any 2-wheel bicycle upon any of the public highways, streets, sidewalks, or public places in the Village without first obtaining therefor a registration certificate from the Village. 
(b)  Issuance. The Village Manager or designee is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle registrations. Any such registration, when issued, shall entitle the person to operate any bicycle for which the registration has been issued upon all the public highways, streets, sidewalks, and public places in accordance with applicable laws. 
(c)  Tag and registration certificate. The Village shall provide registration tags together with registration certificates or cards. Tags and registration documents shall have numbers stamped thereon in numerical order. The tags shall be kept firmly attached to the bicycle frame below the seat facing forward during the valid term of such registration. All persons engaged in the business of renting bicycles for hire within the Village shall obtain a tag and registration certificate or card for each bicycle used for hire. 
(d)  Fee. There shall be no registration fee for any bicycle registration. 
(e)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be the duty of every person residing in the Village who sells or transfers ownership of any 2-wheel bicycle to remove and destroy the tag at the time of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee, if the purchaser or transferee resides within the Village, to apply for registration thereof within 5 days of the date of sale or transfer. Issuance of such registration shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this article. 
(f)  Term. Bicycles shall be registered every 5 years. 
(Code 1979, § 54.11)  
Sec. 106-225. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. In no event shall the speed exceed the applicable speed limit for motor vehicles. 
(Code 1979, § 54.02)  
Sec. 106-226. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1979, § 54.03) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 106-227. - Riding on sidewalk. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a CX Core Mixed-Use zoning district. 
(b)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1979, § 54.04; Ord. No. 09-2-C-3664, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 106-228. - Riding on roadway. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the righthand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or 1 proceeding in the same direction, and at all times giving the right-of-way to other moving vehicles. 
(b)  Bicycles shall not be operated upon any street where the operation of bicycles has been prohibited and signs have been erected indicating such prohibition. 
(c)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride other than single file except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(d)  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and not use the roadway. 
(Code 1979, § 54.05)  
Sec. 106-229. - Carrying articles. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least 1 hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1979, § 54.07)  
Sec. 106-230. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 54.08)  
Sec. 106-231. - Riding on seat required; carrying additional persons. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1979, § 54.09)  
Sec. 106-232. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or a turn in the opposite direction is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1979, § 54.10)  
Sec. 106-233. - Required equipment. 
(a)  Lights and reflectors. Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a headlamp which shall emit a white light visible from a minimum distance of 500 feet from the front and with a rear red reflector which will emit a reflected light visible for a distance of approximately 200 feet to 250 feet from the rear. 
(b)  Signaling device. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(c)  Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(d)  Helmets. Every person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by either; the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing or the Snell Memorial Foundation, Inc., whenever that person is upon a public highway, sidewalk, bicycle path or other public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village and is riding or being carried on any bicycle or any carrier attached to or pulled by a bicycle. 
(Code 1979, § 54.12; Ord. No. 02-11-C-3125, § 2, 11-4-2002)  
Chapter 110 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; Department of Public Works, § 2-241 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; electrical code, § 22-91 et seq.; mechanical code, § 22-121 et seq.; plumbing code, § 22-151 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 42; fees, ch. 46; water and sewer charges, § 46-191 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; poles and wires on streets and sidewalks, § 90-53; subdivisions, ch. 94; water, sewer and street improvements in subdivisions, § 94-7; telecommunications, ch. 102; district regulations for stormwater control, § 118-81. 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities, 65 ILCS 5/11-117-1 et seq.; municipal water supply and sewage systems, 65 ILCS 5/11-124-1 et seq.; construction and purchase of waterworks, 65 ILCS 5/11-130-1 et seq.; utilities, 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.; Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 110-1—110-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal water supply and sewage systems, 65 ILCS 5/11-124-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 110-31. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article contain general regulations regarding the installation of plumbing, including provisions for health and safety; the connection to public systems when available; the exclusion of certain wastes detrimental to the sewage system; and the matters of corrosion, freezing, trenching, bedding, tunneling and backfilling. 
(Code 1979, § 9.01)  
Sec. 110-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Basic user charge means the assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning 5 feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal beginning 5 feet outside the face of the building wall. 
Combined sewer means a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage. 
Commercial user includes transient lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services. 
Control manhole means a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the MWRDGC representative to sample and/or measure discharges. 
Debt service charge means the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of loans outstanding owed to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and/or other agencies and financial institutions. 
Director means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent criteria shall be as defined in any applicable NPDES permit. 
Enterprise fund means the fund utilized to account for the operations of the water and sewer system which is similar to a business enterprise in the private sector. 
Federal Act means the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C.A. § 1251 et seq., as amended (Public Law 95-217). 
Fiscal year means the period from May 1 to April 30. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Fund means a fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts recording cash and other financial resources, together with all related liabilities and residual equity balances, and charges therein, which are segregated for the purpose of carrying on specific activities. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food. 
Industrial users includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into products. 
Industrial waste means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or discharge permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Institutional/governmental user includes schools, churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, State and local governments. 
Milligrams per liter is a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituents. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. 
Municipal Engineer means the Municipal Engineer of the Village or designee. 
MWRDGC means the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Village, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the federal act. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
pH is the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. 
ppm means parts per million by weight. 
Pretreatment means the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the Village boundaries that serve 1 or more persons and ultimately discharge into the Village sanitary, storm, or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with Village funds. 
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the wastewater collection facilities to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
Residential user means all dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multifamily dwellings. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water and groundwater or polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage is used interchangeably with the term "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage. 
Sewer service charge means the charge levied on all users of the wastewater collection facilities computed as outlined in Section 110-53(a)(2). 
Sewer service line means sewer pipe on private property which serves a building or buildings that extends to the public sewer and includes the connection to the public sewer. 
Sewerage means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
Sludge means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Storm sewer means a sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
State Act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq. 
State grant or loan means the State participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act, 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq., and for making such grants or loans as filed with the Illinois Secretary of State. 
Stormwater runoff means that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers. 
Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
Unpolluted water means water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Useful life means the estimated period during which the collection system will be operated. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of the sewage collection system for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement. 
User class means the type of user (residential, institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial) as defined in this article. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. This may include a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and slugs. The term is interchangeable with the term "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant." 
Water quality standards are as defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois. 
Water service pipe means the pipe from the water main or other source of potable water supply to the water distributing system of the building served. 
Water supply system means the water service pipe, water distribution pipes, and necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1979, § 9.04) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 110-33. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 9.23)  
Sec. 110-34. - Right of entry of inspectors. 
(a)  Generally. The Village Manager or designee and representatives of the MWRDGC, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, codes, statutes, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Easements. The Village Manager or designee shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement. 
(Code 1979, § 9.20)  
Sec. 110-35. - Connection to sanitary drainage system required. 
Every plumbing fixture, drain, appliance, or appurtenance thereto which is to receive water or waste, or discharge any liquid wastes or sewage, shall discharge to the sanitary drainage system of the building in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9.02)  
Sec. 110-36. - Connection to public water and sewer system required, prohibition of use of ground water. 
a.  The water distribution and drainage system of any building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public water main and sewer. 
b.  The use or attempted use of groundwater from within the corporate limits of the Village of Skokie, as a potable water supply, by the installation or drilling of wells after the effective date of this section is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the Village of Skokie. 
c.  Any person violating the provision of this Section shall be subject the penalty provisions set out in Section 2-106 of this Code. 
d.  As used in this Section, the terms below shall have the following meaning: 
Person is an individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, Limited Liability Company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other legal entity or their representative, agents or assigns. 
Potable water is any water used for human or domestic consumption, including but not limited to water used for drinking, bathing, swimming or preparing foods. 
(Code 1979, § 9.03; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3597, § 1, 2-4-2008)  
Sec. 110-37. - Safety and construction standards; protection of pipes. 
(a)  Generally. Any part of a building or premises and adjacent public streets, sidewalks and parkways which are changed, altered, or required to be replaced as a result of the installation, alteration, renovation, or replacement of a plumbing system or any part thereof shall be left in a safe, nonhazardous condition. 
(b)  Correction of health and safety hazards. Where a health or safety hazard exists on premises by reason of an existing plumbing installation or lack thereof, the owner or the owner's agent shall install additional plumbing or make such corrections as necessary to abate such nuisance and bring the plumbing installation within the provisions of this Code. 
Cross reference— Public nuisances, § 42-31 et seq. 
(c)  Safety of structural members. Any structural member weakened or impaired by cutting, notching or otherwise shall be reinforced, repaired or replaced so as to be left in a safe structural condition in accordance with the requirements of the building code listed in Chapter 22, Article II. 
(d)  Protection of footings. Trenching installed parallel to footings shall not extend below the line of a 45-degree (0.79 radian) angle to the bearing plane of the footing. 
(e)  Protection of pipes from breakage. Pipes passing under or through walls shall be protected from breakage. Any plumbing pipe passing under a footing or through a foundation wall shall be provided with a relieving arch or sleeve 2 pipe sizes greater than the pipe passing through the wall. 
(f)  Protection of pipes from corrosion. Pipes subject to corrosion by passing through or under corrosive fill, such as but not limited to cinders, concrete, or other corrosive material, shall be protected against external corrosion by protective coating, wrapping or other means which will resist such corrosion. 
(g)  Freeze protection. Water service piping shall be installed below recorded frost penetration but not less than 5 feet below grade. Plumbing pipes in exterior building walls or areas subjected to freezing temperatures shall be protected against freezing by insulation or heat. 
(h)  Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 2 feet 6 inches below grade. 
(i)  Excavations. Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing service pipes shall be made in compliance with the provisions relating to excavations in streets provided for in Section 110-50(l). 
(j)  Trenching and bedding. Trenching and bedding shall adhere to regulations set forth by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago Procedures Manual. 
(k)  Tunneling. Pipe shall be protected from damage during tunneling installation and from uneven loading. Where earth tunnels are used, supporting structures shall be provided to prevent future settling or caving. All tunneling performed shall be in compliance with all federal, State and local laws and regulations. 
(l)  Backfilling. Loose sand or gravel shall be placed in the trench in 6-inch layers and tamped in place. The backfill under and beside the pipe shall be compacted for pipe support. Backfill shall be brought up evenly on both sides of the pipe to retain alignment. 
(Code 1979, § 9.05)  
Sec. 110-38. - Permit and fee for connection to water main. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to connect with the water main without first obtaining a permit. Applications for permits shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. Fees for permits shall be as set forth in Section 46-192. 
(Code 1979, § 9.09)  
Sec. 110-39. - Installation and repair of water service pipes and shutoff valves. 
(a)  Permit required for installation; payment of costs. No installation of service pipes from the water main to the premises or installation of shutoff valves shall be made without a permit. Such installation shall be at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Repairs. 
(1)  All repairs on service pipes from the service valve, including the valve box and plumbing system of buildings, shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served, by a licensed plumber. Failure to repair such pipes, valve, box or plumbing systems after notice is given to the property owner and may result in the shutoff of water service. Any repair made within 2 feet of the shutoff valve will require the replacement of the shutoff valve. 
(2)  The Village, in case of emergency, may shut off water service or repair any service pipe, valve, box or plumbing system. The cost of any such repair work shall be paid to the Village by the owner of the premises served. This payment shall include the actual cost plus a 10 percent administrative fee. Failure of the property owner to make full payment of any invoice issued in accordance with this subsection within 90 days of the date of issuance of the invoice shall result in the invoice being included as an amount due on the next regular water bill issued for the property. Such amount due shall be subject to late charges and all collections efforts, including but not limited to shutoff of water service to the property. 
(c)  Shutoff valve and box. Shutoff valves 2 inches or under and service valve boxes shall be placed on every service pipe and shall be located between the curbline and the sidewalk line and shall be easily accessible. Shutoff valves 3 inches or above shall be placed at the water main and will require a 60-inch or larger valve box. If such valve or box cannot be located or is not easily accessible, the property owner shall be responsible for locating or relocating such valve and box in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Chlorination and flushing. 
(1)  Any person repairing, replacing or adding to the Village's water distribution system, water service lines, or internal plumbing system shall have the responsibility for chlorination under the applicable IEPA regulations and/or guidelines of Title 35, Subtitle F, Sections 652.101, 652.203, 652.204, and 653.302 and the American Water Works Standards for Disinfecting Water Mains, Publication C601-81, and any amendments to applicable guidelines and regulations, as determined by the Director of Public Works or designee. 
(2)  All work on water service lines which are 2 inches or less in diameter shall require 5 minutes of continuous full flow flushing after any repair or installation work. 
(3)  The Village Manager or designee shall be given 24 hours' advance notice to take water samples necessary to satisfy the requirements of this subsection. The cost of laboratory analysis of the samples shall be paid by the permittee. 
(e)  Fees. All fees shall be as required in Chapter 46. 
(f)  Disconnection of old water service line. Any person replacing a water service line or adding a new water service line shall disconnect the old water service from the Village water main at the connection to the Village water main or as directed by the Director of Public Works. 
(Code 1979, § 9.06; Ord. No. 09-11-C-3715, § 1, 11-2-2009)  
Sec. 110-40. - Material for water service pipes. 
All water service leading into any building shall be constructed of a minimum 1-inch copper or ductile iron. All copper pipes leading into any building must be connected with flared or compression copper fittings. 
(Code 1979, § 9.13)  
Sec. 110-41. - Water meters and remote reading devices. 
(a)  Required; ownership; water rate prior to installation of meter. 
(1)  The Village shall furnish an adequate water meter and a remote reading device to all premises using water from the Village water supply. The cost of such meter and remote reading device and installation thereof shall be at the property owner's own expense. Prior to the installation of such a meter and remote reading device, water service may be supplied by the Village at a flat rate of charge until such meter and reading device is installed. All meters and remote reading devices, including the necessary wiring, shall remain the property of the Village. 
(2)  Prior to any premises being occupied, a water meter and remote reading device shall be installed. If such devices are not installed, the property owner may temporarily request a flat rate of charge for water service until such devices can be installed. If such devices are not installed and a flat rate of charge is implemented, water usage shall be limited for construction purposes only (landscape maintenance is prohibited). 
(b)  Installation; location. All water meters shall be installed in a space easily accessible at all times for replacement and reading. The meter must be installed within 18 inches to 24 inches of where the water line enters the building. No meter shall at any time be placed or located in what is commonly known as crawl spaces, nor shall a meter be placed in a space requiring the removal of stored articles or furniture. All remote water meter reading devices shall be installed on the outside of the premises in a space easily accessible at all times for replacement and reading. However, if it is not possible to install the reading device on the outside of the premises, it shall be installed as directed by the Village Manager or designee. 
(c)  Repair or replacement of damaged meters or reading devices. Any meter or remote reading device damaged shall be repaired or replaced by the Village at the property owner's expense. Expense shall include actual expenses and a 20 percent administrative fee. Failure of the property owner to make full payment of any invoice issued in accordance with this subsection within 90 days of the date of issuance of the invoice shall result in the invoice being included as an amount due on the next regular water bill issued for the property. Such amount due shall be subject to late charges and all collection efforts, including but not limited to shutoff of water service to the property. 
(d)  Interference with meter or reading device. Any person who interferes with the installation or repair of water meters or remote reading devices as required by this section shall be in violation of this section and is subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6 in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for, or termination of water service. 
(Code 1979, § 9.07)  
Sec. 110-42. - Turning on water; unauthorized use of fire hydrants. 
Water service to premises shall not be provided or turned on without prior approval by the Village. No unauthorized person shall turn on any fire hydrant, or use water therefrom, and the person so using or wasting water in such an unauthorized manner shall be liable for the water and for any damages done or caused to the fire hydrant. 
(Code 1979, § 9.08)  
Sec. 110-43. - Resale of water prohibited. 
No water shall be resold, distributed or diverted by a recipient of water supplied by the Village to any premises other than that for which it is intended. 
(Code 1979, § 9.10)  
Sec. 110-44. - Damaging or tampering with water system or equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter, or damage any part of the Village waterworks or supply system, or any meter or remote reading device. 
(b)  The Village Manager or designee, after giving notice, shall authorize the shutting off of the water supply to any premises in which water meters and remote reading devices are not installed. 
(Code 1979, § 9.11)  
Sec. 110-45. - Water conservation. 
The Village Manager or designee shall have the authority to implement a temporary or permanent water ban restricting any or all outdoor use due to a disruption or shortage of adequate domestic water flows. 
(Code 1979, § 9.12)  
Sec. 110-46. - Lawn sprinkling restrictions. 
Lawn sprinkling or irrigation, including but not limited to the use of automatic or oscillating sprinklers, is prohibited from the hours of 10:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. Property owners with odd-numbered street addresses shall restrict the use [of] sprinklers to odd-numbered days of the month. Property owners with even-numbered street addresses shall restrict the use [of] sprinklers to even-numbered days of the month. 
(Code 1979, § 9.121; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 4, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 110-47. - Use of water from fire hydrants by contractors. 
Landscapers, contractors or entities with the intended use of lawn or landscape maintenance, cleanup, watering or construction purposes shall fill their equipment at fire hydrant locations designated by the Village Manager or designee, only after payment of all applicable fees as provided for in Section 46-191 and the issuance of a fire hydrant meter to gauge the quantity of water used and compensation for the water used. 
(Code 1979, § 9.122)  
Sec. 110-48. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to dispose into any natural outlet within the Village any sewage, debris or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided. 
(b)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage. 
(c)  The owner, at the owner's expense, of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary or combined sewer, shall install toilet facilities connected directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9.14)  
Sec. 110-49. - Sewer maintenance. 
(a)  Responsibilities of Village. The Village shall be responsible for the maintenance of the public sewer. 
(b)  Responsibilities of property owner. The property owner shall be responsible for the service line from and including the junction and the connection to the public sewer to the property line and beyond. 
(c)  Infiltration and inflow; stormwater inlets. If infiltration or inflow has occurred, it must be remedied to meet MWRDGC, IEPA, State, local, or federal regulations. This shall include but not be limited to maintenance such as cleaning, rodding due to root blockage, sewer pipe or manhole replacement; sewer pipe or manhole lining; sewer pipe or manhole joint sealing and patching; and disconnection of stormwater inlets, downspouts, other connections as specified by Section 110-51(c) to sanitary sewers. Disconnection of stormwater inlets and footing drains shall apply to all those constructed after the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  Repair by Village. The Village may repair or cause to be repaired the sewer service lines after notice has been given to the property owner. The charge to the owner for this work shall be direct costs plus 20 percent for administrative costs. When a determination is made by the Village that damage to Village property is imminent, water service to the premises may be shut off. Failure of the property owner to make full payment of any invoice issued in accordance with this subsection within 90 days of the date of issuance of the invoice shall result in the invoice being included as an amount due on the next regular water bill issued for the property. Such amount due shall be subject to late charges and all collection efforts, including but not limited to shutoff of water service to the property. 
(Code 1979, § 9.15)  
Sec. 110-50. - Sewer connections; installation of building sewer. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereto without a permit. 
(b)  Prohibited discharges. All disposal into the sewer system shall be unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards. 
(c)  Permit classifications. There shall be the following 2 classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Class A: For a building service sewer constructed to serve a single building devoted solely for residential purposes and 2 or less residential lots containing single- or 2-family units. 
(2)  Class B: For a building service sewer for all commercial, institutional, governmental, or industrial buildings and residential developments containing 3 or more units. 
The Village Manager or designee shall issue both Class A and Class B permits. Any other regional, State or federal permits shall be required where applicable. 
(d)  Application for permit; fee. 
(1)  Applications for permits shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. All permit applications shall be accompanied by plans, specifications, and additional information as required by the Village Manager or designee and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago. Fees for permits shall be as set forth in Chapter 46. 
(2)  An industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. 
(e)  Restrictions on connection; supervision of connection. 
(1)  A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be permitted if it is demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. 
(2)  Upon completion of the building sewer, the sewer permit holder shall so notify the Village Manager or designee for inspection and connection purposes. The connection to the sewer shall only be made under the supervision of the Village Manager or designee. 
(f)  Payment of costs; indemnification of Village; insurance. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be the property owner's responsibility. The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation or existence of the building sewer, and shall furnish proof of insurance as required by the Village. Proof of insurance for a general comprehensive liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 is required. Cancellation of the insurance shall automatically suspend the permit. 
(g)  Separate building sewers required; separation of sanitary and storm sewers. A separate and independent building sanitary sewer service and a separate and independent storm sewer service, carrying waters as defined in Section 110-52, shall be provided for all new subdivision, multifamily, commercial and industrial buildings connected to the public sewer. However, in combined sewer areas, the separate sanitary and storm services may be connected together once the service sewer pipes enter the public right-of-way. The separate storm sewer service shall be disconnected from the combined sewer and connected to an appropriately designed storm sewer within 90 days if a storm sewer becomes available within 100 feet of the service entering the public right-of-way. 
(h)  Use of existing building sewers. Existing building sewers may not be used in connection with new buildings without having an independent televised test made and the results approved by the Village Manager or designee. If a new sewer is installed, the old sewer shall be disconnected at the public sewer main or as directed by the Village Manager or designee. 
(i)  Specifications for building sewer. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes of the Village, the MWRDGC Sewer Permit Ordinance and other applicable rules and regulations, codes and ordinances. 
(j)  Elevation of building sewer. The building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation to allow proper discharge of the building's sanitary drains. The building's sanitary drains shall conform to the requirements of all applicable plumbing regulations and rules and regulations, codes and ordinances. 
(k)  Specifications for connection. The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be gastight and watertight and conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes of the Village, the MWRDGC Sewer Permit Ordinance and other applicable rules and regulations, codes and ordinances. 
(l)  Excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with shoring, barricades and lights for the purpose of protecting the public. The building sewer permit holder shall be responsible for restoring all public property, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, and parkways, during the excavation, installation or connection of building sewers. 
(Code 1979, § 9.16)  
Sec. 110-51. - Damaging or tampering with sewer system; prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage and stormwater collection system. 
(b)  No person shall connect or cause to be connected any sanitary sewage outlet or industrial wastewater outlet to any component of a stormwater sewer system. 
(c)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water or groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow a discharge not meeting the standards of Article III, Prohibited Wastes, of the Sewage and Waste Control Ordinance, latest edition, of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago (MWRDGC). 
(Code 1979, § 9.17)  
Sec. 110-52. - Stormwater discharge. 
(a)  Generally. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Village Manager or designee. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet, with the approval of the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  Disconnection of inflow sources on combined sewer system. Stormwater discharges on the combined sewer system shall be removed from the combined sewer system and connected to an appropriately designed storm sewer within 1 year of a separate storm sewer becoming available within 100 feet of the building. 
(c)  Downspouts on new construction. Downspouts on new construction shall be discharged to flow overland, except where a waiver has been granted by the Village Manager or designee. 
(1)  All detached one-and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) shall have gutters or scuppers and downspouts to direct stormwater discharge to the front or rear of the building. No stormwater shall discharge directly into the storm or combined sewer system. All discharge shall be located as not to damage or create a nuisance to the property or adjoining properties. 
(2)  Accessory structures, less than 400 square feet in area, shall be exempt from subsection (1) of this section, when in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee, the stormwater discharge causes no damage or nuisance to the property or adjoining properties. 
(3)  All buildings and developments that provide on-site stormwater control facilities in accordance with the requirements of Section 118-81 shall be exempt from subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Existing downspouts discharging to sewer system. All downspouts for conducting stormwater from the roof of any building into the Village's sewer system shall be disconnected from the sewer system when a new or revised flood control unit is installed to serve the building or any part thereof. However, no such disconnection shall be made in those cases where, in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee, such disconnection will create an associated stormwater hazard to the building or part thereof or to a neighboring building. The Village Manager or designee shall be responsible for all inspections and final reports required in connection with this subsection. 
(e)  New connections to combined system. New construction tributary to the combined sewer system shall be designed to minimize and/or delay inflow contributions to the combined sewer system pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 118). 
(Code 1979, § 9.18; Ord. No. 14-9-C-4092, § 1, 9-15-2014)  
Sec. 110-53. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Establishment; basis. 
(1)  Water and sewer rates shall be established by the Village from time to time. The rate shall be based on all costs associated with operations, capital improvements, extensions or reconstructions, transfers, reserves, and costs to service debt (principal, interest, professional service fees, etc.). Capital shall include but not be limited to current machinery, equipment, furniture, fixtures, buildings, standpipes, infrastructure, etc. 
(2)  The water and sewer rates shall be based on the methodology promulgated by the Village and shall be established as 1 combined rate for both water and sewer services. The rate shall be established as a fixed rate per 1,000 cubic feet. Water and sewer rates shall be reviewed by the Village Manager or designee and revised as needed to ensure the fiscal health of the enterprise fund. 
(b)  Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing the water and sewer rates and charges shall be the metered water consumption read in increments of 1,000 cubic feet. 
(c)  Minimum charge. A minimum charge shall be assessed for metered water usage of less than 1,000 cubic feet in any billing cycle in the amount of the water and sewer rate then in effect. 
(d)  Annual review. 
(1)  The Village Manager shall cause a periodic review to be made of the adequacy of the water and sewer rates and charges and shall report accordingly to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(2)  The user of the wastewater collection facilities will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the sewer service charge which is attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater collection facilities. 
(e)  Water rates. Water rates shall be as set forth in Section 46-193. 
(f)  Disposition of revenue. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water and sewer systems shall be deposited in the enterprise fund. The Village Manager or designee shall cause all such revenues and monies to be held separate from all other funds of the Village. 
(g)  Accounts. 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water and sewer system, and at regular annual intervals shall cause an audit to be made by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the water and sewer systems. 
(2)  In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater collection facilities, including a replacement item, to indicate that sewer service charges under the cost recovery system meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
a.  Flow data showing total cubic feet of water consumed. 
b.  Billing data to show total number of cubic feet billed per fiscal year. 
c.  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
d.  Number of users connected to the system. 
e.  Number of non-metered users. 
(h)  Access to records. The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Village which are applicable to the Village's system of water and sewer user charges. Such access shall be for the purpose of making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant and/or loan agreement and rules of any State loan. 
(Code 1979, § 9.21)  
Sec. 110-54. - Billing and payment of charges. 
(a)  Due date for payment. For a water bill to be considered as paid, the payment must be received by the Village. For purposes of this section, the term "received" shall mean physically in the possession of the Village by 5:00 p.m. on the due date and not merely placed in the U.S. mail and postmarked prior to the original due date of the water bill. 
(b)  Nonpayment. 
(1)  Payment for water and sewer service is the obligation of the property owner at the time the water is consumed. A late charge of 10 percent shall be assessed on the unpaid balance of any water bill and any other invoices included thereon which remain unpaid for a period 30 days. The late charge shall continue to be assessed to all unpaid balances until paid in full, and such late charges shall be cumulative. 
(2)  If a bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days and it is known that the occupant of the premises for which a water and sewer bill has been issued is not the owner of the premises served, a notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises at the owner's last known address. 
(3)  In addition to the late charge, the water supply may be shut off from any premises for a bill which remains unpaid for a period of 30 days. 
(c)  Lien for unpaid charges. 
(1)  Whenever a bill for water and sewer service remains unpaid for a period of at least 60 days from the original due date, the Village may file a statement of lien claim with the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Cook County. Such statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water and sewer services subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(2)  The failure of the Village to record such lien claim or to mail notices as required in this section or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water and sewer bills. 
(d)  Foreclosure of lien. 
(1)  Property subject to a lien for unpaid water and sewer charges may be sold for nonpayment of the charges, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied towards payment of the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. 
(2)  The Corporation Counsel shall institute such proceedings, in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which the bill for water and sewer service has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Code 1979, § 9.22)  
Secs. 110-55—110-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Illinois Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 110-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Control area means an electrical system bounded by interconnection (tie-line) metering and telemetry. It controls generation directly to maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to frequency regulation of the interconnection. 
Control area emergency means a control area that is at risk of having to shed firm load, having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating action short of shedding firm load and firm sales. 
Controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service means the implementation of a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers for a short period of time and rotating this curtailment of electric service through different areas within the electric utility's service territory in a situation where the demand has exceeded or is at significant risk of exceeding the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. The action of an electric utility to interrupt or curtail electric service to a customer participating in or taking service under an interruptible or curtailable rate is not included in this definition of controlled rotating interruption of electric service. 
Emergency energy plan means the portions of the emergency load conservation procedures, which immediately precede and include the controlled rotating interruption of electrical service to firm load customers within the Village. The emergency energy plan shall include the following steps: 
(1)  A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities; 
(2)  Declaration of a control area emergency; 
(3)  A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use; and 
(4)  Implementation of the plan for controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service. 
Emergency load conservation procedures means a planned course of action developed by an electric utility company to be implemented in emergency situations when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. 
Electric utility company and electric utility mean any person or entity engaged in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the Village. This term shall not include any person or entity that delivers electricity to fewer than 50 customers within the Village. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-C-2827, § 1(21.01), 6-7-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 110-102. - Violations; enforcement; penalty. 
Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this article or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,500.00 and not more than $10,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The Village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or order to compel the other party to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-C-2827, § 1(21.05), 6-7-1999)  
Sec. 110-103. - Interpretation of article. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude or interfere with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. Nothing set forth in this article shall be deemed to modify the terms of any existing franchise agreement or franchise ordinance otherwise applicable to any electric utility company, or to excuse any performance required such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any authority that may be exercised pursuant to such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-C-2827, § 1(21.06), 6-7-1999)  
Sec. 110-104. - Submittal of emergency energy plan. 
(a)  Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency energy plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of this article, or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is later. 
(b)  Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Village Manager or designee an emergency energy plan adopted by the company no later than 30 days after June 7, 1999, the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or within 24 hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The electric utility company shall be required to examine and update as needed its emergency energy plan at least annually. The electric utility company shall notify the Village Manager or designee in writing of any material revisions to its plan and the rationale for said revisions within 5 business days of the time said revisions are made. 
(c)  The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing: 
(1)  Circumstances that would require the implementation of the emergency energy plan; 
(2)  Stages of the emergency energy plan; 
(3)  The approximate geographic limits of each outage area provided for in the emergency energy plan; 
(4)  The approximate number of customers within each outage area provided for in the emergency energy plan; 
(5)  The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, day care centers, senior citizen centers, community health centers, dialysis centers, community mental health centers, correctional facilities, stormwater and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and water-pumping stations that have been identified by the Village and persons on life-support systems that are known to the company, and that could be affected by controlled rotating interruptions of electric service under the emergency energy plan; and 
(6)  The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional interruptions of electric service to each outage area under the emergency energy plan. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-C-2827, § 1(21.02), 6-7-1999)  
Sec. 110-105. - Review of emergency energy plan. 
(a)  Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the Village Manager or designee, the Village Manager or designee shall review the emergency energy plan in order to determine if the emergency energy plan is complete and to assure appropriate coordination with applicable Village departments. 
(b)  The Village may reject the emergency energy plan if it does not contain all the information required under Section 110-104(c), in which case the Village shall notify the electric utility company in writing of the rejection and the reasons therefor. The electric utility company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy plan to the Village no later than 30 days after such notice is sent by the Village. 
(c)  The Village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to: 
(1)  Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled rotating interruption of electric service would require heightened response by applicable Village departments; 
(2)  Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public health and safety; and 
(3)  Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the applicable Village departments. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-C-2827, § 1(21.03), 6-7-1999)  
Sec. 110-106. - Implementation of emergency energy plan. 
(a)  This section applies to electric utility companies which implement an emergency energy plan. 
(b)  Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical service due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility company, the electric utility company shall do the following: 
(1)  Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing a controlled rotating interruption of electric service and notify the appropriate electric utility company personnel; and 
(2)  Notify the Village Manager or designee that the electric utility company will be implementing its emergency energy plan. The notification shall be made pursuant to a notification procedure approved by Village Manager or designee after consultation with the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may waive the notice requirement to accommodate exigent circumstances. 
(c)  Subsequent to providing the notice as required in subsection (b) of this section, an electric utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the Village Manager or designee when it implements the each of steps of the emergency energy plan. Such steps shall include the following: 
(1)  A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities; 
(2)  A declaration of a control area emergency; and 
(3)  A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use. 
(d)  The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to the Village Manager or designee immediately upon the determination that there will a controlled rotating interruption of electric service pursuant to the emergency energy plan. The notification shall include the areas to be interrupted, the sequence and estimated duration of the service outage for each area, and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area. Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least 2 hours prior to the time of the outages, and in no case shall the notification be made less than 30 minutes prior to the outages, if the company is aware that controlled rotating interruptions may be required. 
(e)  Notification required by this article shall be in addition to any notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement or franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable federal or State law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 99-6-C-2827, § 1(21.04), 6-7-1999)  
Chapter 114 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; fees related to motor vehicles and traffic, § 46-221 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate taxicab drivers and expressmen, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 114-1—114-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Public passenger vehicle fees, § 46-229; public carrier stops and stands, § 106-57; cruising by public passenger vehicles, § 106-59. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 114-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business license means a license issued by the Village Manager or designee to a person or entity authorizing the holder thereof to dispatch, own, or control a public passenger vehicle for hire upon Village streets. 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a public passenger vehicle business in the Village. 
Chauffeur's license means a license issued by the Village Manager or designee to a person authorizing the holder thereof to drive a public passenger vehicle upon the streets of the Village. 
Holder means a person or entity to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
Manifest means a daily record of all trips made by a driver showing the time and place of origin, the destination, the number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip. 
Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the Village which has been designated by the Village Manager or designee as reserved exclusively for the use of public passenger vehicles. 
Public passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle for hire regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers, having a seating capacity of less than 6 persons and not operated on a fixed route. 
Public passenger vehicle company means any person engaged in business as proprietor of 1 or more public passenger vehicles for hire for the transportation of passengers. 
Public passenger vehicle license means a license issued by the Village Manager or designee to a person or entity authorizing the holder thereof to operate a specific public passenger vehicle for hire within the Village. 
Public passenger vehicle owner means any person owning or leasing a public passenger vehicle for hire. 
Rate card means a card issued for display in each public passenger vehicle which contains the rates of fare then in force. 
Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a public passenger vehicle which measures mechanically or electronically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
Waiting time means the time when a public passenger vehicle is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the public passenger vehicle is not in motion if due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers. 
(Code 1979, § 48.01; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 1, 2-22-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-32. - Violations declared nuisance. 
The operation or maintenance of a public passenger vehicle in violation of this article is declared a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 42-35. The Village Manager may, in addition to other remedies provided for in Chapter 42, Article II, recommend that the Corporation Counsel seek injunctive relief.  
Sec. 114-33. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
The Village Manager or designee is authorized to establish rules, regulations and procedures for the implementation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 48.20)  
Sec. 114-34. - Enforcement; duties of Police Department. 
The Police Department shall watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this article. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this article, the Police Department shall report the violation to the Village Manager or designee, who will order or take appropriate action. 
(Code 1979, § 48.17)  
Sec. 114-35. - Vehicle equipment and maintenance. 
(a)  Generally. No vehicle shall operate as a public passenger vehicle upon the streets of the Village unless all of the conditions enumerated in this section are met. 
(b)  Registration and license. Such vehicle shall bear proper State and local registration properly displayed and shall be duly licensed by the Village Manager or designee for the current year, and such license shall be properly displayed. 
(c)  Markings. The vehicle shall bear color and identification markings as set forth in Section 114-37. 
(d)  Equipment. The vehicle shall comply with applicable equipment provisions of 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., including but not limited to proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, windshield wipers, and directional signals. Each of these items shall be in good mechanical condition. 
(e)  Maintenance. The vehicle shall be maintained at all times under safe operating condition and in a clean and sanitary condition in that the interior of the vehicle shall be free of refuse and litter and the seats, floor and upholstery shall be clean and undamaged. The exterior of the vehicle shall be undamaged and kept clean and properly painted. 
(f)  Air conditioning. Each public passenger vehicle is required to have the air conditioning on when requested by the passenger and whenever the outdoor temperature is above 85 degrees. 
(g)  Age of vehicle. Each vehicle must be no more than 7 years old as determined by the model year of manufacture when initially placed in service and may remain in service as long as it passes semiannual inspections in accordance with Section 114-36 and is maintained in compliance with the terms set forth in this article. 
(h)  Taximeter. 
(1)  All public passenger vehicles operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped with mechanical or electronic taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. All taximeters shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of each taximeter into a non-recording position at the termination of each trip. The taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the Village Manager or designee. Any inspector or other officer designated by the Village Manager is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any meter, and, discovering any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating the public passenger vehicle to cease operation. Thereupon such public passenger vehicle shall be kept off the highway until the taximeter is repaired and passes a reinspection. 
(2)  The taximeters may be operated mechanically or electronically. If the taximeter is operated mechanically, it shall be a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from 1 of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached mechanism. 
(3)  All taximeters, whether mechanically or electronically operated, shall conform to the standards of the United States Department of Commerce as adopted by the National Conference on Weights and Measures and published in the most recent edition of the Bureau's Handbook No. 44 and the current official revisions and interpretations. These standards are incorporated into and made a part of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 48.063; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 5, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 114-36. - Vehicle inspections. 
(a)  Required. The inspections enumerated in this section shall be made for the purpose of determining compliance of each vehicle with the conditions set forth in this article. 
(b)  Inspection standards. In accordance with Section 114-33, the Village Manager or designee shall adopt rules and regulations establishing reasonable inspection standards which public passenger vehicles must satisfy to pass the inspections required by this article. The inspection standards shall be designed to ensure that public passenger vehicles licensed by the Village are mechanically dependable, safe, and clean and satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Initial inspection. The Village Manager or designee shall conduct an initial inspection of each vehicle with respect to which a license is sought for the first time, prior to the issuance of such license, to determine its compliance with the conditions set forth in this article. 
(d)  Periodic inspections. The Village Manager or designee shall conduct semiannual reinspections of each public passenger vehicle for the purpose of determining continued compliance with the conditions set forth in this article. 
(e)  Inspection stations. The Village Manager or designee shall designate specific licensed motor vehicle repair facilities in the Village with certified mechanics to serve as inspection stations to conduct vehicle inspections required by this article. All public passenger vehicles shall bear a current sticker issued by the Village after proof of passing the required inspection from a certified mechanic at a designated inspection station is submitted to the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 48.064)  
Sec. 114-37. - Designation and marking of vehicles. 
(a)  Display of name of owner; identifying design. Each public passenger vehicle shall bear on the outside of a door on each side of the public passenger vehicle, in painted letters not less than 3 inches and not more than 5 inches in height, the name of the owner, and in addition may bear an identifying design approved by the Village Manager or designee. No vehicle covered by this article shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this article, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. If, after a license has been issued for a public passenger vehicle under this article, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the Village Manager or designee, in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia used by any other person or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive the public, the license of or certificate covering such public passenger vehicle shall be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Display of vehicle identification number. The identification number assigned to each vehicle by the public passenger vehicle company shall be placed in the interior of the public passenger vehicle on the back of the driver's seat with a minimum letter size of 3 inches in a color that contrasts with the upholstery in clear sight of the passenger compartment. The identification number assigned to each vehicle by the public passenger vehicle company shall be placed on the outside of the vehicle on the rear of the public passenger vehicle and on the passenger side's front fender of the vehicle. 
(Code 1979, § 48.07; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 4, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-38. - Rates of fare; rate card. 
(a)  No owner or driver of a public passenger vehicle shall charge a greater sum for the use of a public passenger vehicle than in accordance with the following rates: 
(1)  The "flag pull" shall not exceed $2.00. The rate for each 1/10 mile or fraction thereof shall not exceed $0.20. For Dial-A-Ride participants, the rate shall be based upon each additional 1/7 mile. 
(2)  The rate for each additional passenger over the age of 12 shall not exceed $2.00. Participants of the Dial-A-Ride program shall not pay an additional passenger fee. A card shall be displayed in each public passenger vehicle setting forth the additional passenger rate charge as provided in this subsection, and stating that the total additional passenger charge accrues to the benefit of the driver of the public passenger vehicle. 
(3)  No driver shall transport passengers, nor shall any charge be made, unless the meter flag is in a recording position. The meter shall not register until the passenger is in the public passenger vehicle except as otherwise provided under subsection (6) of this section. 
(4)  Passengers shall be entitled to a conveyance of their ordinary hand luggage without charge. 
(5)  No charge shall be made for children under 12 years of age, accompanied by an adult. 
(6)  The rate for each minute of waiting time or fraction thereof shall not exceed $0.35, and shall not exceed $21.00 per hour. Such waiting time shall include the time beginning 5 minutes after arrival at the place to which the public passenger vehicle has been called and the time consumed at direction of a passenger. 
(7)  The flat rate of fare between O'Hare Airport and a location within the Village shall not exceed $28.00. 
(b)  Every public passenger vehicle operated under this article shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed on the back of the front seat as to be in view of all passengers. 
(Code 1979, § 48.08; Ord. No. 01-1-C-2966, § 1, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 04-6-C-3280, § 1, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 04-12-C-3323, § 1, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 05-6-C-3362, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 06-1-C-3407, § 2, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 08-4-C-3615, § 1, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 15-8-C-4174, § 5, 8-17-2015)  
Sec. 114-39. - Receipts. 
The driver of any public passenger vehicle shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the name of the dispatch company, the identification number assigned to the particular vehicle by the public passenger vehicle company, the amount of the meter reading or charges and the date of the transaction. 
(Code 1979, § 48.09; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 5, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-40. - Refusal of passenger to pay fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any public passenger vehicle after having hired the vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any public passenger vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired for the value of such service. 
(Code 1979, § 48.10)  
Sec. 114-41. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers; prohibited acts by drivers. 
(a)  Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit passengers for a public passenger vehicle except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such public passenger vehicle or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver of any public passenger vehicle shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to the vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from the driver's public passenger vehicle for not more than 30 consecutive minutes. Nothing contained in this section shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(b)  Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any persons for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(c)  Receipt and discharge of passengers. Drivers of public passenger vehicles shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but shall pull up to the righthand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or in the absence of a sidewalk to the extreme righthand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be discharged at either the righthand or lefthand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(d)  Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in the public passenger vehicle unless the person or persons first employing the public passenger vehicle shall expressly direct the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's destination, and then only for the additional distance so traveled. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any public passenger vehicle to solicit the permission of the person first hiring the public passenger vehicle to pick up any additional passengers. 
(e)  Riding in front seat. No driver shall permit any person to ride in the front seat unless the rear compartment of the public passenger vehicle is filled to capacity. 
(f)  Restriction on number of passengers. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a public passenger vehicle as passengers than the rated seating capacity of the public passenger vehicle based on the number of seat belts. 
(g)  Refusal to carry passengers. No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(h)  Prohibited acts by drivers. No driver of a public passenger vehicle shall solicit business for any hotel, or attempt to divert patronage from 1 hotel to another. No driver shall engage in selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use such vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers or package delivery. 
(Code 1979, § 48.11)  
Sec. 114-42. - Open stands. 
(a)  Establishment. The Village Manager or designee may establish open stands in such place or places upon the streets of the Village as deemed necessary for the use of public passenger vehicles operated in the Village. No open stand shall be created without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the companies and the convenience to the general public. The Village Manager or designee shall prescribe the number of public passenger vehicles that shall occupy such open stands. 
(b)  Use. Open stands shall be used in the following manner: 
(1)  Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come, first served basis. The driver shall pull onto the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the public passenger vehicles ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within 5 feet of their public passenger vehicles; they shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. A passenger may board the public passenger vehicle of the passenger's choice that is parked at an open stand. 
(2)  The standing of public passenger vehicles in places other than designated public passenger vehicle stands is prohibited. 
(3)  Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space upon the streets that has been established as an open stand. 
(Code 1979, § 48.12; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 6, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-43. - Service requirements. 
All persons engaged in the public passenger vehicle business in the Village operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use public passenger vehicles. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the place of business open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching public passenger vehicles. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the Village as soon as they can do so. If service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the Village at any time when such holder has available public passenger vehicles, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this article, and the certificate granted to such holder may be revoked at the discretion of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 48.13; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 7, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-44. - Manifests. 
(a)  There shall be maintained a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such manifests shall be retained by the dispatch company and/or owner. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished by the dispatch company and shall be approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
(b)  Every owner shall retain and preserve all manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and the manifests shall be available to the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 48.14)  
Sec. 114-45. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Required records. Every holder shall keep accurate records or receipts of operations, expenses, and capital expenditures and such other operating information as may be required by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(b)  Submittal of records. Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of operation to the Mayor and Board of Trustees for each calendar year in accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The reports shall reach the Mayor and Board of Trustees on or before March 1 of the year following the calendar year for which such reports are prepared. 
(c)  Accident reports. All accidents within the Village arising from or in connection with the operation of public passenger vehicles which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any vehicle, or to any property in the amount exceeding the sum of $100.00, shall be reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the Village Police Department in a form of report to be furnished by the Department. 
(d)  Service contract reports. It shall be mandatory for all holders to file with the Mayor and Board of Trustees copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda, or other writings relating to the furnishing of public passenger vehicle service to any hotel, theater, hall, public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering, whether such arrangement is made with the holder or any corporation, firm or association with which the holder may be interested or connected. Failure to file such copies within 7 days shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of a certificate of any offending holder or the cancellation of any open stand privileges. 
(Code 1979, § 48.15; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 8, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-46. - Advertising on vehicles. 
Subject to the rules and regulations of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, it is unlawful for any person owning or operating a public passenger vehicle or motor vehicle for hire to permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such public passenger vehicles or motor vehicles for hire. 
(Code 1979, § 48.16) 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6.  
Sec. 114-47. - Dial-A-Ride program. 
(a)  All public passenger vehicles licensed under this article shall be required to accept subsidy coupons. For the purpose of this section, the term "subsidy coupon" shall be defined as a coupon issued by the Village to residents registered for the Dial-A-Ride program and used at face value towards payment of the fare. 
(b)  No public passenger vehicle driver licensed under this article shall refuse to provide service to any Dial-A-Ride participant. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1-6, the enforcement provisions contained in Section 114-34 and the license suspension and revocation provisions contained in Section 114-107, in addition to any other penalty specifically provided for. 
(Code 1979, § 48.18; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 9, 2-22-2000)  
Secs. 114-48—114-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 114-71. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to operate or permit a public passenger vehicle owned or controlled by such person to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the Village without first obtaining a certificate of public convenience and necessity in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-72. - Application information; filing fee. 
Applications for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in Section 46-229. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-73. - Public hearing on application. 
Upon the filing of an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall fix a time and place for a public hearing to be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given the general public by advertising in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. The notice shall be published not more than 30 days and not less than 10 days prior to the date stated as the date of public hearing. Any interested person may file with the Mayor and Board of Trustees a memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of the certificate. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-74. - Issuance. 
(a)  If a majority of the Mayor and Board of Trustees finds that further public passenger vehicle service in the Village is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may issue a certificate of public convenience and necessity, which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and the date of issuance. 
(b)  In making the findings mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall take into consideration the number of public passenger vehicles already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased services on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall further take into consideration the services being provided by holders of certificates and their ability to provide the additional public passenger vehicle services required, and, upon application of such holders, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall give due consideration to the distribution of the additional licenses to the existing holders who have so applied. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-75. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A certificate issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor and Board of Trustees if the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this article, discontinued operations for more than 30 days, or violated any ordinance of the Village or the laws of the United States or the State, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(b)  Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-76. - Transfer. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this division may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, pledged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-77. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  The holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall file a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State. The policy shall conform to the provisions of Section 114-104(c). 
(b)  All insurance policies required by this section, or copies certified by the insurers, shall be filed with the Village Manager or designee, and shall not be subject to cancellation except on 30 days' previous notice to the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 48.02; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 2, 2-22-2000)  
Secs. 114-78—114-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 114-101. - Required licenses. 
No person or entity shall operate a public passenger vehicle or permit a public passenger vehicle owned or controlled by such person or entity to be operated for hire upon Village streets without obtaining the applicable licenses established by this article. Such applicable licenses consist of the following 3 types: 
(1)  A business license; 
(2)  A public passenger vehicle license; and 
(3)  A chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1979, § 48.03)  
Sec. 114-102. - Application information. 
Applications for a business license, public passenger vehicle license or chauffeur's license under this division shall be made to the Village Manager or designee on forms prescribed and furnished by the Village Manager or designee. The Village Manager or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 48.03)  
Sec. 114-103. - Issuance. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the Village Manager or designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the applicant. When the review reveals that all applicable requirements are complied with, including the payment of all applicable license fees, and the application reveals nothing of a nature that might endanger the health, safety and welfare of the general public as a result of the possession of a license, the Village Manager or designee shall issue the respective license to the applicant which conforms to Village standards. A license may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the terms set forth in Section 114-107. 
(Code 1979, § 48.03)  
Sec. 114-104. - Business license. 
(a)  Required. It is unlawful for a public passenger vehicle which is dispatched, owned or controlled by a person or entity to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon Village streets without first having obtained a business license. A person who is merely an employee of the owner of the public passenger vehicle is not required to obtain a business license. 
(b)  Fees; term. Fees for business licenses shall be as set forth in Section 46-229. The license shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. 
(c)  Bond. No business license shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect an indemnity bond for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any 1 person, in the amount of $300,000.00 for injuries to more than 1 person which are sustained in the same accident, and in the amount of $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from any 1 accident. Evidence of compliance with this subsection shall be by the issuance of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed in the State of Illinois. The certificate of insurance required hereunder shall insure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder or the holder's employees or agents. The certificate of insurance shall be filed in the office of the Village Manager or designee and shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in the State. 
(Code 1979, § 48.04)  
Sec. 114-105. - Chauffeur's license. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate a public passenger vehicle for hire upon the streets of the Village, and no person who owns or controls a public passenger vehicle shall permit it to be so driven, and no public passenger vehicle licensed by the Village shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the public passenger vehicle shall have a chauffeur's license issued under the provisions of this article and an appropriate driver's license issued by the State. 
(b)  Fee; term. Fees for chauffeur's licenses shall be as set forth in Section 46-229. The license shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. 
(c)  Eligibility. Every applicant shall be 18 years of age or over, and each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician certifying that, in the physician's opinion, the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(d)  Training program. Applicants for a chauffeur's license are required to attend a chauffeur's training program designated by the Village Manager or designee through the adoption of rules and regulations in accordance with Section 114-33. The training program shall include but not be limited to knowledge of the community, frequently requested destinations, special destinations and information contained in this article. 
(e)  Examination of applicants and licensees. All applicants for a chauffeur's license and, if deemed necessary, all public passenger vehicle drivers upon the renewal of their chauffeur's license issued by the Village shall be subject to passing a test administered by the Village Manager or designee. The test shall consist of, but not be limited to, questions pertaining to the driver's geographic familiarity with the Village and the Village's Dial-A-Ride program. 
(f)  Police investigation of applicant. The Police Department shall conduct an investigation, including fingerprinting, of each applicant for a chauffeur's license, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the Village Manager or designee. 
(g)  Action on application. The Village Manager or designee shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the Mayor and Board of Trustees to offer evidence why the application should be reconsidered. 
(h)  Display. Every driver under this article shall post the driver's chauffeur's license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a public passenger vehicle. 
(i)  Compliance with applicable laws. Every driver licensed under this article shall comply with all Village, State and federal laws. 
(Code 1979, § 48.05; Ord. No. 00-2-C-2881, § 3, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 114-106. - Vehicle license. 
(a)  Required. It is unlawful to operate a public passenger vehicle for hire within the Village unless the public passenger vehicle's operator, owner or dispatcher has obtained a specific public passenger vehicle license for that particular public passenger vehicle. 
(b)  Fee; term. Fees for public passenger vehicle licenses shall be as set forth in Section 46-229. The license fee shall be for the year beginning May 1 and terminating the following April 30 and shall be in addition to any other applicable license and permit fees or charges established by the Village. 
(Code 1979, § 48.06)  
Sec. 114-107. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Authorized; grounds. The Village Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend any business license, public passenger vehicle license or chauffeur's license issued under this division. In addition to the provisions contained in this article, the Village Manager shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for the conduct of a hearing relating to the revocation or suspension of licenses. The Village Manager is hereby given the authority to revoke or suspend a license if the Village Manager finds: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, laws, policies or rules and regulations. 
(2)  The licensee has made fraudulent, false or misrepresentative statements in the application for the license. 
(3)  The licensee owes the Village required fees or outstanding fines or penalties. 
(4)  The licensee has failed to provide insurance in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Fraudulent use of the license has occurred with the licensee's consent, if applicable. 
(6)  An individual chauffeur's licensee has become physically, mentally or emotionally unfit to perform the licensee's duties as a public passenger vehicle operator. 
(7)  Public passenger vehicle operation has been discontinued by a business licensee in the Village for more than 30 days. 
(b)  Notice and hearing. The Village Manager or designee may revoke, suspend, or take other action with respect to a license in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The Village Manager or designee shall send written notice of the intent to revoke or suspend a license by certified mail or personal delivery, setting forth the reasons for revocation or suspension. 
(2)  In matters involving license suspension, the notice shall state the effective date of the suspension. In matters involving license revocation, the notice shall state the effective date of the revocation, which shall be 30 days from the date of the notice. Notices regarding suspension or revocation shall inform the licensee of the right to submit in writing within 15 days of the date of the notice either: 
a.  Documentation to explain the past occurrences stated in the notice and to propose corrective action to eliminate the violations; or 
b.  A request for hearing. 
(3)  If the Village Manager or designee accepts the corrective action proposed by the licensee, the Manager or designee shall respond in writing stating the conditions for continuing to hold the license and retracting or deferring the notice of intent to revoke or suspend the license. 
(4)  If the licensee requests a hearing, the Village Manager or designee shall hold a hearing within 30 days of the date of the original notice, at which hearing the licensee shall have an opportunity to present evidence in the licensee's behalf. 
(5)  The Village Manager or designee conducting the hearing shall render a written decision within 7 days of the hearing, sent to the licensee by certified mail or personal delivery, either: 
a.  Revoking or suspending the license, stating the effective date of the action; or 
b.  Stating any conditions for continuing to hold the license. 
(Code 1979, § 48.19)  
Sec. 114-108. - Appeals. 
A business licensee may appeal to the Mayor and Board of Trustees decisions of the Village Manager or designee only after a hearing is requested and a decision is rendered by the Village Manager or designee. The licensee must file a notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within 30 days after the Village Manager's or designee's decision is rendered. If a hearing has not been requested, the decision and determinations of the Village Manager or designee are not appealable to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. Within 30 days of receipt of a notice to appeal, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall hear the evidence presented by the licensee and the Village Manager or designee. 
(Code 1979, § 48.193)  
Secs. 114-109—114-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVERY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 114-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Livery vehicle means a passenger vehicle for hire only at a charge or fare for each passenger per trip or for each vehicle per trip fixed by agreement in advance. 
(Code 1979, § 42.221) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 114-132. - Taximeters prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive a livery vehicle equipped with a meter which registers a charge or fare or indicates the distance traveled by which the charge or fare to be paid by a passenger is measured. 
(Code 1979, § 42.222)  
Sec. 114-133. - Solicitation of passengers. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit passengers for transportation in a livery vehicle on any public way. No such vehicle shall be parked on any public way for a time longer than is reasonably necessary to accept passengers in answer to a call for service, and no passengers shall be accepted for any trip in such vehicle without previous engagement for such trip, at a fixed charge or fare, through the station or office from which the vehicle is operated. 
(Code 1979, § 42.223)  
Sec. 114-134. - Markings on vehicles; advertising restrictions. 
(a)  The outside of the body of livery vehicles shall not have any inscription thereon. No lights shall be attached to or exposed outside of such vehicle unless required or permitted by the laws of the State regulating traffic. 
(b)  It is unlawful for persons to hold themselves out to the public, by advertisement or otherwise, to render any livery service, unless the person is the driver of a licensed livery vehicle, or for any such person to use the words "cab" or "cabman," or "taxi" or "taxicab," in connection with or as a part of the person's operation of such vehicle. 
(Code 1979, § 42.224)  
Secs. 114-135—114-160. - Reserved. 


SKOKIE VILLAGE - ZONING CHAPTER 
____________ 
VOLUME II 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
SKOKIE, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
George Van Dusen 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michele L. Bromberg 
Michael A. Gelder 
Frank G. McCabe 
Donald P. Perille 
Randall E. Roberts 
Edie Sue Sutker 
Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Marlene Williams 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Albert J. Rigoni 
Village Manager 
____________ 
J. Patrick Hanley 
Corporation Counsel 
____________ 
Peter W. Peyer 
Director of Community Development 
____________ 
? 
? 
? 
Paul Luke, Chairman 
Michael Lorge, Vice Chairman 
Herb Sweetow, Secretary 
David J. Marek 
George Mitchell 
Morton Paradise 
Mel Septon 
Lawrence Stasica 
Plan Commission 
____________ 
Ralph Klein, Chairman 
Robert Davis 
Marilyn D. Glazer 
Omprakash Kamaria 
Robert Leifer 
James McCarthy 
Syed Najiullah 
David Solovy 
Roberta Sweetow 
Zoning Board of Appeals 
____________ 
Herbert Dubrow 
Assistant Corporation Counsel 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
SKOKIE, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
George Van Dusen 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michele L. Bromberg 
Karen Gray Keeler 
Ralph Klein 
Randall E. Roberts 
Edie Sue Sutker 
Ilonka Ulrich 
Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Pramod C. Shah 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
John T. Lockerby 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Michael M. Lorge 
Corporate Counsel 
____________ 
Peter W. Peyer 
Director of Community Development 
____________ 
? 
? 
? 
Paul Luke, Chairman 
George Mitchell, Vice Chairman 
Dakshes Laxpati, Secretary 
Scott Berman 
Jeff Burman 
Cindy Franklin 
Ross Mathee 
Bob Quane 
Melissa Villegas 
Plan Commission 
____________ 
Brian O'Donnell, Chairman 
Alan Gerstner, Vice Chairman 
Jessica Beverly 
Mike Shah 
Richard Perlin 
Sean Arden 
Sharon Roos-Kirkpatrick 
David Solovy 
Elaine Jacobson 
Zoning Board of Appeals 
____________ 
Tyler Kobylski 
Assistant Corporation Counsel 
PREFACE 
    This Code volume contains the zoning chapter for this recodification of the general and permanent 
ordinances of the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the zoning chapter were the zoning ordinance, as 
supplemented through 1999 and subsequent ordinances. The source of each section is included in the 
history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in 
the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the zoning ordinance Code, as 
supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have 
been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the zoning 
chapter is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many 
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The 
figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of 
the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 118 is numbered 118-2. Under this 
system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in 
their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting 
of one section that would logically come between sections 118-1 and 118-2 is desired to be added, such 
new section would be numbered 118-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same 
way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the 
case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive 
number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of 
the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is 
maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. The following are the parts of volume II, and their 
corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 
ZCD118:1 
ZONING COMPARATIVE TABLES 
ZCDCT:1 
ZONING STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
ZCDSLT:1 
ZONING CODE INDEX 
ZCDi:1 
 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under 
several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still 
others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item 
in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Connie 
Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the 
other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the 
project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Barbara Meyer, Corporation Counsel, Mark Vanderpool, Assistant 
Village Manager, and Keith Glatz, Purchasing Agent and Marlene Williams, Village Clerk, for their 
cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their 
efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of 
the village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day 
administration of the village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the 
Village of Skokie, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of 
contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law 
references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such 
material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of 
Municipal Code Corporation and Village of Skokie, Illinois. 
©?Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Skokie, Illinois. 2004. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 05-1-C-3333 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 118 OF THE SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE PERTAINING TO THE 
INCLUSION OF EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCES INTO THE SKOKIE VILLAGE CODE 
    WHEREAS, on April 15, 2002, the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Skokie adopted the 
recodification of the Code of Ordinances for the Village of Skokie into the Skokie Village Code 
(hereinafter "SVC") that provided the additional benefit of making the SVC available to the public in an 
electronic format; and 
    WHEREAS, at the time the recodification was adopted, Chapter 118 was reserved for the Skokie 
zoning ordinances, however, they were not included in the recodification process because there were 
numerous amendments under consideration by the Skokie Plan Commission; and 
    WHEREAS, the Skokie Plan Commission and the Mayor and Board of Trustees have since 
completed their review of most major sections of the Village of Skokie zoning ordinances in 2004 and as 
a result, the Community Development Department and the Municipal Code Corporation (hereinafter 
"MCC") were able to complete the zoning ordinances recodification process; and 
    WHEREAS, Chapter 118 will contain the Skokie zoning ordinances and the content will be the same 
as the existing zoning ordinances, however, the numbering system will be consistent with the rest of the 
Village Code. In addition, the order of some sections have been changed to make them easier to find and 
use; and 
    WHEREAS, the Community Development Director recommended in his memorandum dated 
November 1, 2004, that the recodified zoning ordinances be incorporated into the SVC as Chapter 118; 
and 
    WHEREAS, a copy of the proposed Chapter 118 is attached hereto as Exhibit "1"; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of 
Skokie, Cook County, Illinois; 
    Section 1: That Chapter 118, of the SVC be and the same is hereby amended by adopting and 
incorporating the proposed Chapter 118, as attached hereto in Exhibit "1", being comprised of the newly 
recodified zoning ordinances of the Village of Skokie. 
    Section 2: That the provisions of the amended Chapter 118, insofar as they are substantively the 
same as the existing Village of Skokie zoning ordinances regardless of their location and numbering, shall 
be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. In the event the term or terms, 
"Skokie Zoning Ordinance," "Amended Zoning Ordinance" or a similar word or phrase is referenced in 
any Village of Skokie Ordinance or Resolution, the Skokie Village Code, or any Village issued document 
whatsoever, then such term or terms shall mean and be construed as if it referenced Chapter 118. 
    Section 3: That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval 
and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. 
    ADOPTED this 3rd day of January, 2005. 
Ayes: 5 (McCabe, Perille, Roberts, Sutker, Van Dusen) 
Nays: 0 
Absent: 2 (Bromberg, Gelder) 

/s/ ?  
      Village Clerk 
 
 
Approved by me this 3rd day of January, 2005. 

/s/ ?  
      Mayor, Village of Skokie 
 
 
Attested and filed in my office this 4th day of January, 2005; and published in pamphlet form 
according to law from January 4th, 2005 to January 14th, 2005. 
/s/ ?  
      Village Clerk 

 
 


ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, deleted the former Art. I, §§ 118-1—
118-30, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to in general. See the 
Code Comparative Table for a complete history of the former Art. I. 


Sec. 118-1. - General. 
(a) ?Title. This chapter may also be referred to as the "Zoning Ordinance." 
(b) ?Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard public health and welfare and to conserve the 
value of property by controlling the design, location, use, or occupancy of all buildings and structures 
through the regulated and orderly development of land and land uses within the Village. It is intended 
to benefit the public as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons. This chapter fulfills 
this intent by: 
(1) ?Determining the methods and procedures to implement and enforce this chapter, including, but 
not limited to, when site plan approval and planned developments are required and providing 
variations or relief from its requirements. 
(2) ?Considering the existing and future development or use of land in the Village under the 
guidance of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3) ?Dividing the entire Village into districts, revising those districts as necessary, and defining and 
restricting uses allowed in those districts. 
(4) ?Restricting and regulating the location of buildings and structures on a lot or lots, including 
height and bulk, setbacks from property lines or other buildings or structures, the amount of 
open space, and the intensity of use. 
(5) ?Establishing standards for certain improvements such as building design and the amounts and 
locations of required landscaping and parking in a way that is compatible with the intended use 
of the zoning district. 
(c) ?Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, addition, alteration, moving, 
repair, and use of any building, structure, parcel of land, sign, or public rights-of-way within the 
Village. These provisions do not apply to towers, poles, and equipment of a public utility. 
    Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the more 
restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific 
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Although not intended to abrogate any 
easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements of this chapter shall govern whenever 
the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements. 
    Through the implementation, administration, and enforcement of this chapter, benefits and 
detriments may be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals, which is merely a byproduct of the overall 
benefit to the whole community. 
    If any portion of this code is held invalid for any reason, the remaining herein shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-2. - Fees. 
    A fee for services may be charged, and a schedule of fees is available in the Community 
Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-3. - Compliance with the chapter. 
    Upon adoption of this code by the Village Board, no use, building, or structure, whether publicly or 
privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized until it conforms to this code. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 1, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-4. - Existing buildings and uses. 
(a) ?General. Lawfully established buildings and uses in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter, 
or any subsequent change to this chapter, are permitted to have their existing use or occupancy 
continued, except when it is contrary to public health and welfare. 
(b) ?Additions, alterations, or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs are permitted to be made to any 
building without requiring the existing building to comply with the requirements of this chapter, 
provided the addition, alteration, or repair conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c) ?Maintenance. All buildings or parcels of land must be maintained by the owner. To determine 
compliance with this section, the Zoning Official is permitted to inspect any building or parcel of land. 
(d) ?Moved or temporary buildings, structures, and uses. Buildings, structures, or uses moved into or 
within the Village must comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Temporary buildings, structures, and uses for the protection of the public are permitted, provided an 
approval is received from the Zoning Official, for a limited period of time and completely removed upon 
the expiration of the time limit stated on the permit. 
(e) ?Illegal uses. Uses that were illegally established prior to the adoption of this chapter remain illegal, 
unless otherwise made legal. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-5. - Duties and powers of the Zoning Official. 
(a) ?General. This section establishes the duties and responsibilities for the Zoning Official, designated 
by the Village Manager. The Zoning Official and/or designee is referred to herein as "the Zoning 
Official." 
(b) ?Designees. The Zoning Official may designate other employees as may be necessary to carry out 
the functions of this chapter. 
(c) ?Reviews and approvals. The Zoning Official is authorized to undertake reviews, make 
recommendations, conduct inspections, grant approvals, and any other duties necessary to 
implement or enforce this chapter. All approvals must be in writing by the Zoning Official. 
(d) ?Comprehensive Plan. The Zoning Official assists the Plan Commission in the development and 
implementation of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(e) ?Administrative actions. The Zoning Official receives and reviews for completeness applications, 
submittals, and requests, including any plans and all data necessary to show that the requirements 
of this chapter are met, and distribute those submittals for review and action to the appropriate body 
for: 
(1) ?Building permits. 
(2) ?Certificates of occupancy. 
(3) ?Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Appearance Commission cases, including 
amendments to cases previously heard. 
(4) ?Modified review of site plan approvals, special use permits, and certain plats of subdivisions or 
dedications. 
(5) ?Zoning verification letters of the status of the conformance of the buildings, structures, and 
uses on the requested lot. 
(6) ?Determinations of the specific use of a lot and whether the use is a permitted, special, 
accessory, or restricted in that zoning district. 
(7) ?Other plan reviews as needed. 
(f) ?Enforcement actions. The Zoning Official enforces compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(g) ?Interpretations. The Zoning Official interprets and applies the provisions of this chapter. 
(h) ?Liability. The Zoning Official, acting in good faith in the discharge of the duties described in this 
chapter, is not personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of 
an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person other 
than the Zoning Official for damage or injury to any person or property in relation to any building or parcel 
of land by reason of the reviews or permits issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-6. - Plan Commission. 
(a) ?General. This section addresses the duties and responsibilities of the Plan Commission and other 
officials and agencies with respect to the administration of this chapter. 
(b) ?Establishment of the Commission. The establishment of the Plan Commission, herein referred to as 
"the Commission," shall be in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in this code. 
(c) ?Commission reporter. A reporter to assist the Commission shall be appointed by the Zoning Official. 
The reporter keeps records of the Commission meetings for public record and conducts all 
correspondence, including the notification of decisions. The reporter shall prepare and submit the 
minutes of the Commission meetings to the chairperson and the Commission for approval. 
(d) ?Recommendations to the Village Board. The Commission, after holding public hearings, has the 
duty to make recommendations, including any conditions of approval, to the Village Board in the 
following areas: 
(1) ?Comprehensive Plan. Developing, periodically reviewing, and amending a Comprehensive 
Plan for the present and future development and redevelopment of the Village. 
(2) ?Chapter amendments. Periodically reviewing and recommending amendments to the Zoning 
chapter, in accordance with the guidelines of the Comprehensive Plan and the Subdivisions 
chapter of this code. 
(3) ?Zoning map amendments. Amending boundaries of zoning districts on the zoning map. 
(4) ?Subdivisions. Reviewing and offering recommendations for all subdivisions 4 acres or greater 
in area or in conjunction with a special use permit or site plan approval. 
(5) ?Dedications. Reviewing the dedication of any new street or alley and any addition to existing 
rights-of-way when considered in conjunction with a special use permit, site plan approval, or a 
subdivision that is subject to review by the Commission. 
(6) ?Zoning chapter relief. Recommending relief from those allowable variations listed in Section 
118-7 in conjunction with special use permit or site plan approval. 
(7) ?Subdivisions chapter relief. Recommending relief from the subdivision layout requirements for 
sites 4 acres or greater or when the development for which the subdivision is requested 
requires a planned development. 
(8) ?Site plan approvals. Reviewing and offering recommendations on proposed site plans for 
permitted uses that require site plan approval to ensure that district regulations are met and to 
maintain a high quality of development. The Commission shall also review site plans for 
decorative fence locations at nonresidential permitted uses in all residential districts, except for 
fences at schools, public parks, governmental uses, and public utilities that are required for the 
protection of the public. 
(9) ?Special use permits. Reviewing and offering recommendations on proposed special uses that, 
because of their potential adverse impact upon the immediate neighborhood and the Village as 
a whole, require a greater degree of scrutiny and review of site characteristics, operation of the 
use, and impacts to determine their suitability in a given location. 
(10) ?Vacations. Reviewing the vacation of any public street or alley. Compensation is to be 
determined by the Village Board. 
(e) ?Determination of off-street parking requirements. The Commission determines the off-street parking 
requirements for uses that specifically require a commission determination. The Commission is the 
final hearing body in these cases. 
(f) ?Special use permit review findings of fact. Each request for a special use permit must be consistent 
with the following findings of fact: 
(1) ?The request is consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2) ?The request will not adversely affect adjacent properties. 
(3) ?The request is compatible with the existing or allowable uses of adjacent properties. 
(4) ?The request demonstrates that adequate public facilities, including roads, drainage, utilities, 
and police and fire protection exist or will exist to serve the requested use at the time such 
facilities are needed. 
(5) ?The request demonstrates adequate provision for maintenance and use of the associated 
structures. 
(6) ?The request has considered and, to the degree possible, addressed the adverse effects on the 
natural environment. 
(7) ?The request will not create undue traffic congestion. 
(8) ?The request will not adversely affect public health, safety, and welfare. 
(9) ?The request conforms to all applicable provisions of this code, except where relief is granted 
with the request. 
(g) ?Site plan approval review findings of fact. Consideration of each request for site plan approval must 
be confined solely to the site plan characteristics, not based upon the characteristics of the proposed 
use, and consistent with the following findings of fact: 
(1) ?The request is harmonious with and does not adversely affect adjacent properties. 
(2) ?The request can demonstrate that adequate public facilities, including roads, drainage, utilities, 
and police and fire protection exist or will exist to serve the requested use at the time such 
facilities are needed. 
(3) ?The request demonstrates adequate provision for maintenance of the associated structures. 
(4) ?The request has considered and, to the degree possible, addressed the adverse effects on the 
natural environment. 
(5) ?The request will not create undue traffic congestion. 
(6) ?The request will not adversely affect public health, safety, and welfare. 
(7) ?The request conforms to all applicable provisions of this code, except where relief is granted 
with the request. 
(h) ?Zoning map amendments findings of fact. Each request for a zoning map amendment must be 
made with respect to the following findings of fact: 
(1) ?The map amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan or development trends in the 
area that have taken place since the affected property was placed in the present zoning district. 
(2) ?After identifying the existing uses and zoning districts in the area, the property in question is 
more suitable for the uses allowed under proposed zoning district than the existing zoning 
district. 
(i) ?Appeals and hearings. Any person with standing aggrieved by any decision of the Commission shall 
have the right to make such appeals as shall be permitted by this chapter or state law. Such appeals 
shall be based on the record. 
(j) ?Written report. After the Plan Commission has made its recommendation on a case and once all of 
the necessary conditions are met by the applicant, the Plan Commission shall send a written report 
with its recommendation to the Village within 120 days. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-7. - Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(a) ?General. This section addresses the duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Board of Appeals, 
hereafter referred to as "the ZBA," and other officials and agencies, with respect to the administration 
of this chapter. 
(b) ?Establishment of the ZBA. The establishment of the ZBA shall be in accordance with the policies 
and procedures set forth in this code. 
(c) ?ZBA reporter. A reporter to assist the ZBA shall be appointed by the Zoning Official. The reporter 
keeps records of the ZBA meetings for public record and conducts all correspondence, including the 
notification of decisions. The reporter shall prepare and submit the minutes of the ZBA meetings to 
the chairperson and the ZBA for approval. 
(d) ?Duties and powers. 
(1) ?Variances. The ZBA hears and decides appeals to the terms of this chapter. Limitations as to 
the ZBA's authorization are set forth in this chapter. 
a. ?Location and size of accessory buildings and structures within permitted yards. 
b. ?Height of a building or structure provided that a certificate of appropriateness has been 
issued by the Appearance Commission. 
c. ?Spacing between congregate living facilities. 
d. ?Land coverage, floor area ratio, or impermeable surface ratios. 
e. ?Size of all required yards and the placement of buildings or structures therein. 
f. ?Number of required off-street motor vehicle or bicycle parking spaces and from the 
requirements of Section 118-212, Motor vehicle parking facility design standards, (a) Size 
and clearance. 
g. ?Reduction in the setback requirement for landscaping in business districts along arterial 
streets, Main Street, or Howard Street, provided that the project would not be economically 
feasible but for the variance or that other design features are substituted for the 
landscaping that have been approved by the Appearance Commission. 
h. ?Parking certain commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
i. ?Requirements in the Signs chapter of this code. 
j. ?Reducing a required minimum lot area, lot width, or required side yard to build a detached 
residence on a substandard buildable lot of record in a residential district established prior 
to 1947, provided it meets all the other requirements of this chapter. The owner shall 
provide with the application for a variance a survey of the lot by a duly licensed land 
surveyor and the portion of the adjacent lots including the distance between the side lot 
line and the nearest part of the buildings or structures thereon. 
(2) ?Appeals to administrative decisions. The ZBA hears and decides appeals where it is alleged 
that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, determination, or interpretation by the 
Zoning Official. 
(3) ?Variance review findings of fact. The ZBA is permitted to approve, approve with conditions, or 
deny a request for variance. Each request for a variance must be consistent with the following 
findings of fact: 
a. ?Limitation on the use of the property due to physical, topographical, and geologic features. 
b. ?The applicant can demonstrate that without a variance there can be no reasonable use of 
the property. 
c. ?The grant of the variance is not based solely on economic reasons. 
d. ?The necessity for the variance was not created by the property owner. 
e. ?The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to allow reasonable use of the 
property. 
f. ?The grant of the variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
g. ?The property subject to the variance request possesses one or more unique characteristics 
generally not applicable to similarly situated properties. 
(4) ?Additional findings of fact for parking certain commercial vehicles in residential districts. In 
addition to the findings of fact for variances, a request for parking certain commercial vehicles in 
residential districts must also be consistent with the following findings of fact: 
a. ?The petitioner's business or occupation is of a nature requiring the usage of the vehicle 
upon demand at irregular hours for reasons of public necessity. 
b. ?Alternative, possible parking sites are not available. 
c. ?Screening of the vehicle can be provided. 
(5) ?Additional findings of fact for building on a substandard lot. In addition to the findings of fact for 
variances, a request to build on a substandard lot must also be consistent with the following 
findings of fact: 
a. ?The subject lot is not abutting a vacant lot on either side held under common ownership at 
any time after the year 1946. 
b. ?The subject lot is not abutting an improved lot of record which has 1' or more of an abutting 
side yard in excess of the minimum required side yard for the district in which the building 
or structure is located, which additional side yard land could physically be added to the 
applicant's lot to increase its width or area. 
c. ?The subject lot is not owned and has not been owned directly or indirectly or by a nominee 
of any person, firm, corporation or trust, or by an officer, shareholder, director, partner, 
beneficiary, agent or person related by blood or marriage or by any predecessors in title, 
who also held or holds any right, title or interest, directly or indirectly, in the applicant's lot 
after the year 1946 to the date of application for a building permit. 
d. ?The contiguous lots are not owned and have not been owned directly or indirectly or by a 
nominee of any person, firm, corporation or trust, or by an officer, shareholder, director, 
partner, beneficiary, agent or person related by blood or marriage or by any predecessors 
in title, who also held or holds any right, title or interest, directly or indirectly, in the 
applicant's lot after the year 1946 to the date of application for a building permit. 
e. ?The subject lot was not used as part of a single or common homesite by or with the 
consent of the same interests, which owned or controlled an abutting lot after the year 
1946 to the date of application for a building permit. 
(e) ?Limits to powers. 
(1) ?The ZBA is prohibited from granting a variance for the following items: 
a. ?Any term of this chapter that is specifically prohibited by this chapter. 
b. ?Any term of the chapter related to a B4, B6, H1, or OR zoning district. 
c. ?Establishing a use in a zoning district that is not allowed. 
d. ?Any provisions or conditions of any ordinance providing for a special use permit or site plan 
approval. 
e. ?Allowing a front yard fence or increase to fence height. 
f. ?Reducing the number of required off-street motor vehicle parking spaces in zoning districts 
where a cash distribution to a parking fund is required in lieu of parking spaces. 
g. ?Allowing parking of a commercial vehicle in a residential district in any yard that has a State 
license in excess of the "B" classification or 8,000 pounds gross weight, in any front yard, 
for more than 1 vehicle per residence, when the only purpose is to provide transportation to 
and from the applicant's place of employment, or on any nonconforming lot. 
h. ?Reducing a required side yard to less than 10% of the lot width on a substandard lot. 
i. ?Any requirement of the Signs chapter that has not been first endorsed by the Appearance 
Commission. 
(2) ?The ZBA may only recommend to the Village Board to grant or deny a variance for the 
following items: 
a. ?A building or structure height exceeding 10% of the existing applicable zoning district 
height regulation. 
b. ?A reduction in the spacing between congregate living facilities by more than 10% of the 
applicable requirement. 
c. ?To allow vehicle parking in the front yard in an industrial district. 
d. ?To allow required off-street vehicle parking in the front yard or side yard abutting a street in 
a residential district. 
The Village Board will grant or deny the petitioner's request. 
(f) ?Decisions. The ZBA is permitted to decide in any manner it sees fit. The ZBA also may require 
conditions upon the premises that reduce or minimize the injurious effect of the request upon other 
property in the neighborhood and implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter. In 
interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the conditions must be in the spirit and intent 
of the chapter and not constitute granting of a special privilege. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-10-
C-4254, § 1, 10-19-2016) 


Sec. 118-8. - Hearings, appeals, and modified reviews. 
(a) ?Hearings. 
(1) ?Notice. Upon receipt of an application in proper form, the Zoning Official shall arrange to 
advertise the time and place of the public hearing. Such advertisement shall be given by at least 
one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village. Such notice shall state 
the nature of the request, the location of the property, and the time and place of the hearing. 
Except for parking determinations and zoning chapter amendments, personal notice must be 
given by regular mail of the time and place of the hearing to each property owner, as 
ascertained by the most recent available property tax records available to the public by the 
Cook County Assessor's Office, of all lots or buildings lying in whole or part within 250' of the 
property lines of the subject property and all tenants, occupants, and property owners on the 
subject property. The petitioner must file an affidavit with the Zoning Official containing a 
complete list of the names and last known addresses of all persons served proper notice 
pursuant to this section. The notice shall be advertised, posted in a conspicuous manner on the 
subject property, and delivered by first class mail not more than 45 days nor less than 15 days 
prior to the hearing, as applicable. 
(2) ?Continuance of case. The Commission or ZBA will hold at least 1 public hearing on the 
proposed case, but may continue the hearing to a date certain without further notice being given 
except by public announcement at the meeting and being placed in the meeting minutes. 
(b) ?Appeals. 
(1) ?Interpretations by the Zoning Official. Any person with standing, aggrieved, or affected by any 
interpretation of the Zoning Official may request in writing an appeal of the decision or 
interpretation to the ZBA, who, unless otherwise provided, is authorized to interpret the chapter, 
and such interpretation is considered final. 
(2) ?Plan Commission or ZBA. An applicant who has received an adverse final decision from the 
Commission or ZBA may request in writing a review of the decision to the Corporation Counsel. 
The Corporation Counsel, Director of Community Development, and chairperson of the 
Commission or ZBA that made the decision will review each request and make a 
recommendation to the Village Board. 
(3) ?Time limit. An appeal must be filed no later than 10 working days after the decision is rendered 
or else the appeal cannot be considered. If such an appeal is not made, the decision of the 
Zoning Official, Commission, or ZBA shall be considered final. 
(4) ?Stays of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings from further action unless there is 
immediate danger to public health and safety. 
(c) ?Modified review. Certain amendments to existing special use permits and site plan approvals may 
be eligible to bypass the Commission and be heard directly be the Village Board. The petitioner must 
request in writing to the Zoning Official the request for the modified review with a list of all items that 
are being modified from the originally granted ordinance and any other supporting documentation. 
The community development director, commission chairperson, and corporation counsel will review 
the request and must unanimously find that the proposed modifications are in substantial compliance 
with and do not change the intent of the original special use permit or site plan approval and send a 
memorandum to the Village Board with its findings and any other recommendations. If the request is 
granted, the Village Board will make a finding that the requested amendment is in substantial 
compliance with the original special use permit or site plan approval ordinance. 
(d) ?Voting and notice of decision. There shall be a vote of a majority of the Commission or ZBA present 
in order to decide any matter under consideration. Each decision shall be entered into the minutes by 
the reporter. All appeals shall be kept in accordance with the state regulations and such appeals 
shall be open to the public. 
    Notice in writing of the decision and the disposition of each appeal shall be given to the Zoning 
Official and each petitioner by mail or otherwise. 
(e) ?Reapplication. No application for a variance, special use permit, or site plan approval that has been 
denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of 6 months from the date of denial. 
(f) ?Inaction of the Village Board. If an application for a proposed request is not acted upon within 6 
months of the date upon which a recommendation of the Commission or ZBA is received by the 
Village Board, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 1, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-9. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, 
convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or land or cause or permit that same to 
be done in violation of this code. When any building or parcel or land regulated by this chapter is being 
used contrary to this code, the Zoning Official shall be permitted to order such use discontinued and the 
structure, parcel of land, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to 
be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Zoning Official after 
receipt of such notice to make the structure, parcel of land, or portions thereof, comply with the 
requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-10. - Permits and approvals. 
(a) ?General. All departments, officials, and employees that are charged with the duty or authority to 
issue permits or approvals shall issue no permit or approval for uses or purposes where the same 
would be in conflict with this chapter. Any permit or approval, if issued in conflict with this chapter, 
shall be null and void. 
(b) ?Expiration and cancellation. Each final action granted by the Commission, ZBA, or Village Board 
expires after 180 days from the passage of ordinance or approval of the final decision by the granting 
body if building permits have not been submitted, work is undertaken, or such use or activity is not 
established, unless a different time of issuance is allowed in the ordinance or decision, or unless an 
extension is granted by the granting body prior to expiration. 
    A use with a special use permit that ceases to operate for a period of 6 months is automatically null 
and void and of no further force or effect. 
    Failure to comply fully with the terms of any permit, license, or approval is grounds for cancellation or 
revocation. Action to cancel any license, permit, or approval shall be permitted to be taken on proper 
grounds by the Zoning Official. Cancellation of a permit or approval by the Commission or ZBA shall be 
permitted to be appealed in the same manner as its original action. 
(c) ?Validity of licenses, permits, and approvals. For the issuance of any license, permit or approval for 
which the Commission or ZBA is responsible, the Zoning Official shall require that the development 
or use in question proceed only in accordance with the terms of such license, permit, or approval, 
including any requirements or conditions established as a condition of issuance. Except as 
specifically provided for in this chapter and conditions of approval, the securing of one required 
review or approval shall not exempt the recipient from the necessity of securing any other required 
review or approval. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 1, 10-7-2013) 


Secs. 118-11—118-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 118-
31—118-60, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to administration and 
enforcement. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Art. II. 


Sec. 118-31. - General. 
(a) ?Scope. Unless other otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the 
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning shown in this chapter. 
(b) ?Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future; words stated in the 
masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; the singular number includes the plural and 
the plural, the singular. 
(c) ?Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the 
International Building Code or the International Mechanical Code, as amended, such terms shall 
have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
(d) ?Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined though the methods authorized by this section, 
such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meaning such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 2, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-32. - General definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abut and abutting mean in actual contact at 1 point along the property line or district line. 
    Accessory building or structure means a detached building or a structure on the same lot and of a 
nature customarily incidental to the principal building or structure, the use of which is clearly incidental 
and subordinate to that of the dominant use of the principal building. 
    Accessory use. An accessory use is one which is incidental to and on the same lot as the principal 
use of the land or buildings. 
    Adjacent means to lie near or close to. 
    Adult use means any permitted or special use, which by the intent of civil and/or criminal statutes 
excludes access by minors to the establishment or to any part of the establishment or to any part of the 
establishment which would otherwise be open to the general public, except those listed as permitted 
uses. 
    Agricultural research and education means the use of land primarily for urban agricultural research 
and public education, including: a) the growing, harvesting, processing, storing, and sales of crops 
including fresh and dried herbs, fruits, vegetables, non-food ornamental plants, and compost; b) 
associated buildings and structures for agricultural product and machinery storage, production, and sales; 
c) associated classrooms, research labs, and office space; and d) wind energy and other alternative 
energy production facilities. 
    Alcoholic beverage production means specific food and beverage manufacturing facility that brews, 
distills, or vints alcoholic beverages. 
    Alley means any public right-of-way, with a width of not less than 16 feet and not more than 24 feet, 
which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. A street shall not be 
considered an alley. 
    Alteration means any change, addition, or modification in construction, occupancy, or use. 
    Amusement device means any mechanical, electronic and/or computer game machine and/or 
player-operated device available for the amusement of the general public. Such machines may be 
operated by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object. This definition shall not be construed to include 
coin-operated vending machines which merely dispense cigarettes, candy, gum, soft drinks, other food 
products, toys or other products. 
    Animal shelter means any place of business designated to provide for the kenneling of common 
household pets for the purpose of finding a permanent adoptive home for them. Pet supplies sales and 
pet services as well as educational, training, and fundraising activities are allowed in conjunction with the 
use. 
    Antenna means an apparatus, external to or attached to the exterior of a building, together with any 
supporting structure, for sending or receiving electromagnetic waves. 
    Antique and thrift shop means an establishment that primarily retails a general line of used goods. 
    Arterial means any regional arterial or village arterial as depicted or identified in the Comprehensive 
Plan. 
    Assisted-living facility means a facility that provides sleeping accommodations for at least 3 
unrelated persons, at least 80 percent of whom are 55 years of age or older, in need of assistance with 
the activities of daily living, including personal, supportive, and intermittent health-related services 
available 24 hours a day, if needed, to meet the scheduled or unscheduled needs of a resident. 
    Auction house means an ongoing business conducted in an auction room (house, gallery or barn, 
etc.) where auction sales are conducted on a more or less regular basis throughout the year. 
Nonrecurring auctions, i.e., those not to be held more often than 1 time in 12 months, are subject to the 
licensing provisions of this Code. 
    Automated teller machine (ATM) means an electronic information device as defined in the Illinois 
Automated Teller Machine Security Act, 205 ILCS 695/1 et seq. 
    Automotive fuel station means any portion of property where flammable or combustible liquids or 
gases are dispensed for retail sale from fixed equipment into motor vehicles. 
    Automotive repair facility means an establishment that commercially repairs, services, adjusts, 
paints, or equips automobiles or other motor vehicles. 
    Bar and drinking place mean an establishment, also known as a bar, tavern, nightclub, or drinking 
place, that primarily prepares and serves alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption. These 
establishments may also provide limited food and entertainment (primarily music) services. 
    Basement means any story more than 50 percent below grade. 
    Beer, wine, and liquor store means an establishment that primarily retails packaged alcoholic 
beverages, such as ale, beer, wine, and liquor. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, 
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way or other lines of demarcation. A block may be located in part beyond 
the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the Village. 
    Boat means a device used or capable of being used for navigation on water. 
    Boat trailer means a vehicle without motive power that is drawn by a motor vehicle, designed for 
carrying a boat, and constructed so that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Brew pub means an establishment that includes a microbrewery, microdistillery, or micro-winery in 
conjunction with a restaurant and a bar or drinking place. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by walls designed or built for the support, 
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, or property of any kind, and which is permanently 
affixed to the land. 
    Building, accessory. See Accessory building . 
    Building, completely enclosed, means a building separated on all sides from the adjacent open 
space, or from other buildings or structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, 
pierced only by windows and normal entrance and exit doors. 
    Building, principal, means a nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot. 
    Building, temporary, means any building not designed to be permanently located at the place where 
it is or where it is intended to be temporarily placed or affixed. 
    Building height means the vertical distance above the lesser of the crown of the street or the top of 
the curb to the top of the roof, excluding steeples, church belfries, spires, chimneys, smokestacks, cooling 
towers and elevator bulkheads, parapet walls and building equipment penthouses only when such 
structures have a floor area less than ? of the floor area of a typical floor. When a building is on a lot that 
faces on more than 1 street, the height shall be measured from the lesser of the average of the crowns of 
both streets or the average of the middle points of the top of the curbs to the top of the roof. 
    Business means an occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor and 
materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
    Business support services means an establishment that provides any of the following: document 
preparation, mailing (except direct mail advertising), court reporting, stenotyping, or copying centers, 
which may provide photocopying, duplicating, blueprinting, or other copying services besides printing. 
They may provide a range of support activities, including mailing services, document copying, facsimiles, 
word processing, on-site PC rental, and office product sales. Electronic answering services, collections, or 
telemarketing as defined in this section shall not be considered business support services. 
    Car dealer means an establishment retailing automobiles and light trucks, motorcycles, sport utility 
vehicles, and passenger and cargo vans, including replacement parts and accessories. 
    Car wash means a facility, apparatus, or structure designed and used for the washing of motor 
vehicles. 
    Carport means a roofed automobile shelter with 2 or more open sides. Enclosed storage facilities 
may be provided as part of a carport. 
    Caterer means a single event-based food service that transports food via equipment and vehicles to 
events or prepares food at an off-premise site. Banquet halls with catering staff are not included in this 
subcategory. 
    Cemetery means sites or structures operated and reserved for the internment of human or animal 
remains and may include cremation services. 
    Child and youth services means an establishment that offers services such as adoption, foster care, 
drug prevention services, and life-skills training but does not provide residence or accommodation. 
    Child day care means an establishment primarily for the care of infants and preschool children that 
may offer prekindergarten education programs or care services for older children. 
    Clinics and outpatient care centers means establishments that include physician offices, dentists, 
chiropractors, optometrists, therapists, treatment centers, or other similar health care professionals and 
services or that have several practitioners with different specializations practicing within the same 
establishment, without facilities for overnight lodging. 
    Club and lodge mean an association of persons, the facilities of which are restricted to members and 
their guests. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises, provided they are secondary 
and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective. 
    Collector's items shop means an establishment that specializes in the sale and resale of specialty 
merchandise such as autographs, cards, coins, stamps, and other similar goods. 
    Colleges and universities means junior colleges, colleges, universities, seminaries, and professional 
schools that furnish academic or technical courses and grant degrees, certificates, or diplomas at the 
associate, baccalaureate, or graduate levels, and other related uses except dormitories, which must be 
specifically listed as an accessory use in the district. The requirement for admission is at least a high 
school diploma or equivalent general academic training. 
    Commercial trailer means a commercial vehicle without motive power that is drawn by a motor 
vehicle, designed for carrying persons or property, and constructed so that no part of its weight rests 
upon the towing vehicle. 
    Commercial vehicle means a vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the 
furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, not including commuter vans, vehicles used for the 
purpose of ride-sharing arrangements, or noncommercially used recreational vehicles. 
    Community food services means establishments that collect, prepare, and deliver food for the needy. 
They may also distribute clothing and bedding, run collections for food and donations, or provide meals at 
fixed or mobile locations. Examples are food banks, meal delivery programs, and soup kitchens. 
    Computer services establishment means an establishment providing on-site use of personal 
computers for internet, e-mail, and other software access. Printing and copying services may also be 
provided. Computer services establishments may be operated in conjunction with other permitted uses. 
    Congregate living facility means any living facility or residential unit primarily for unrelated elderly or 
disabled persons. Paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency living with the 
residents on a 24-hour basis or available in accordance with the particular needs of the residents may 
also be present. A facility shall have common kitchen, dining, and entertainment areas for the purpose of 
assisting the residents to return to or to maintain a semi-independent life style. In addition to providing 
shelter, services shall include access to but not be limited to meals, medical, housekeeping, laundry, 
social, recreational, educational, protective, and transportation. 
    Construction and demolition debris recycling and disposal facility means an establishment that 
operates facilities for separating and sorting recyclable materials from construction and demolition debris 
from non-hazardous waste streams. 
    Construction material sales center means any retail or wholesale establishment that sells building 
materials, hardware, landscaping and other materials and supplies necessary for the improvement of 
property. Asphalt and concrete ready-mix plants are specifically excluded from this definition. 
    Convenience store means an establishment or food mart (except those with fuel pumps) that 
primarily retails a limited line of goods that generally includes milk, bread, soda, and snacks or similar 
convenience items. 
    Conventional warehouse means a building or portion of a building in which goods, merchandise, or 
equipment is stored for eventual distribution. 
    Day care center for adults means a program of services provided for functionally-impaired adults 
who do not require 24-hour institutional care, and yet who are in need of an adult day care program 
directed toward maintaining physical and mental health, and should be a structured, comprehensive 
program providing a variety of health, social, and related support services in a protective setting for a 
period of time less than 24 hours. A skilled nursing facility shall not be considered as an adult day care 
center. 
    Demonstration project is the redevelopment of a site for allowable uses in a district designed to 
stimulate redevelopment and economic growth in the area. The subject site must be in a designated 
redevelopment district. The proposed project must be designed to fulfill the goals of the redevelopment 
district. In order to stimulate development, relief may be granted in the area of district development 
standards and other Zoning Chapter regulations. 
    Director of Community Development means the official of the Village who has been duly appointed 
by the Village Manager as the Director of the Community Development Department. 
    Director of Engineering means the official of the Village who has been duly appointed by the Village 
Manager as the Director of Engineering of the Village. 
    Director of Public Works means the official of the Village who has been duly appointed by the Village 
Manager as the Director of the Department of Public Works. 
    District means a portion of the corporate area of the Village within which certain uniform regulations 
and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this chapter. For the 
purpose of this chapter, a zoning district shall be an area into which the Village has been divided for 
zoning regulations and requirements. 
    Dog run means any area set aside, intended, or utilized primarily as an area for the defecation by 
and/or penning of dog(s). 
    Dormitory means a rooming or boarding establishment that serves a specific group or membership, 
provides temporary accommodations, and may offer housekeeping, meals, and laundry services. A 
congregate living facility shall not be considered a dormitory. 
    Dry cleaning and laundry establishment means a business that provides pickup and/or delivery dry 
cleaning and/or laundry service, with less than 3,500 square feet used for activities that would occur in a dry 
cleaning and laundry plant. The dry cleaning or laundering may be done on-site, excluding self-service. 
    Dry cleaning and laundry plant means a building or portion thereof used for the cleaning, drying, and 
pressing of clothing and fabrics. 
    Efficiency unit means a residential unit consisting of 1 principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, 
hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal room, providing that such dining alcove does not 
exceed 90 square feet in area. 
    Elderly and disabled housing means a use that is limited to occupancy by persons qualifying under 1 
or more of the following categories: 
(1) ?Persons who are 62 years of age or older. 
(2) ?Persons who are certified by a physician as being physically disabled. 
(3) ?Spouses of persons at least 62 years of age or certified by a physician as being physically 
disabled. 
(4) ?Persons under the age of 62 or not certified to be physically handicapped who are offspring, 
dependents, or relatives by blood or marriage to an otherwise qualified occupant, if a physician 
certifies that the qualified occupant is essential for their care. 
(5) ?A person who is determined by a physician to be essential for the care of an otherwise qualified 
occupant. 
    Electric vehicle charging station means a place where a vehicle may be parked to transfer electric 
energy to a battery or other energy storage device within that vehicle and any equipment necessary to 
transfer that energy. 
    Electronic answering services, collections, or telemarketing means a use where at least 20 percent 
of the floor area is devoted to a business conducted primarily by telephone or electronic means, not 
limited to solicitation of sales directly to customers, collection of bills, or answering of telephones or other 
electronic messages. 
    Facilities support services means an establishment that provides operating staff for support services 
within a client's facilities. They typically provide a combination of services, such as janitorial, 
maintenance, litter and trash disposal, security, mail reception, and laundry services. They provide 
operating staff to carry out these support activities, but are not involved with the core activities of the 
client. 
    Fence means a structure which is a barrier and used as a boundary or means of protection or 
confinement. 
    Firearm range means any establishment where the discharging of a firearm, as defined in the 
Firearm Owners Identification Card Act, 430 ILCS 65/1.1, is allowed for a sporting event or for practice, 
instruction, testing, or training in the use of a firearm and may also include rental of a firearm for allowable 
uses within the establishment and a firearm seller. 
    Firearm seller means any establishment or entity that engages in the sale or purchase of any firearm 
or firearm ammunition, as defined in the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act, 430 ILCS 65/1.1. 
    Floor area, gross means the sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors, 50% above grade or more, 
and roofed areas. The horizontal area shall be measured from either the exterior faces of the exterior 
walls or the exterior faces of the posts or ground supporting members if the roofed area is not supported 
by a wall. Any floor or roofed area with a floor to ceiling height of 16 feet in height shall be counted as 2 
floors. Each 8-foot increase in the floor to ceiling height, greater than 16 feet, shall be counted as an 
additional floor. Any attic area with a height of 6 foot 9 inches or greater, measured from the top of the top 
plate to the top of the roof, shall be counted as gross floor area. 
    Floor area, ground means the lot area covered by a principal building, measured at grade, from the 
exterior faces of the exterior walls, excluding open porches or terraces, garages or carports. 
    Floor area, net (for determining off-street parking and loading requirements). "Floor area," when 
prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street parking and loading spaces for any use, shall be 
the sum of the gross horizontal area of the basement, and all other floors, excluding hallways, stairways, 
elevator shafts, boiler and air conditioning equipment rooms, or areas used for off-street parking facilities. 
All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the 
centerlines of walls separating 2 buildings. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the gross floor area of a building(s) in relation to lot area, as 
determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings and/or structures on a lot by the lot area. 
    Fruit and vegetable store means an establishment that primarily retails fresh fruits and vegetables. 
    Funeral homes and services means an establishment that prepares the dead for burial or internment 
and conducts funerals (i.e. providing facilities including chapels for wakes, arranging transportation for the 
dead, selling caskets and related merchandise) and may provide cremation services. 
    Games arcade means an establishment in which 4 or more amusement machines are available for 
operation for the amusement of the general public, but does not include gambling, billiards, or pool. 
    Golf course means an area of land, with at least nine holes, improved with tees, greens, fairways, 
and hazards for playing golf as well as other related services or amenities such as swimming, outdoor 
recreation, limited retail, and restaurants. 
    Grade means the highest level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of 
the building or structure. 
    Grocery store, supermarket, or bakery means an establishment that retails a general line of food, 
such as canned and frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh and prepared meats, fish, and 
poultry, except convenience stores. Included in this class are meat and seafood markets, delicatessen-
type establishments, and establishments retailing baked goods (not for immediate consumption and 
made off-premises). 
    Hand car wash means any establishment where employees of the establishment wash or detail 
motor vehicles by hand inside a building. 
    Health and fitness center means a building or portion of a building used primarily for the conduct of 
any combination of sports, exercise, health education and counseling, or similar activities and any other 
appropriate uses that support such activities, such as massage, beauty salons, child care, or food 
services. Health facilities for the exclusive use of hotels, businesses, or building tenants are not health 
and fitness centers. 
    Heavy construction business is an establishment that provides heavy nonbuilding construction. 
Establishments may subcontract all or some of the construction work. Establishments include general 
contractors, design builders, engineer-constructors, joint-venture contractors, highway and street 
construction, bridge and tunnel construction, water, sewer, and pipeline construction, power lines, 
communication and transmission lines, and industrial and other nonbuilding construction. Also included 
are construction management firms and special trade contractors and subcontractors. 
    Height of wind energy system means the total vertical distance from the lesser of the crown of the 
street or the top of the curb to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point. 
    Helipad, medical, means an area or structure used and designed to accommodate the landing or 
takeoff of a single helicopter solely for the emergency transport of patients, staff, organs, and equipment 
that does not include refueling, maintenance, or repair facilities. The design and construction of the facility 
shall meet all federal, State and local requirements. 
    Home occupation means the partial use of a residence for limited nonresidential uses by a resident 
thereof, which is subordinate and incidental to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging is offered to the public for compensation with ingress and 
egress to the rooms through an inside lobby supervised at all hours. 
    Impermeable surface means a surface that allows little or no water to be absorbed. 
    Junkyard means an open area of land and any building or structure that are used primarily for 
buying, selling, exchanging, storing, bailing, packing, disassembling or handling waste or scrap materials 
including vehicles, machinery, or equipment not in operable condition, or parts thereof, and other metals, 
paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. 
    Kennel means any premises, or portion thereof, on which more than 3 dogs, cats or other household 
domestic animals, over 6 months of age, are kept, or on which more than 2 such animals are maintained, 
boarded, bred or cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale. 
    Landscaping means the finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials and treatment 
generally include naturally growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs, and flowers, as well as accent 
features and contouring of the earth. 
    Large vehicle dealer means an establishment retailing larger vehicles that are not sold at a car 
dealer, such as buses, recreational vehicles (RVs), mobile homes, and trucks, including replacement 
parts and accessories. 
    Laundromat means a business that provides self-service type washing, drying and ironing facilities, 
provided that: 
(1) ?No more than 4 persons, in addition to 1 owner or manager, are employed on the premises at 
any given time. 
(2) ?No pickup or delivery service, or both, are maintained. 
    Loading space means a space within the principal building or on the same lot, providing for the 
standing, loading or unloading of motor vehicles with access to a public way. 
    Local transit systems means the set of operational facilities and infrastructure improvements 
associated with a transportation system that operates over regular routes and on regular schedules within 
a local or metropolitan area, including, but not limited to, tracks, shelters, parking, taxi stands, and station 
buildings that may include limited retail amenities such as ticket sales and other retail uses commonly 
found in train or bus stations, and areas for loading and unloading passengers. 
    Lot means a parcel of land that consists of either of the following: 
(1) ?A single lot of record, which is a single tax parcel; or 
(2) ?A combination of complete lots of record, which are consolidated into a single tax parcel. 
    Lot area means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the lines of a lot. 
    Lot, buildable, means a parcel of land which meets the minimum zoning requirements for use in the 
zoning district in which it is located. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of 2 or more streets. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot 
measured at the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot that is not a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front, means a boundary of a lot that abuts an existing or dedicated public street, or, where 
no public street exists, is along a public way. On a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest length 
abutting a street shall be the front lot line. 
    Lot line, interior, means a lot line which is not a rear lot line and which does not abut a street. 
    Lot line, rear, means a boundary of a lot that is most distant and nearly parallel to the front lot line. In 
the case of an irregular lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance 
from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side, means a boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the 
office of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office 
of the County Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance of 1946. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along 2 more-or-less parallel streets and 
that is not a corner lot. Both lot lines along streets shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width means the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the 
narrowest width within the defined buildable area. 
    Machinery related contractor is a contractor that installs or utilizes specialized machinery not 
generally used by other building or trade contractors such as building equipment and machinery 
installation, excavation, water well drilling, wrecking and demolition, structural steel erection, and other 
similar contractors. 
    Marine craft dealer means an establishment retailing boats, personal watercraft, outboard motors, 
and boat trailers, including replacement parts and accessories for such craft and other related marine 
equipment supplies. 
    Medical cannabis cultivation center means a facility operated by an organization or business that is 
registered by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only 
registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis. 
    Medical cannabis dispensing organization, or "dispensing organization", or "dispensary organization" 
means a facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of 
Financial and Professional Regulation or successor to acquire medical cannabis from a registered 
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and 
educational materials to registered qualifying patients. 
    Microbrewery, microdistillery and micro-winery means an alcoholic beverage production facility that 
does not exceed 50,000 gallons a year with a tap room. 
    Mortuary means a building used only for the storage and preparation of bodies until burial or 
cremation. 
    Motor vehicle parts and accessories store means any building used for the display and retail sale of 
motor vehicle parts and accessories. 
    Motorbike, ATV, and other similar vehicle dealer means an establishment retailing motor vehicles 
with less than 150 cubic centimeter piston displacement engines such as motor scooters, motor bikes, 
mopeds, and off-road all terrain vehicles, including replacement parts and accessories. For retailing of 
motor vehicles with piston displacement engines of 150 cubic centimeters or more, see car dealer. 
    Nameplate capacity means the maximum rated electrical output of a generator under specific 
conditions designated by the manufacturer. Generator nameplate capacity is usually indicated in units of 
kilovolt-amperes (kVA) and in kilowatts (kW) on a nameplate physically attached to the generator. "Rated 
capacity" is often used synonymously with "nameplate capacity." 
    Nonconforming building or structure means any building or structure that does not comply with all the 
regulations of this chapter, or of any amendment to this chapter, governing bulk of the zoning district in 
which such building or structure is located. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot whose width, area, or other dimension does not conform to the 
regulations of this chapter. 
    Office and administrative services means an establishment that: a) provides day-to-day office 
administrative services, such as financial planning, billing, record keeping, personnel employment, and 
logistics; b) holds securities (or other equity interests) of companies in order to own a controlling interest 
or influence management decisions; c) oversee and administer a company often by providing strategic or 
organizational planning; or d) provides other administrative services not classified elsewhere. Only use 
this classification for stand-alone establishments which, although they may be part of a larger company, 
are separate from the actual goods or services producing facilities. The activities of these establishments 
could apply equally to a manufacturing company, a law firm, etc. 
    Parking lot means an open area at grade, other than a street, used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Parking lot, deficient, means a lot that meets the surfacing requirements of this chapter but may be 
deficient in 1 of the following: curbing, striping, handicapped parking, drainage, detention of stormwater 
runoff, landscaping, regulatory signing, or any other provision of this chapter. 
    Parking lot, unimproved, means a lot that does not meet the surfacing requirements of this chapter. 
    Parking space means an area reserved for the parking of 1 motor vehicle. 
    Particulate matter means finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into 
the atmosphere. 
    Party wall means a vertical wall dividing 2 occupiable units. 
    Performance standard means criteria established for regulatory purposes to determine levels of 
noise, vibration, smoke and particulate matter, odors, radioactivity materials and hazards or glare or heat 
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings. 
    Person means a natural person, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and includes a firm, 
partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. 
    Pet services means an establishment that provides services to animals (except veterinary) such as 
clipping, bathing and training. No boarding shall be permitted. 
    Planned development (PD) means a development guided by a total design plan with 1 or more 
principal buildings or planned and constructed as a unified development where specific regulations of the 
zoning district or the subdivision or sign chapters are modified to allow flexibility and creativity in site and 
building design. 
    Public safety use means a government-owned or private establishment providing fire, rescue, police, 
or emergency response services. 
    Public works facility means a facility operated by a public utility or unit of government, including 
offices, storage, testing, repairing, and servicing activities, but not including off-site electrical generation, 
manufacturing plants or storage facilities for natural or artificial gas, and batch-mixing plants for asphalt or 
portland cement concrete. 
    Recreational vehicle means a camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home, travel trailer, truck 
camper, or van camper, all as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., used 
primarily for recreational purposes and not used commercially or owned by a commercial business. 
    Religious assembly means a use located in a permanent building that provides regular organized 
religious worship and related incidental activities such as churches, temples, synagogues, mosques, etc. 
    Residence means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, 
including detached, townhouse, and multifamily residences, congregate living facilities, and elderly and 
disabled housing but not including assisted-living facilities, skilled nursing facilities, hotels, or dormitories. 
    Residence, detached, means a building containing 1 residential unit only. 
    Residence, multifamily, means a building containing 2 or more residential units except townhouses. 
    Residence, townhouse, means 2 or more residential units attached side by side. 
    Residential unit means 1 or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters as 
a single housekeeping unit. A residential unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in addition to 
sleeping and living areas. 
    Restaurant, carryout, means any establishment where the primary purpose of the operation is the 
preparation and service of food and/or beverages for immediate consumption off the premises; however, 
up to 5 seats may be provided for patrons. 
    Restaurant, limited service, means an establishment that provides food services (except carryout 
restaurants) where patrons order or select items and pay before eating, including cafeterias, which use 
cafeteria-style serving equipment, a refrigerated area, and self-service beverage dispensing equipment, 
and which display food and drink items in a continuous cafeteria line. Some establishments in this 
subcategory may provide food services in combination with selling alcoholic beverages. 
    Restaurant, full-service, means an establishment that provides food services to patrons who order 
and are served while seated and pay after eating. They may provide this service in combination with 
selling alcoholic beverages, providing carryout services, or presenting live nontheatrical entertainment. 
Banquet halls with catering staff are considered a full-service restaurant for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    Retail merchandising unit (RMU) means an outdoor, freestanding fixture to be used for the sale of 
goods and services, informational purposes, including new product launches, community service 
announcements, or other similar activities. 
    Road materials recycling means a general process that crushes or grinds recycled material and/or 
road material allowing for its incorporation in concrete or asphalt production and any associated 
machinery, which must have permanent power and foundations. 
    School, alternate education, means a publicly operated educational facility working with local school 
districts to provide services to students in a small, highly structured, non-traditional education setting. 
Such facilities are designed to provide special educational services to students that have difficulty 
learning in a traditional school setting or require a highly structured program, or to provide a curriculum 
that is specifically designed to meet the educational or developmental needs of a student. 
    School, technical and trade, means a school that offers vocational and technical training in a variety 
of technical subjects and trades, which may lead to job-specific certification other than the associate, 
baccalaureate, or graduate degree levels. Operation of the school shall not involve increased danger of 
fire and explosion, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat, or other objectionable influences 
(except as provided for by the performance standards in industrial districts). 
    Self-service storage facility means a building or group of buildings divided into separate 
compartments used to meet the temporary storage needs of small businesses and residential users, and 
may include, but not exclusively consist of, outdoor storage of motor vehicles, boats, and boat trailers, 
subject to the regulations of this chapter, and limited retail sales such as moving supplies, boxes, packing 
materials, locks, and other similar items. 
    Seminary. See Colleges and universities . 
    Services to the elderly and disabled means establishments that serve the elderly and persons with 
disabilities such as group support and activities, companionship, day care, home care service agencies, 
etc. but not housing. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between a building or structure and another building, 
structure, property line or other feature. 
    Sight distance triangle means a volume with a triangular base established at the intersection of two 
rights-of-way or a street right-of-way and a driveway where obstructions are limited in height or width so 
as to not obstruct the sight of pedestrians or motorists. The measured distance is the length of the legs of 
the triangle at grade from the point where the two rights-of-way intersect or where a right-of-way and 
driveway intersect. 
    Skilled nursing facility means a facility providing 24-hour skilled nursing care to at least 3 unrelated 
persons, including nursing homes and convalescent hospitals but not including hospitals, clinics, or 
similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases, 
or mental illness. 
    Smoke means the visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or combustion process 
which is made up of particulate matter. 
    Special trades contractor is an establishment that specializes in construction activities, such as 
carpentry, floor, and tile, concrete, electrical, glass and glazing, masonry and drywall, painting and wall 
covering, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning, and roofing, siding, and sheet metal work. These 
activities may be subcontracted from builders or general contractors or may be performed directly for 
project owners. Construction work includes new work, additions, alterations, maintenance, and repairs. 
Special trade contractors usually work at the job site, although they may have shops for prefabrication 
and other work. 
    Specialty food store means a store that primarily retail specialty food items, such as packaged coffee 
and tea, confectionery products, nuts, spices, and gourmet foods, except beer, wine, and liquor. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of 
the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next 
above it. A basement more than 50 percent below grade is not a story. 
    Street means a public right-of-way containing a surface used or intended to be used for vehicular 
travel that affords the primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. An alley shall not be 
considered a street. 
    Street frontage means all of the property fronting on 1 side of a street between 2 more or less 
parallel streets, or, in the case of a dead-end street, all of the property along 1 side of the street between 
an intersecting street and the end of such dead-end street. 
    Structure means anything that is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece 
of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some manner. 
    Tap room means a facility that allows customers to taste samples of beverage products 
manufactured on-site and purchase beverage items produced by that producer. 
    Tax parcel means a parcel of land with a single property identification number (PIN) as assigned by 
the County. For the purposes of this chapter, tax parcel shall be only the first 10 digits of the PIN. 
    Townhouse. See Residence, townhouse . 
    Trailer means any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit temporary occupancy for 
use as a building or structure in the conduct of a business, trade or occupation and which may be used as 
a conveyance on streets and highways by its own or other motive power. 
    Trailer, travel, means a trailer designed and constructed for travel and temporary lodging purposes 
which is intended for use only for camping, recreational travel or vacation use. 
    Transit oriented development means a building or combination of buildings, within 2,000 feet of a 
commuter rail station, that may contain dwelling units and permitted or special uses in a unified 
development in which there is a significant physical and functional integration of the uses. Such 
development shall not abut or be across an alley from property zoned in R1 or R2. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or 
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such 
activity with respect to the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Use, lawful, means the use of any building, structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations 
of this chapter or any amendment to this chapter and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances 
and other legal requirements as existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this 
chapter is derived, or any amendments thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined. 
    Use, nonconforming, means the use of any building, structure, or land that does not comply with the 
regulations of this chapter governing use of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Use, permitted, means any use that may be lawfully established provided it conforms with all 
requirements of this chapter. 
    Use, principal, means the primary use of land or structures. 
    Use, special, means a use of land or structures that may be allowed only by special use permit. 
    Vehicle, motor, means any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or 
drawn by mechanical power. 
    Vending machine means a machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated 
by the customer. For the purposes of this chapter, an automated teller machine is not a vending machine. 
    Veterinary services means an establishment with licensed practitioners of veterinary medicine, 
dentistry, or surgery for domestic animals; also included are establishments that provide testing services 
for licensed veterinary practitioners. Boarding and caring are allowed in conjunction with this use. 
    Wind energy system means equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from the 
wind into usable form of electrical energy. This equipment includes any base, blade, foundation, 
generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other component used in 
the system. 
    Yard means an open area on a lot which is unobstructed from the center of the earth to the sky, 
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Yard, corner side, means a side yard which abuts a street. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending along the front lot line, which is bounded by the side lot lines, 
the front lot line and the front yard line. 
    Yard line means a line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the applicable yard extends 
and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than the required depth or width of the applicable 
yard. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending the full width of the lot on which a building is located and situated 
between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto and passing through the nearest point of the building. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending along a side lot line, which is bounded by the rear yard line, the 
front yard line and the side lot line. 
(Zon. Ord., § 4.1; Ord. No. 00-7-Z-2902, § 1, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 00-8-Z-2912, § 1, 8-7-2000; 
Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 1, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-
Z-3021, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-3072, § 1, 3-4-
2002; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-3073, § 1, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3082, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 
02-6-Z-3094, § 1, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 
1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 2, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-9-Z-3201, § 1, 9-15-2003; Ord. 
No. 03-11-Z-3228, § 1, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 05-6-C-3359, § 1, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 05-8-C-
3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 05-11-C-3400, § 2, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-3-C-3422, § 1, 3-6-
2006; Ord. No. 06-4-C-3429, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 07-1-C-3483, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 
08-2-C-3600, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3604, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 08-6-C-3621, § 1, 
6-2-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. 
No. 09-5-C-3674, § 1, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 10-2-C-3736, § 1, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 
1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3885, § 1, 2-6-2012; Ord. 
No. 12-4-C-3895, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 12-11-C-3948, § 1, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 13-10-C-
4010, § 2, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4036, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4064, § 1, 6-2-
2014; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4065, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-12-C-4108, § 1, 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 
15-5C-4142, § 2, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-7-C-4236, § 1, 7-18-2016; Ord. No. 16-8-C-4241, § 1, 
8-1-2016; Ord. No. 16-10-C-4250, § 1, 10-6-2016; Ord. No. 18-3-C-4368, § 1, 3-19-2018; Ord. 
No. 18-8-C-4404, § 1, 8-6-2018; Ord. No. 18-10-C-4416, § 1, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 19-4-C-
4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Secs. 118-33—118-40. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - USE DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, amended the title of Art. III to read as 
herein set out. Formerly, said Art. III was entitled "District Regulations." Additionally, said ordinance 
repealed Art. III, Div. 1(tit.) and renumbered Art. III, Divs. 1.1—5 as Arts. IV—IX. Furthermore, Arts. IV—
VII have been renumbered as Arts. XI—XIV. 


Sec. 118-41. - District classifications. 
    In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the locations of uses and locations of buildings designated 
for specific areas and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open spaces within 
or surrounding such buildings, property in the Village is hereby classified into districts as prescribed in this 
chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-42. - Zoning map. 
(a) ?District boundaries. The boundaries of each zoning district are to be indicated upon the official 
zoning map as approved by the Village Board, hereafter referred to as the "zoning map". The zoning 
map and subsequent amendments shall be considered as a part of this chapter. 
(b) ?Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries 
of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply: 
(1) ?If there is a conflict between an ordinance granting a particular zoning designation and the 
zoning designation shown on the zoning map, the ordinance designation is effective. 
(2) ?When a zoning district boundary is indicated as following a street, alley, or extension of a street 
or alley, the boundary shall be construed to be the centerline of the street, alley, or extension of 
the street or alley. 
(3) ?When streets or alleys are vacated, the zoning district boundary shall be construed to be the 
centerline of the vacated street or alley. 
(4) ?Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map or by dimensions of a subdivision, district 
boundaries follow parcel lines. 
(5) ?Areas under water are subject to the regulations of the district it abuts. If the water area abuts 2 
or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend equidistant into the 
water area until they meet each other. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-43. - Annexed territory. 
    Any ordinance approved to annex territory must also be accompanied by an ordinance establishing 
its zoning district, subject to the procedures amending the zoning map in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-44. - Uses. 
(a) ?Allowable uses. Uses are allowed within the various zones as described in this chapter and as 
otherwise provided herein. Allowable uses are listed as permitted, special, restricted, or accessory. A 
comprehensive list of allowable uses listed in each district is presented in the table in Appendix A to 
this chapter. 
(b) ?Determination of use. It is recognized that all possible uses and variations of uses that might arise 
cannot be reasonably listed in Appendix A. Any use not specifically listed shall be administratively 
classified by comparison with other listed uses. If the Zoning Official determines that the proposed 
use resembles an identified use in terms of intensity and character, and is not otherwise prohibited, it 
shall be considered an allowable use within that district. If a use does not resemble another 
identifiable allowable use within a district, it is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Secs. 118-45—118-50. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. III, Div. 1.1, as Art. 
IV. In addition, said ordinance amended the article to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative 
Table for a complete history of the former Div. 1.1. 


Sec. 118-51. - Approval and availability of essential services. 
    All projects that require the additional use of new facilities or essential services, such as sewers, 
storm drains, fire hydrants, potable water, public streets, energy, telecommunications, street lighting and 
similar services, shall obtain such approval as required by the Village or other provider of such service 
prior to the issuance of building permits. Nonavailability of essential services shall be permitted to be 
grounds for denying permits for additional development until such services are available. The provider is 
not obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available. If capacity is available, the 
extension of services shall be by and at the cost of the developer, unless the provider agrees otherwise. 
All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full compliance with the provider's standards for 
such service, and is subject to review, permit, fees, and inspection as required by other policies or 
ordinances of the provider. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-52. - Sight distance triangle. 
    No objects are allowed within a 10' sight distance triangle in R1, R2, R3, and R4 districts, or within a 
15' sight distance triangle in all other districts, between 30" and 84" in height from grade except traffic 
control devices listed in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-53. - Residential uses below grade. 
    No residential unit or bedroom shall be established in a residence where the floor level is below 
grade level. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-54. - Number of buildings on lot. 
    Not more than 1 principal building shall be located on a lot, except in a planned development. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-55. - Reduction of lot area. 
    No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or lot area become less than required by this 
chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-56. - Front lot line on through-lots. 
    Either of the lot lines abutting a street right-of-way line in a given block may be established as the 
front lot line. However, when the front lot line of a lot in a block containing multiple through-lots has been 
established by an existing building, such front lot line shall be the front lot line for the remaining lots in the 
block. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-57. - Required lot consolidation. 
    No building or set of buildings shall be on a separate lot from any other part of a building, any 
associated required on-site improvements, or any other land used by or necessary to such buildings or 
improvements, with the following exceptions: the separate lot is an undeveloped side yard that is a 
buildable lot in a residential district, the lot line runs through a building containing townhouses, the site is 
divided by a public right-of-way, or the site is consistent with a subdivision associated with a planned 
development. 
(Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-58. - Required site plan approval. 
    In business, mixed-use and residential districts site plan approval is required for the development, 
redevelopment, or modification of buildings and structures or site plan modifications of sites 1 acre or 
larger in size. 
(Ord. No. 16-10-C-4254, § 2, 10-19-2016) 


Sec. 118-59. - Permitted obstructions in required yards. 
(a) ?General . Any obstruction permitted in this section may be further restricted in compliance with 
another Village code, ordinance, and rule or regulation. 
(b) ?All yards. 
(1) ?Basketball backboards with standards, bicycle parking spaces and racks (except in front yards 
of detached, 2-unit multifamily, and townhouse residences), flagpoles, landscaping, ornamental 
light standards, signs and nameplates as regulated by the Signs chapter, steps and ramps 
necessary for access to permitted buildings or for access to lots from streets, required exterior 
fire escapes, and temporary construction fences required as a condition of a Village permit or 
license. 
(2) ?Chimneys, window wells, sills, belt courses, cornices or other ornamental features projecting 
not more than 1.5' into the required yard. 
(c) ?Front yards. 
(1) ?Individual window or through-the-wall installed air conditioning units and fences at schools, 
public parks, governmental uses, and public utilities that are required for the protection of the 
public. 
(2) ?Decorative fences with site plan approval at nonresidence uses in residential districts. 
(3) ?Awnings, canopies, or one-story bay windows that are not ground-supported projecting not 
more than 3' into the required front yard, except that the total width of the bay windows must be 
less than 50% of the width of the building wall containing the bay windows. 
(4) ?Terraces or porches that do not have permanent roofs not more than 4' above the average 
level of the abutting ground and not projecting over 10' into the required front yard. 
(5) ?Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting not more than 15% into the depth of the required 
yard. 
(d) ?Rear yards . 
(1) ?Air conditioning condensers in compliance with § 118-66, individual window or through-the-wall 
installed room air conditioning units, arbors, trellises, balconies, open porches, barbecues, 
clotheslines, accessary structures in compliance with § 118-60, fences in compliance with § 
118-61, recreational and playground equipment, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(2) ?Awnings and canopies that are not ground-supported and not projecting more than 5' into the 
required rear yard. 
(3) ?Dog runs, subject to Building Division and Health Department approval, except that dog runs in 
residentially zoned and used properties must be at least 3' from any property line. 
(4) ?Overhanging eaves and gutters, provided that eaves and gutters of accessory buildings are at 
least 2' from any lot line of principal buildings are not projecting more than 15% into the depth of 
the required rear yard. 
(5) ?Terraces or porches that do not have permanent roofs not more than 4' above the average 
level of the abutting ground and not projecting over 10' into the required rear yard. 
(e) ?Side yards . 
(1) ?Fences in compliance with § 118-61, individual window or through-the-wall installed room air 
conditioning units with a capacity not exceeding 12,000 Btu's, and air conditioning condensers 
in compliance with § 118-66. 
(2) ?Awnings and canopies that are not ground-supported and are at least 2' away from the lot line. 
(3) ?Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting not more than 3' into the required side yard and at 
least 2' away from the lot line. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-60. - Accessory building, structures and uses. 
(a) ?Accessory classifications in districts . 
(1) ?Accessory structures shall be allowed in all districts, except those structures specifically 
prohibited. 
(2) ?Accessory buildings and uses are allowed only in residential zoning districts. 
(b) ?Maximum height . An accessory building cannot exceed 1 story or 15' in height. The distance from 
grade to the top of eave or to the top of the highest point on a flat roofed building cannot exceed 10' 
above grade, except that an open roof deck railing cannot exceed 15' above grade. 
(c) ?Area . The ground floor area of all accessory buildings must not exceed the ground floor area of the 
principal grade. 
(d) ?Rear yard coverage. The total area of all accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30% of the 
rear yard. 
(e) ?Use of accessory buildings in residential districts. In residential districts a motor vehicle garage or 
other accessory building shall not be used as a residence, temporary residence, or in conjunction 
with a commercial or business activity, except that commercial vehicles may be parked or stored in 
the garage. 
(f) ?Setbacks. Except for legal fences or as otherwise provided, an accessory building or structure 
erected, altered, enlarged, or moved must conform to the following: 
(1) ?International Residential Code, as amended in Chapter 22, as if all accessory buildings are 
garages. 
(2) ?An accessory building less than 50 ft. 2 in area and of noncombustible construction is permitted 
to abut the principal building. 
(3) ?An accessory building or structure is prohibited in a required front or side yard or within 60' 
from a front lot line. 
(4) ?An accessory building or structure in a rear yard shall be at least 3' from a lot line except that 
the setback required shall be at least: 
(a) ?The distance required for a side yard abutting a street on corner lots. 
(b) ?The distance required for a front yard on through lots. 
(c) ?5' from the lot line abutting the alley. 
(g) ?Colocation . Accessory buildings shall occupy the same lot as the principal use or building. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-61. - Fences. 
(a) ?A building permit shall be required for the construction, installation, or replacement of any fence. 
(b) ?All fence posts and other supporting members must face to the owner's side or be enclosed on two 
sides by fencing. 
(c) ?Fence location. 
(1) ?No fence or portion of a fence shall be allowed on any part of a front yard or corner side yard 
except at schools, public parks, governmental uses, and public utilities, required for the 
protection of the public in residential zoning districts. Decorative fences in the front yard of a 
nonresidence use in a residential zoning district may be allowed with site plan approval. 
(2) ?A temporary fence required as a condition of a Village permit or license at a construction or 
work site shall be allowed in all required yards. 
(d) ?Height. A fence in a required yard may be erected to a height not exceeding 6' from ground level, 
except as otherwise provided below: 
(1) ?Not exceeding 5' from ground level in a residential zoning district when abutting another lot in a 
residential zoning district if the fence is either along a side lot line or in a required side yard. 
(2) ?Not exceeding 8' from ground level in an industrial zoning district or where a side or rear lot line 
of a property in a residential zoning district abuts either an industrial district or an alley abutting 
an industrial district. 
(3) ?Not exceeding 30" from ground level within a sight distance triangle. 
(e) ?The following types of fences and fence attachments are prohibited unless otherwise stated: 
(1) ?Electrically charged. 
(2) ?Barbed wire, razor wire or any guard or barricade intended to cause injury. Barbed wire shall 
only be allowed at industrially zoned property, located at least 6' above ground level, and 
extended inwards towards the property enclosed. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-62. - Outdoor storage, parking, or standing of recreational vehicles, boats, boat trailers, and 
commercial trailers. 
(a) ?General conditions . The following general conditions shall apply to recreational vehicles, boats, 
boat trailers, or commercial trailers: 
(1) ?State license plates and Village vehicle license stickers, if applicable, shall be current and 
properly displayed. 
(2) ?Such vehicles shall not be used as living quarters or an accessory building, for storage, or in 
conjunction with any business enterprise. 
(3) ?Such vehicles shall not be parked, stored or stand with flammable liquids aboard other than in 
State Department of Transportation approved containers. 
(4) ?Such vehicles shall not be parked, stored, or be permitted to stand in such a manner as to 
create a dangerous or unsafe condition on the property. 
(5) ?Other than in a self-service storage facility, the owner of such vehicles shall also be the legal or 
beneficial owner of lessee of the real estate upon which such vehicles are stored, standing or 
parked. Upon request by an authorized Village official, proof of vehicle ownership shall be 
provided. 
(6) ?The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to van-type recreational vehicles 
provided that they bear "RV" or passenger license plates and are standard stock models as 
produced by the original vehicle manufacturers. No modifications affecting overall length, width, 
or height of standard production models shall be permitted to such van-type vehicles. 
Customizing, such as, but not limited to, special painting, "mag" wheels, and plastic dome vents 
shall not be considered a modification. 
(b) ?Residential districts . Parking commercial trailers outdoors is prohibited in residential districts. A 
recreational vehicle, boat, or boat trailer may be stored, parked, or permitted to stand out of doors in 
any residential district subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1) ?A recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall be maintained in mobile condition. 
(2) ?No major constructions or major repair shall be permitted. 
(3) ?Such vehicles shall not exceed the following dimensions: 
Dimension 
RV/Boat/Boat Trailer 
Length, excluding hitches and bumpers (feet) 
14 
Width (feet) 
8 
Height, excluding antenna (feet) 
11 
 
(4) ?Such vehicle shall not cover more than 3% of the area of the lot on which it is located. 
(5) ?Such vehicles shall not be parked or stored within 3' of any lot line or within any front yard, side 
yard, or front driveway unless otherwise specifically permitted. 
(c) ?Business and industrial districts . A recreational vehicle, boat, boat trailer, or commercial trailer may 
be stored, parked, or permitted to stand out of doors in any business or industrial district subject to 
the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1) ?Recreational vehicle, boat, or boat trailer - at a motor vehicle or boat sales facility or operated 
with self-service storage only. 
(2) ?Commercial trailer - operated with a permitted or special use in that district. 
(3) ?Such vehicles shall not block access to any off-street parking space. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-63. - Antennas. 
(a) ?Antennas shall be allowable accessory structures in all districts. Antennas shall also be allowable 
principal uses in districts designated in Appendix A. 
(b) ?Generally . 
(1) ?Permitted use antenna structures may be up to 25' in height above the district height 
regulations. 
(2) ?All antennas located in residential districts shall be for the personal use and benefit of the 
resident occupants of the subject property unless the antenna is operated by a public utility 
company or is a small cell antenna as defined in Chapter 103 and is co-located on an existing 
utility pole or Village or governmentally owned structure as defined in Chapter 103. The term 
"public utility" shall be defined in the same manner as in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as 
amended now or in the future. 
(3) ?Ground-mounted antennas located in mixed-use and business districts shall be exclusively 
used for the operation of the principal use of the subject property, unless operated by a public 
utility company. 
(4) ?A Village permit shall be secured for all antenna ancillary equipment utilizing standard line 
voltage electrical current or whose installation requires any structural modifications. A Village 
permit shall also be required for any small cell antenna located in a public right-of-way. 
(5) ?Prior to the issuance of a Village permit for a principal use antenna, a copy of the FCC license 
for an individual antenna or the license for the Chicago Major Trading Area shall be submitted to 
the Village. A copy of this license shall be submitted to the Village upon its renewal. 
(6) ?Antennas located in residential districts whose width exceeds 3' shall be constructed in such a 
manner as to be at least 50% transparent by light and air. 
(7) ?All antennas exceeding 3' in width located in the R1, R2, and R3 zoning districts shall be 
mounted at a location closest to the ground, except when a higher or different location is 
needed for signal reception. In addition, all antennas shall meet all other location and height 
requirements. 
(8) ?An antenna shall not be located less than 60' from the front lot line, except when attached to 
the side of an existing steeple, church belfries, chimneys, elevator bulkheads and building 
equipment penthouses. 
(9) ?Antennas and their related facilities shall be removed upon abandonment. An antenna will be 
considered abandoned when it is deactivated or out of service, its FCC license has lapsed or 
has not been renewed, or the antenna is not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a 
period of 90 days. The owner(s) of an antenna shall inform the Village of their intent to abandon 
an antenna. An antenna will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service 
during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced. 
(10) ?All antenna support structures and antennas shall comply with the International Building 
Code, the National Electrical Code, and FAA and FCC requirements. 
(11) ?The fabrication and testing of antennas shall be governed by the allowable land use 
classifications as stated in the industrial district sections of this chapter. 
(c) ?Ground mounted. 
(1) ?The base of a ground-mounted antenna shall be screened to a height of 6' to shield its view 
from neighboring property and the street fronting the property. Screening shall consist of 
landscaping. Screening shall not be located so as to interfere with the reception of the antenna. 
(2) ?Principal use antennas shall be located a minimum of 100', or a distance equal to the height of 
the antenna structure, whichever is greater, from residentially zoned property. 
(3) ?The owners of principal use antenna support structures in industrial districts are encouraged to 
design such structures to allow the co-location of other communication providers' equipment so 
as to minimize the proliferation of antenna support structures throughout the community. 
(4) ?The owner of principal use antenna support structures shall allow the collocation of other 
communication providers' equipment, where technically feasible, on a commercially reasonable 
basis. 
(5) ?Antennas which alter the approved site plan of a special use site shall be subject to the 
abbreviated special use process for review and approval. The following siting requirements shall 
be met: 
(a) ?The antenna shall not be mounted in a required yard. 
(b) ?The antenna shall not be mounted in any required off-street parking spaces or affect traffic 
circulation. 
(c) ?Where possible, the base and back of the antenna support structure and antenna shall be 
screened with landscaping to a height of 6'. 
(d) ?The antenna support structure shall not interfere with or reduce on-site water detention. 
(d) ?Accessory . Accessory antenna structures may be up to 12' in height above the district height 
regulations except small cell antennas co-located on a utility pole or Village structure. Such antennas 
shall not exceed a height of 7' above the pole height and shall be mounted with non-metallic 
materials of a neutral color approved by the Village as is further defined in Chapter 103. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-64. - Stormwater control. 
(a) ?Purpose . The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, by 
controlling stormwater runoff resulting from the urbanization of the Village. Because the Village is 
located in a Combined Sewer Area, is committed to reduce combined sewer overflows occurrences, 
and is encouraging the use of Green Infrastructure on private development projects. 
(b) ?Applicability of the WMO. The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District's (MWRD) Watershed 
Management Ordinance (WMO) applies to all development within the Village boundaries. 
Components that are regulated under the WMO include qualified sewer construction, drainage and 
detention, volume control, floodplain management, isolated wetland protection, riparian environment 
protection, and soil erosion, and sediment control. As such: 
(1) ?The Village requires that all development obtain a permit letter of determination from MWRD's 
Engineering Department. 
(2) ?As developments within the Village may not be required to meet certain site stormwater 
management requirements under the WMO, the Village maintains its rights to enforce the 
Village's stormwater requirements as applicable under this section. 
(3) ?The Village requires that an Earthwork/Foundation permit consistent with WMO requirements 
be obtained from MWRD if site disturbance is to commence prior to the issuance of the MWRD 
permit. The purpose of this limited scope permit is to allow the issuance of an advanced 
'Foundation' permit from the Village. 
(4) ?Credit shall be given to Village required stormwater detention volumes for any volume control, 
as expressly required by WMO, or as installed by the developer. 
(c) ?Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Allowable release rate means the rate at which stormwater runoff is allowed to flow from the site 
into the Village sewer system. 
    Control structure means a structure having an outlet designed to control the stormwater runoff 
release rate. 
    Developed state means the condition of the site after development that is represented by a 
composite runoff coefficient based upon an imperious runoff coefficient of 0.95 and a pervious runoff 
coefficient of 0.25. 
    Excess stormwater runoff means the portion of the stormwater runoff that exceeds the allowable 
release rate. 
    100-year frequency rainfall shall be as defined by the Illinois State Water Survey. 
    On-site stormwater detention means the utilization of an on-site stormwater storage facility that 
is designed and maintained to temporarily contain stormwater only when excess stormwater runoff 
occurs. 
    On-site stormwater retention means the utilization of an on-site stormwater storage facility that 
is designed and maintained to temporarily contain stormwater when excess stormwater runoff occurs 
and to permanently hold an additional volume of water at a level which is at or below the level of the 
discharge point for such a storage facility. 
    Peak runoff rate means the rate of stormwater runoff that occurs when the duration of the 
rainfall is equal to or greater than the time of concentration. 
    Rainfall intensity means the amount of precipitation that occurs within a given period, expressed 
in inches of rainfall per hour. 
    Rational Method means the empirical method that relates stormwater runoff to rainfall intensity 
by the formula "Q = CiA" where "Q" is the peak runoff rate in cubic feet per second, "i" is the average 
rainfall intensity in inches per hour, and "A" is the area of the site in acres. 
    Runoff coefficient means the percentage of precipitation that appears as stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater runoff means the portion of the precipitation from a rainfall event remaining after 
interception and evaporation losses which flows from the site into the Village sewer system. 
    Time of concentration means the time required for the stormwater runoff to become established 
and flow from the most remote part of the site to the point under consideration into the Village sewer 
system. 
    Two-year frequency rainfall shall be defined by the Illinois State Water Survey. 
    Undeveloped state means the natural condition of the site prior to development that is 
represented by a runoff coefficient of 0.15. 
(d) ?Stormwater control requirements and exemptions. 
(1) ?All developments resulting from the construction of any building, parking lot or other 
improvement on any part or combination of parcels of land located within the Village shall 
control the stormwater runoff release rate and provide storage of the excess stormwater runoff 
in accordance with the following requirements: 
a. ?Stormwater control calculations shall be performed in accordance with the Rational Method 
and in the format required by the Village; 
b. ?The allowable release rate shall not exceed the peak runoff from the site in its undeveloped 
stat for a 2-year frequency rainfall; and 
c. ?The excess stormwater runoff, as determined to be the difference between the stormwater 
runoff from the site in its developed state for a 100-year frequency rainfall less the 
allowable release rate, shall be temporarily contained on the site by means of on-site 
stormwater retention and/or detention facilities. 
(2) ?The following developments are exempt from the stormwater control requirements of this 
section: 
a. ?All developments existing prior to February 17, 1987, shall be exempt. 
b. ?A parcel or parcels of land used for detached, or 2-unit multifamily residences shall be 
exempt. 
c. ?An individual undeveloped lot of record and subdivisions and resubdivisions with only 1 or 
2 undeveloped lots shall be exempt from the stormwater control requirements. 
d. ?Any parking space with direct access from a public alley is exempt from drainage 
requirements of this section, provided that surface drainage is made to a fully improved 
(paved) public alley. Direct access from a public alley shall be defined as a parking space 
utilizing the public alley as an access aisle without any intervening access aisle. 
(3) ?The exemptions in subsection (d)(2) of this section shall not apply to the following and a 
determination of site impermeable surface shall be required. 
a. ?Deficient existing off-street parking facilities which have site drainage but which are 
deficient in on-site stormwater detention, which facilities shall make provision for maximum 
feasible detention as set forth in subsection (d)(5) of this section. 
b. ?Existing developments that are damaged by any cause to the extent of 50% of its value 
immediately prior to the event as determined by the Zoning Official, in which case such 
developments shall be restored and/or reconstructed in full accordance with the 
stormwater control requirement; and 
c. ?Existing developments which are altered, rehabilitated or reconstructed such that the 
alterations, repairs, or reconstruction are in excess of 50% of its value immediately prior to 
the event as determined by the Zoning Official, or such that the alteration, repairs or 
reconstruction represent a substantial change in use, as determined by the Zoning Official, 
or such that the alteration, repairs or reconstruction represent a substantial change in use, 
as determined by the Zoning Official, in which case such development shall be altered, 
rehabilitated or reconstructed in full accordance with the stormwater control requirement. 
d. ?Subdivisions and resubdivisions . Subdivisions and resubdivisions with 3 or more 
undeveloped or redeveloped lots shall meet the following applicable requirements: 
1. ?Subdivisions served by existing streets and/or combined sewer systems shall be 
required to provide stormwater control for that portion of the subdivision behind the 
proposed front yard to ensure that the runoff from the majority of unimproved property 
and all roof water will be controlled, in accordance with Village standards, and 
minimize the stormwater impact of the subdivision on the surrounding area. 
2. ?Subdivisions where existing street and sewer improvements do not exist shall provide 
stormwater control for all property, including dedicated public streets, in compliance 
with the Village stormwater control requirement. 
(4) ?All new and unimproved existing off-street parking areas, either open or enclosed, shall make 
provision for adequate site drainage and detention of stormwater runoff, subject to the approval 
of the Village Manager or designee. The on-site stormwater detention requirement shall be 
based upon detention storage of the runoff from the developed site for a 100-year frequency 
rainfall less an allowable release rate based upon the runoff from the undeveloped site for a 2-
year frequency rainfall. The 2-year and 100-year frequency rainfalls shall be those defined by 
the Illinois State Water Survey. The undeveloped site shall be defined as having a composite 
runoff coefficient based upon an impervious runoff coefficient of 0.95 and a previous coefficient 
of 0.25. The maximum allowable depth of detention storage shall be 12". 
(5) ?Deficient existing parking lots which are deficient in drainage shall not be required to provide 
site drainage and detention of stormwater runoff. Deficient existing lots which have site drainage 
but which are deficient in detention of stormwater runoff shall make provision for maximum 
feasible detention of stormwater runoff, subject to the approval of the Village Manager or 
designee. The maximum feasible on-site stormwater detention requirement shall be based upon 
detention storage of the runoff from existing developed site for 100-year rainfall less an 
allowable release rate based upon the runoff from the existing developed site for a 2-year 
frequency rainfall, except that this detention storage requirement shall not exceed the maximum 
detention storage that can be safely contained on the site without creating associated drainage 
hazards to the general public or adversely affecting the normal use of the site. The 2-year and 
100-year frequency rainfalls shall be those defined by the Illinois State Water Survey. The 
existing developed site shall be defined as having a composite coefficient of 0.95 and a 
previous runoff coefficient of 0.25. The maximum allowable depth of detention storage shall be 
12". 
(e) ?On-site stormwater retention-detention facilities . 
(1) ?The temporary storage of excess stormwater runoff shall be provided by means of on-site 
stormwater retention and/or detention facilities that are located wholly within the development, 
as determined by the Village Manager or designee. 
(2) ?The design and construction of on-site stormwater retention and/or detention facilities shall be 
performed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a. ?The permanent water surface area of an on-site stormwater retention facility shall not 
exceed 10% of the tributary drainage area contained in the development, provided that an 
individual retention facility shall have a permanent water surface area of at least ½ acre. 
b. ?The minimum normal water depth of an on-site stormwater retention facility shall be 4', 
except that a minimum of 25% of the permanent water surface area shall have a minimum 
depth of 10' when the facility is stocked with fish. 
c. ?On-site stormwater retention facilities shall include suitable shoreline protection methods to 
prevent erosion from wave action. These facilities shall be provided with adequate aeration 
and/or circulation facilities to prevent stagnation, and shall be subject to periodic inspection 
to ensure proper operation and compliance with local health standards. 
d. ?Landscaped on-site stormwater retention and detention facilities shall have a minimum side 
slope of 100:1, and a maximum side slope of 3:1. The side slopes shall be kept as close to 
the natural land contours as practicable. Facilities proposing side slopes in excess of 3:1 in 
order to meet storage requirements shall be allowed only as those cases specifically 
approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
e. ?Landscaped areas utilized as on-site stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to 
serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space, or other types of uses that will not 
be adversely affected by periodic storage of excess stormwater runoff. 
f. ?Paved areas utilized as on-site stormwater detention facilities shall have a minimum grade 
of 0.5% and a maximum slope established by the Village Manager or designee based on 
the use. Maximum storage depth shall not exceed 6". 
g. ?Roof areas as on-site stormwater detention facilities shall use permanent outlet control 
structures and parapet walls to contain excess stormwater runoff on the rooftop. An 
emergency overflow shall be provided to ensure that the weight of water stored will not 
exceed the structural capacity of the roof. Volume controls provided on green roofs shall be 
credited to any Village required stormwater detention. 
h. ?On-site stormwater detention facilities shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to a 
storm sewer which is designed in such a manner as to require minimum maintenance for 
proper operation. On-site stormwater retention facilities should be provided with a positive 
gravity outlet, if at all possible, to allow the ambient water level to be lowered for cleaning 
and shoreline maintenance. 
i. ?On-site stormwater retention and detention facilities shall be provided with a method of 
emergency overflow in the event that the outlet control structure becomes nonfunctional 
due to failure, clogging or other reason, or in the event that a rainfall event in excess of the 
100-year frequency rainfall occurs. 
j. ?At no time during the construction of the development shall the stormwater runoff release 
rate exceed the runoff from the site in its undeveloped state for a 2-year frequency rainfall. 
k. ?During the construction of the development, suitable facilities shall be provided and 
methods employed to prevent erosion and siltation of abutting areas. 
l. ?Plans, specifications and all calculations prepared in conjunction with the stormwater control 
requirement shall be submitted to the Village Manager or designee for review and approval 
prior to the issuance of any permit otherwise required for construction or substantial 
reconstruction of the development. 
(f) ?Design and construction standards . The Village Manager or designee shall prepare or cause to be 
prepared such minimum specifications for materials, designs, construction methods and erosion 
control as may be necessary to implement the provisions, requirements and regulations set forth in 
this chapter. The design and construction of storm drainage and stormwater control systems shall be 
performed in accordance with these specifications established by the Director of Public Works. 
(g) ?Maintenance . All on-site stormwater retention and detention facilities shall be maintained in a fully 
operational condition. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-65. - Amusement devices. 
    Amusement devices that are not part of an arcade establishment are permitted with allowable uses 
in mixed-use and business districts, provided that such devices are clearly incidental and secondary to 
the principal use and are limited to a maximum of 3 devices. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-66. - Air conditioning condenser. 
(a) ?A permit shall be required for the installation or replacement of an air conditioning condenser. 
(b) ?Air conditioning condensers cannot be located in a required front yard or side yard facing a street. 
(c) ?Residential regulations. The following conditions shall apply to air conditioning condensers that are 
located on a lot with a detached or 2-unit multifamily residence: 
(1) ?Air conditioning condensers must be located at grade level. 
(2) ?Air conditioning condensers must be located at least 6' from a lot line. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-67. - Fire safety zone. 
    For all yards abutting a street, a building setback shall be required such that the height of the 
building shall not exceed 3 times the furthest distance an emergency vehicle may park on that street in 
order to provide emergency services to that building. The furthest distance shall be measured from the 
face of the building on any given story to the inside edge of the furthest driving lane from the building, 
regardless of the direction of the traffic flow of that lane. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-68. - Wind energy systems. 
(a) ?Standard conditions for all wind energy systems are as follows: 
(1) ?A Village permit is required for the installation of a wind energy system on any property (the 
"Subject Property"). 
(2) ?Wind energy systems shall comply with the International Building Code, National Electrical 
Code, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, and all federal and state statutes, 
laws, rules, and regulations and all Village codes. 
(3) ?The maximum noise level shall not exceed 60 decibels as measured from the Subject Property. 
(4) ?A wind energy system shall be for the use and benefit of the occupants of the property on 
which it is located, except for reverse metering as allowed by the appropriate state or federal 
agency. 
(5) ?All abandoned or unused wind energy systems shall be deemed a nuisance 12 months after 
the cessation of operations, unless an extension is approved. If an extension is not approved by 
the Village Manager or designee, the Village may act to abate such nuisance and require its 
removal at the property owner's expense. After the wind energy system is removed, the owner 
of the Subject Property shall restore the Subject Property to a condition consistent with the 
property's condition prior to the installation of the system. 
(6) ?One wind energy system is allowed per Subject Property. Additional wind energy systems may 
be allowed with site plan approval. 
(b) ?Rooftop wind energy systems. 
(1) ?All permit applications will be reviewed and approved, or denied, by the Village Manager or 
designee. 
(2) ?Rooftop wind energy systems shall be allowed as accessory structures in all zoning districts. 
(3) ?The height of a wind energy system shall be no more than 15' above the highest point of a 
building's roof or 15' above the existing allowable building height in the district, whichever is 
lower in height. 
(4) ?In all zoning districts, no portion of any rooftop wind energy system shall be in any required 
yard. In residential, mixed-use, and business districts, rooftop wind energy systems shall be at 
least 20' from the front yard line, or in the case of corner lots, at least 10' from the corner side 
yard line. A rooftop wind energy system that is mounted on the side of a structure may 
encroach, by no more than 1.5', into a required yard. 
(c) ?Small wind energy systems. 
(1) ?Small wind energy systems shall only be allowed as accessory structures subject to site plan 
approval in the M1, M2, and M3 districts. 
(2) ?The height of a small wind energy system shall not exceed 70'. 
(3) ?The nameplate capacity of a small wind energy system shall not exceed 100 kilowatts. 
(4) ?The blade tip of any rotor of a small wind energy system shall, at its lowest point, have ground 
clearance of no less than 15' or ? of the tower height, whichever is greater, above ground. 
(d) ?Large wind energy systems. 
(1) ?Large wind energy systems shall be allowable accessory structures with site plan approval an 
M3 district. 
(2) ?The total height of a large wind energy system shall not exceed 120'. 
(3) ?The blade tip of any rotor of a large wind energy system shall, at its lowest point, have ground 
clearance of no less than 25' or ? of the tower height, whichever is greater, above ground. 
(e) ?Installation requirements for small and large wind energy systems. 
(1) ?The system must include a wind turbine tower and not be mounted on a building. 
(2) ?Security fencing not less than 6' high equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device shall 
be required. 
(3) ?The permittee shall promptly replace or repair all fences or gates removed or damaged during 
all phases of the wind energy system's life. 
(4) ?An automatic braking, governing, or a feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or 
over speeding is required. 
(5) ?Wind energy systems shall have lightning protection. 
(6) ?If guy wires are used to support the tower, these wires shall be clearly visible to a height of at 
least 6' above the guy wire anchors. 
(7) ?All access doors to wind turbine towers and electrical equipment shall be lockable. 
(8) ?A bird-friendly design to be approved by the Community Development Department is required 
in order to reduce the number of resting places near the turbine's rotors. 
(9) ?The minimum distance between a wind energy system and any property line or public utility 
pole shall be a distance equivalent to 1.1 times the total height. 
(10) ?All on-site electrical transmission lines connecting a wind energy system to a building or the 
public utility electricity distribution system shall be located underground. 
(11) ?Appropriate warning signage shall be placed on wind turbine towers and all electrical 
equipment. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-69. - Automatic teller machines (ATMs). 
(a) ?Principal use. If the primary purpose of a building is to house an ATM, the use is considered a bank, 
and the building is subject to all building codes and requirements of this chapter. 
(b) ?Indoor ATMs. An ATM that is accessed within a completely enclosed principal building is permitted 
in all districts with a use that is allowed in that district. 
(c) ?Requirements for outdoor ATMs. An ATM that is accessed outside a completely enclosed principal 
building is allowed only under the following conditions: 
(1) ?Use. An ATM is allowed with a special use permit, but only in districts where a bank is a 
permitted or special use. An ATM may be part of a drive-through facility that has a special use 
permit. 
(2) ?Appearance Commission. An ATM and any associated structures and signage are subject to 
the review and approval of the Appearance Commission. 
(3) ?Customer standing area. Each ATM shall have a minimum of a 3' by 3' customer standing 
area, centered in front of the face of the ATM. 
(4) ?Obstructions. An ATM, customer standing area, and any structure surrounding the ATM shall 
be interpreted as an obstruction with respect to sight distance triangles, required parking 
spaces, effective walkway widths, vehicle overhangs, or other requirements of this chapter. 
(5) ?Use of public right-of-way. No ATM or structure housing an ATM may be in a public right-of-
way. The customer standing area may be in a public right-of-way with a permit from the Village. 
(d) ?Parking. An ATM is exempt from off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-70. - Electric vehicle charging stations. 
(a) ?Station location. In residential districts, an electric vehicle charging station is permitted in any area 
where a vehicle may be parked. In all other districts, the station is permitted for use with any legal 
parking space that is not in a required vehicle parking space, except when that parking space is 
dedicated to a specific residence. 
(b) ?Equipment location. The charging station equipment must not impede pedestrian, bicycle, or 
vehicular traffic or be located within the required area of the legal parking space, vehicle overhang, 
or associated circulation aisles as required by this chapter. 
(c) ?Requirements for public use. When the station is intended to be used by the public: 
(1) ?Equipment protection. Adequate protection of charging station equipment from vehicles must 
be provided, such as curbing, bollards, or wheel stops. 
(2) ?Signage. Any charging station that is intended to be used for multiple users must have signage 
indicating that parking is for electric vehicle charging only, a phone number or other contact 
information to report when the equipment is not functioning properly, and any time limits on use, 
tow away, or fine provisions. 
(3) ?Parking space identification. The parking space must be identified per the Electric Vehicle 
Charging Station Guidelines. 
(4) ?Principal use. If the primary purpose of the lot is the charging of vehicles, the use is considered 
an automotive fuel station for zoning purposes. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Secs. 118-71—118-89. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS 


Sec. 118-90. - Adult uses. 
(a) ?No adult use may be located within 200' of any of the following uses: religious assembly, schools 
with students primarily under the age of 18 including the school's open space and parking areas, day 
care centers for children, parks, public recreation facilities, and libraries and archives. 
(b) ?An adult use may not be located closer than 500' to another adult use as from outside walls of the 
use. 
(c) ?Such distances shall be measured from the nearest point along the lot line of the site or location to 
the nearest point along the other lot line or site location, in a straight line without regard to 
intervening structures, topography, and zoning. 
(d) ?An adult use is prohibited from being a home occupation. 
(e) ?Advertisements, displays, or other promotion of adult materials or products must not be visible to the 
public from pedestrian sidewalks, walkways, or other public or semipublic areas, including any 
interior areas of the adult use which may be open to minors. 
(f) ?All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner 
as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or semipublic area. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-91. - Home occupations. 
(a) ?General. A home occupation is permitted in all residences provided the home occupation is clearly 
and obviously subordinate to the residence use. A home occupation must be conducted wholly within 
the principal building on the premises. 
(b) ?Conditions. 
(1) ?Other than resident occupants in the residence, no more than one person may be employed or 
working in the home occupation. 
(2) ?The home occupation does not exceed 15% of the floor area of the principal building. 
(3) ?The home occupation does not change the fire rating of the building. 
(4) ?The home occupation does not alter, amend, or modify the residential character of the building 
nor does the delivery or receipt of merchandise, goods, or materials interfere with the residential 
character of the neighborhood. 
(5) ?There shall be no exterior display or storage of commercial goods on said premises. 
(6) ?Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than 50% of the area permitted to be used as a 
home occupation. 
(7) ?Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and scheduled so that not 
more than 1 patron vehicle is on the premises at the same time. 
(8) ?The home occupation shall not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical 
magnetic interference (EMI) and radio frequency interference (RFI), fire hazard, or any other 
hazard or nuisance greater than that usually experienced in a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 07-5-C-3504, § 2, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 19-2-C-
4443, § 2, 2-4-2019; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-92. - Automobile sales or service establishments and automobile rental. 
(a) ?All uses. The following regulations apply to all automobile sales and service uses and automobile 
rental listed in Appendix A: 
(1) ?When the subject property abuts or is across the alley from a residential district: 
a. ?Visual screening at least 6' high must be provided along the abutting lot line. 
b. ?There shall be no automobile repair work or washing of vehicles from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 
a.m. 
(2) ?All repair work must be performed within a building at all times except inspecting vehicles; 
adding fluids; and changing tires, batteries, windshield wipers, or light bulbs. 
(3) ?Outside storage and display of items for sale or lease, tools, equipment, vehicles, parts, or 
supplies is prohibited, except vehicles and propane for sale or lease. Those vehicles that are for 
sale or lease must never occupy a required off-street vehicle parking space. 
(4) ?Vehicles and boats are prohibited to be sold, advertised for sale, or, other than operational 
licensed vehicles owned by the establishment, remain outdoors on the property for more than 
10 days, except at vehicle dealers. 
(b) ?Additional requirements for automotive fuel stations. 
(1) ?At least 1 employee must be at the fuel control console at all times that self-serve fuel is being 
dispensed. At least 2 employees shall be on the premises from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. when a 
convenience store or any other use over 1,000 square feet is collocated with the automotive fuel station. 
(2) ?The attendant must always have a clear view of the fuel dispensing area. 
(3) ?A system that allows communication between persons at each dispensing area and the 
employee at the fuel control console must be provided. 
(4) ?During the hours of operation, air and use of equipment for tire inflation, use of a tire pressure 
gauge, fluid and equipment for washing vehicle windows, water and use of a water container for 
filling radiators, and rest room facilities must be provided free of charge. Charging a fee for 
these services is prohibited. 
(5) ?A canopy must be provided over all fuel dispensing areas. 
(6) ?The pump islands and fuel tanks shall be removed upon closing of the automotive fuel station 
in accordance with the requirements of the State Fire Marshal. 
(7) ?A minimum lot size of 30,000 square feet is required when a car wash or hand car wash is collocated 
with the automotive fuel station. 
(c) ?Additional requirements for car washes and hand car washes. 
(1) ?The Plan Commission will determine the appropriate number and location of drying spaces. 
(2) ?A traffic study must be included with the special use permit petition indicating needed vehicle 
stacking and site circulation that does not constitute a traffic hazard or create on- or off-site 
congestion. 
(3) ?Openings to a wash bay must not face any residentially zoned property unless the opening is 
located more than 50' from such property. 
(4) ?The operation of the use must minimize excessive water from collecting outside the building 
openings to a wash bay. 
(d) ?Additional requirements for automotive repair facilities. 
(1) ?All automotive repair facilities require a special use permit. 
(2) ?Any vehicle outdoors in need of body repair must be parked in a legal parking space and 
screened from view from any public street in rights-of-way abutting the lot or an abutting 
residential zoning district. Such vehicle is prohibited from being parked outdoors for more than 
10 days. 
(3) ?Servicing of any vehicle over 8,000 pounds gross weight is limited to M2 and M3 districts. 
(4) ?In mixed-use and business districts, repair shall be limited to brakes, mufflers, upholstery work, 
tire repair and change, lubrication, tune-ups, and minor engine, mechanical, or electrical repair. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-93. - Food establishments and food service requirements. 
(a) ?A screened garbage corral with an impermeable surface shall be provided to contain all dumpsters. 
(b) ?No tables or eating counters shall be allowed at food establishments. The addition of tables or 
eating counters shall constitute the addition of a food service use at that location, and all additional 
regulations for that food service use shall apply. 
(c) ?At least once during every 4 hours of operation and before opening and closing of the business, 
employees shall patrol the property and clear it of litter. 
(d) ?The sale of open alcoholic beverages at carryout restaurants is prohibited. 
(e) ?Outdoor dining. 
(1) ?Standard conditions . The following shall apply to all outdoor dining areas: 
a. ?Barriers, fencing, landscaping, and other features shall be utilized to define the outdoor 
dining area. 
b. ?Use of the area shall be limited to between 8:00 AM and 10:00 PM, but not longer than the 
posted operational hours of the associated food service facility. 
c. ?Dates of operation shall be limited to between April 1 and October 31 in a calendar year. 
d. ?Outdoor dining areas shall be exempt from parking regulations if used or set up less than 7 
months in a calendar year. 
e. ?All food preparation must take place inside the associated food service establishment. 
f. ?Adequate litter and refuse disposal shall exist as determined by the Health Department. 
g. ?Advertising or promotional features shall be limited to umbrellas or canopies. 
h. ?A drive-through facility shall have at least one litter/refuse disposal container at its exit at a 
location determined by the Health Department. 
i. ?All applicable Village and State health requirements shall be met. 
j. ?Dining areas will be reviewed each year during the annual restaurant inspection. The 
outdoor dining permit may be revoked by the Village Manager at any time on 14 days' 
notice for failure to comply with the regulations set forth in this subsection. 
k. ?The outdoor dining area shall not be enclosed on more than two sides with walls if roofed 
over. 
l. ?The outdoor dining area must be located on a surface approved by the Village Manager or 
designee. 
m. ?The outdoor dining area shall not be located in a required parking space or block a private 
or public sidewalk. 
(2) ?Outdoor dining on private property shall be a permitted use with an outdoor dining permit from 
the Village Manager or designee in TX, CX, B3, B4, and H1 districts subject to the following 
conditions: 
a. ?All conditions in subsection (e)(1) are met. 
b. ?The outdoor dining shall be on the same lot as or within a development that received site 
plan approval as its associated food service establishment. 
c. ?An outdoor dining area shall not be located within a 15' sight distance triangle or within 3' 
from any public alley. 
(3) ?Outdoor dining shall be permitted on private property between November 1 and March 31, of 
the next calendar year, with an administrative permit from the Village Manager or designee, 
subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?An outdoor dining permit or a special use permit for outdoor dining has been issued for the 
site. 
b. ?The outdoor dining area must be in the same location as the approved outdoor dining 
permit or special use permit. 
c. ?The outdoor dining area cannot be used more than 4 periods during this time. 
d. ?The outdoor dining area cannot be used or set up for more than a period of 3 consecutive 
days. 
e. ?A site and floor plan must be approved by the Village Manager or designee. 
f. ?Administrative permit fee must be paid to the Village of Skokie prior to using the outdoor 
dining area. 
(4) ?Outdoor dining on private property shall be a special use in NX, B1, B2, B6, and M1 districts or 
if relief is needed from any condition in subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), or (e)(3) in NX, TX, CX, B1, 
B2, B3, B4, B6, H1 and M1 districts. 
(5) ?Outdoor dining on a public right-of-way shall be a permitted use with an outdoor dining permit 
from the Village Manager or designee in TX and CX districts subject to the following conditions: 
a. ?All conditions in subsection (e)(1) are met. 
b. ?The use of public right-of-way for outdoor furniture and appurtenances shall only be 
permitted incidental to the operation of a restaurant on private abutting property, and the 
outdoor dining area shall not extend laterally beyond the frontage of the permittee's 
establishment. 
c. ?All public sidewalks and parkways shall be maintained in accordance with § 90-43 and § 
118-188. 
d. ?A Use of Public Way for Outdoor Dining Agreement between the Village and both the 
operator of the food service and the abutting land owner shall be approved by the Village. 
(6) ?Outdoor dining on public right-of-way shall be a special use: 
a. ?In NX, B1, B2, B3, B4, B6, and M1 districts in conjunction with an approved Use of Public 
Way for Outdoor Dining Agreement between the Village and the operator of the food 
service. 
b. ?In TX and CX districts if relief from any condition in subsection (e)(5) is needed. 
(f) ?Existing limited-service restaurants are allowed with a special use permit in the M3 district and may 
rebuild, modernize, and/or add outdoor dining if the Plan Commission deems that the restaurant is 
operated and maintained in a manner consistent with the purpose of the district. All new restaurants 
are prohibited in this district except in retail planned developments. 
(g) ?Drive-through facilities are prohibited at carryout and full-service restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 09-5-C-3674, § 1, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 19-4-C-
4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-94. - Child day care. 
(a) ?In residence uses . Child day care in residences listed as restricted uses in Appendix A shall be 
subject to the following regulations: 
(1) ?Child care in residences shall comply with Chapter 54, Article VII, Day Care Homes, of the 
Village Code. 
(2) ?No more than 2 day care homes may be located within the same block or closer than 100' to 
another such facility along the face of a street as measured from the closest property line of 
each lot. 
(3) ?A driveway or on-street parking adjacent to the lot must exist. If a driveway exists, it shall be 
available for the dropoff and pickup of children. If no driveway exists, an 18" wide carriage walk 
connected to the sidewalk shall be present along the street adjacent to the lot and the dropoff 
and pickup of children shall only occur on the same side of the street as the day care home. No 
dropoff and pickup of children shall occur on an arterial street. 
(4) ?Subject to subsections (1) through (3) above, a special use permit must be obtained, except in 
detached and townhouse residences in which the use is a permitted use. 
(b) ?Not in residence uses . 
(1) ?Restricted uses in residential districts. 
a. ?Child day care collocated in the same building as a use requiring a special use in the 
district must also obtain a special use permit. 
b. ?Child day care collocated in the same building as a use permitted in the district is a 
permitted use. 
c. ?Child day care in its own building is a permitted use. 
(2) ?Not in residential districts. Child day care uses shall be permitted or special uses as indicated 
in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 12-4-C-3895, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-95. - Congregate living facilities. 
(a) ?Congregate living facilities may only be in a residence type otherwise identified as permitted or 
special uses in a district. 
(b) ?No residential unit shall be permitted on the first floor in business or mixed-use districts. 
(c) ?The facility shall be a permitted use if the sponsoring agency is eligible for and obtains State 
licensing or certification to operate the proposed use and the use is a permanent residence facility. If 
the sponsoring agency does not meet this criterion because there is no State licensing or certification 
required for the use or the facility is a temporary residence facility, a special use permit must be 
obtained in accordance with Article II of this chapter, and reasonable proof of ability to operate a 
reputable congregate living facility must be shown. 
(d) ?The facility shall be designated a permanent residence facility if all the residents intend to live at the 
facility for 1 year or more. The facility shall be designated a temporary residence facility if any of the 
residents intend to live at the facility for less than 1 year. 
(e) ?Any facility with more than 4 bedrooms in a residential unit, 2 or more residential units in a building, 
or 2 or more buildings on a lot or abutting lots operated by the sponsoring agency must receive site 
plan approval in accordance with Article II of this chapter. 
(f) ?The sponsoring agency must obtain an administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a 
congregate living facility. The following criteria will be used in issuing a permit: 
(1) ?The facility must be located in an area reasonably accessible to public transportation and, if 
needed, employment, vocational, medical, psychiatric, recreational, and other community 
resources that might be utilized by the facility's residents. If this provision cannot be met, the 
sponsoring agency must ensure that the facility's residents have access to these services when 
needed. 
(2) ?Except as allowed in (e) of this section, the facility shall not be located within the same block as 
another such facility nor closer than 800' to another facility as measured from the property line 
of the lot. 
(g) ?Proof of agency ownership, option to own or signed lease for the facility to be occupied shall be 
provided to the Village prior to occupancy. Ownership or lease of the facility by residents of the 
facility shall be permitted provided agency ownership and leasing requirements, set forth by the 
Illinois Department of Human Services Division of Mental Health and Division of Developmental 
Disabilities and delineated in Section 115.300 - Environmental Management of Living Arrangements, 
paragraphs b) and c), are complied with. The sponsoring agency shall be responsible for compliance 
of facilities owned or rented by residents. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-96. - Assisted-living facilities. 
    In compliance with the State of Illinois Assisted Living and Shared Housing Act, 210 ILCS 9/1 et 
seq., and the adopted rules in Chapter 1, Subchapter c of Part 295 of Title 77, as may be amended from 
time to time, an assisted-living facility shall provide: 
(1) ?Community-based residential care for persons who need assistance with the activities of daily 
living, including personal, supportive, and intermittent health-related services available 24-hours 
a day, if needed, to meet the scheduled or unscheduled needs of a resident. 
(2) ?Mandatory services, whether provided directly by the establishment or by another entity 
arranged for by the establishment, with the consent of the resident or resident's representative. 
(3) ?A physical environment that is a homelike setting that includes the following and other such 
elements as established by the State: 
a. ?Individual living units, each of which shall accommodate small kitchen appliances and 
contain private bathing, washing, and toilet facilities, or private washing and toilet facilities 
with a common bathing room ready and accessible to each resident. 
b. ?Units shall be maintained for single occupancy except in cases in which 2 residents choose 
to share a unit. 
c. ?Sufficient common space shall exist to permit individual and group activities. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-97. - Animal shelters. 
(a) ?Site selection criteria. A special use permit may not be granted unless the following site selection 
criteria are met: 
(1) ?The site must have adequate off-street parking to meet the needs of customers and 
employees. 
(2) ?The site should be on an arterial street with bus service, for convenient access by customers 
and employees. 
(3) ?The building must be sound proofed. 
(4) ?The building should be adequately sized to allow space for required services and exercise for 
animals when outdoor exercise is not possible due to weather conditions. 
(5) ?Nonprofit organizations should seek rental properties or currently tax exempt properties to 
preserve the Village's tax base. 
(6) ?The site should be in an area where the animals can be brought outside for controlled exercise 
(walking on a leash). 
(b) ?Remittance of applicable taxes. Pet supplies sales and pet services as well as educational, 
orientation, and fundraising activities are allowed in conjunction with the use. Collection and 
remittance of all applicable sales and use taxes are required. 
(Ord. No. 16-10-C-4250, § 2, 10-6-2016; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-98. - Brew pubs and tap rooms. 
(a) ?All production supplies and waste materials associated with the microbrewery, microdistillery and 
micro-winery must be stored inside the building. 
(b) ?The production area must be visible to the public. 
(c) ?Service truck loading and unloading shall take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(d) ?Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 18-10-C-4416, § 2, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Secs. 118-99—118-120. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. III, Div. 2, as Art. VI. 


Sec. 118-121. - Reserved. 


Sec. 118-122. - Impermeable surface requirements. 
(a) ?Scope. The total permissible area of impermeable surfaces shall be limited as provided in this 
section. For the purpose of this section, coverage shall be the combination of all buildings and 
impermeable surfaces. 
(b) ?A permit shall be required for the construction, installation, or replacement of any impermeable 
surface in any district. 
(c) ?Impermeable surfaces on lots with certain uses shall have a maximum area as indicated in the 
following chart: 
Zone 
Use 
Required  
front yard 
Total lot area 
R1 
all 
40% 
50% 
R2 
all 
55% 
50% 
R3 
all 
55% 
65% 
R4 
detached residences 
50% 
50% 

2-unit multifamily, and townhouse residences 
55% 
65% 

multifamily residences with 3 or more units 
35% a 
b 

all other uses 
b 
b 
 
a Improvements utilizing a circular drive may increase impermeable areas to a maximum of 50% 
b No maximum 
(d) ?Permeable surface installations will be permitted if the surface-volume from a 10-minute, 100-year 
storm is being stored within the permeable pavement base; such areas will be included in the lot's 
impermeable surface calculation at no less than 50% of the permeable surface area. Sample 
installations include permeable pavers and permeable pavements. 
(e) ?Residential building permits which include any excavation work may require a grading plan. No 
grades within the Village shall be disturbed or otherwise altered except as allowed pursuant to a 
grading permit issued by the Director of Engineering. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-123. - Calculation of required front yard in residential zoning districts. 
(a) ?The required front yard is set forth in the zoning district in which the lot is located, except in (b) of 
this section. 
(b) ?If 60% or more of the interior lots fronting 1 side of a street within a block have an established 
building setback of a depth other than required for a front yard in the zoning district of that lot, the 
front yard depth for each remaining lot is the average of the of the building setbacks of the nearest 
principal structure on both sides of the lot. If no principal building exists on 1 side of the lot to the end 
of the block, then the required front setback for that zoning district is used for that adjacent lot. 
(Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-124. - R1 Single-Family district. 
    The following requirements apply to the R1 Single-Family district: 
(1) ?Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 6,600 square feet , except as follows: 
a. ?Child day care (except in residences), convents and monasteries, libraries, museums, 
religious assembly, schools, services to the elderly and disabled: 1 acre. 
b. ?Colleges and universities: 5 acres. 
c. ?Golf courses: 15 acres. 
d. ?Cemeteries: 40 acres. 
(2) ?Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 55 feet. 
(3) ?Building height. Buildings that are not in planned developments: 
a. ?Detached residences with a lot width less than 60 feet the structure shall not exceed 28 
feet. The distance from grade to the top of the eave, or top of beam for a flat roofed 
structure, shall not exceed 23 feet. 
b. ?Detached residences with a lot width between 60 and 85 feet the structure shall not exceed 
30 feet. The distance from grade to the top of the eave, or top of beam for a flat roofed 
structure, shall not exceed 23 feet. 
c. ?Detached residences with a lot width greater than 85 feet the structure shall not exceed 32 
feet. The distance from grade to the top of the eave, or top of beam for a flat roofed 
structure, shall not exceed 23 feet. 
d. ?The height of any other building shall not exceed 32 feet. 
e. ?The repair or reconstruction of nonconforming residences is controlled by Section 118-253. 
In planned developments no building shall exceed a height of 60 feet or 6 stories for sites of at 
least 10 acres and 32 feet or 3 stories for other sites. 
(4) ?Ground floor area. 
a. ?Minimum for a 1-story residence without basement: 1,300 square feet. 
b. ?Minimum for a 1-story residence with a basement: 1,200 square feet. 
c. ?Minimum for a residence having more than 1 story: 750 square feet. 
(5) ?Front yard. The minimum front yard shall be 25 feet in depth. 
(6) ?Side yards. 
a. ?Detached residences with a lot width less than 85 feet: 2 side yards, neither of which is 
less than 6 feet in width. 
b. ?Detached residences with a lot width equal to or greater than 85 feet shall have combined 
side yards equal to 20 percent of the lot width, and neither yard shall be less than 9 feet in 
width. 
c. ?For residential planned developments the side yards shall be determined by site plan 
approval in accordance with Article II, Administration and Enforcement. 
d. ?Nonresidential permitted and special uses: 2 side yards, neither of which is less than 15 
feet in width. 
e. ?A side yard abutting a street: shall not be less than 17 feet, except if a corner lot of record 
on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived has insufficient 
width to provide such yard and still to maintain a buildable width of 20 feet, excluding the 
yard along the interior side lot line, then the side yard abutting the street may be reduced in 
width by the distance necessary to maintain such buildable width of 20 feet of building. 
(7) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?The minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet in depth, or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, 
whichever is less. 
b. ?The minimum rear yard for a corner lot shall be 5 feet. 
(8) ?Maximum land coverage by buildings. The maximum land coverage of the principal and 
accessory buildings shall be 40 percent of the lot area. 
(9) ?Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio for all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 
0.6. 
(Zon. Ord., § 8.1; Ord. No. 00-6-Z-2897, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 00-7-Z-2908, § 1, 7-17-2000; 
Ord. No. 00-12-Z-2954, § 2, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 01-6-Z-2993, § 2, 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-
Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 2, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-
6-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-12-Z-3239, § 1, 12-15-2003; Ord. 
No. 04-8-Z-3291, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 06-5-C-3434, § 
1, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3600, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 3, 10-7-2013; 
Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-125. - R2 Single-Family district. 
    The following requirements apply to the R2 Single-Family district: 
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 4,800 square feet 
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 40 feet. 
(3) Building height. Buildings that are not in planned developments: 
a. ?Detached residences with a lot width less than 45 feet the structure shall not exceed 26 
feet. The distance from grade to the top of the eave, or top of beam for a flat roofed 
structure, shall not exceed 23 feet. 
b. ?Detached residences with a lot width between 45 feet and 60 feet the structure shall not 
exceed 28 feet. The distance from grade to the top of the eave, or top of beam for a flat 
roofed structure, shall not exceed 23 feet. 
c. ?Detached residences with a lot width greater than 60 feet the structure shall not exceed 30 
feet. The distance from grade to the top of the eave, or top of beam for a flat roofed 
structure, shall not exceed 23 feet. 
d. ?The height of any other building shall not exceed 32 feet. 
e. ?The repair or reconstruction of nonconforming residences is controlled by Section 118-253. 
In planned developments no building shall exceed a height of 60 feet or 6 stories for sites of at 
least 10 acres and 32 feet or 3 stories for other sites. 
except as follows: 
a. ?Child day care (except in residences), convents and monasteries, libraries, museums, 
religious assembly, schools, services to the elderly and disabled: 1 acre. 
b. ?Colleges and universities: 5 acres. 
c. ?Golf courses: 15 acres. 
d. ?Cemeteries: 40 acres. 
(4) ?Ground floor area. 
a. ?Minimum for a 1-story residence without basement: 1,100 square feet. 
b. ?Minimum for a 1-story residence with basement: 1,000 square feet. 
c. ?Minimum for a residence having more than 1 story: 650 square feet. 
(5) ?Front yard. The minimum front yard shall be 25 feet in depth. 
(6) ?Side yards. 
a. ?Detached residences with a lot width less than 70 feet: 2 side yards, neither of which is 
less than 4 feet in width. 
b. ?Detached residences with a lot width equal to or greater than 70 feet shall have combined 
side yards equal to 20 percent of the lot width, and neither yard shall be less than 7 feet in 
width. 
c. ?For residential planned developments the side yards shall be determined by site plan 
approval in accordance with Article II, Administration and Enforcement. 
d. ?Nonresidential permitted and special uses: 2 side yards, neither of which is less than 15 
feet in width. 
e. ?A side yard abutting a street: shall not be less than 10 feet, except if a corner lot of record 
on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived has insufficient 
width to provide such yard and still maintain a buildable width of 20 feet, excluding the yard 
along the interior side lot line, then the side yard abutting the street may be reduced in 
width by the distance necessary to maintain such buildable width of 20 feet. 
(7) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?The minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet in depth, or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, 
whichever is less. 
b. ?The minimum rear yard for a corner lot shall be 5 feet. 
(8) ?Maximum land coverage by buildings. The maximum land coverage of the principal and 
accessory buildings shall be 40 percent of the lot area. 
(9) ?Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio for all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 
0.6. 
(Zon. Ord., § 8.2; Ord. No. 00-6-Z-2897, § 2, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 00-7-Z-2908, § 2, 7-17-2000; 
Ord. No. 00-12-Z-2954, § 3, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 01-6-Z-2993, § 3, 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-
Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 3, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-
6-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-12-Z-3239, § 1, 12-15-2003; Ord. 
No. 04-8-Z-3291, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 06-5-C-3434, § 
2, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3600, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 3, 10-7-2013; 
Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-126. - R3 Combined Housing district. 
    The following requirements apply to the R3 Combined Housing district: 
(1) Lot area.  
a. Detached residence minimum lot area: 4,800 square feet. 
b. Townhouse residence minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet per residential unit. 
c. Multifamily residence minimum lot area: 2,400 square feet per residential unit. 
For a lot used for residential purposes only, and upon which the building does not have its 
principal frontage on a street, then the lot depth shall be considered lot width and the lot width 
shall be considered lot depth. 
(3) ?Building height. The height of any structure shall not exceed 32 feet, except in planned 
developments. In planned developments, no structure shall exceed a height of 60 feet or 6 
stories. 
d. ?Child day care (except in residences), convents and monasteries, libraries, museums, 
religious assembly, schools, services to the elderly and disabled: 1 acre. 
e. ?Colleges and universities: 5 acres. 
f. ?Golf courses: 15 acres. 
g. ?Cemeteries: 40 acres. 
(2) ?Lot width. The minimum lot width per residential unit shall be: 
a. ?Detached residence: 40 feet. 
b. ?Townhouse residence: 25 feet. 
c. ?Multifamily residence: 20 feet. 
(4) ?Ground floor area. 
a. ?Minimum for detached residences: 
1. ?1-story without basement or cellar: 1,000 square feet. 
2. ?1-story with basement or cellar: 1,000 square feet. 
3. ?More than 1 story: 650 square feet. 
b. ?Minimum per residential unit for townhouse residences: 
1. ?1-story: 1,000 square feet. 
2. ?More than 1 story: 650 square feet. 
c. ?Minimum per building for 2-unit multifamily residence: 1,000 square feet. 
(5) ?Front yard. The minimum front yard shall be 25 feet in depth. 
(6) ?Side yards. 
a. ?Residential uses shall have 2 side yards, neither of which shall be less than 4 feet in width. 
b. ?Nonresidential permitted uses and special uses shall have 2 side yards, neither of which 
shall be less than 15 feet in width. 
c. ?A yard abutting a street shall not be less than 10 feet, except if a corner lot of record on the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived has insufficient width to 
provide such yard and still maintain a buildable width of 20 feet excluding the yard along 
the interior side lot line, then the side yard abutting the street may be reduced in width by 
the distance necessary to maintain such buildable width of 20 feet. 
(7) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?The minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet in depth or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, 
whichever is less. 
b. ?The minimum rear yard for a corner lot shall be 5 feet. 
(8) ?Maximum land coverage by buildings. The maximum land coverage of the principal and 
accessory buildings shall be 40 percent of the lot area. 
(Zon. Ord., § 8.3; Ord. No. 00-6-Z-2897, § 3, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 00-12-Z-2954, § 4, 12-4-
2000; Ord. No. 01-6-Z-2993, § 4, 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 
02-10-Z-3120, § 4, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 
6-16-2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3600, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. 
No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 3, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, 
§ 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-127. - R4 Multifamily Housing district. 
    The following requirements apply to the R4 Multifamily Housing district: 
(1) Lot area. 
a. Detached residence minimum lot area: 4,800 square feet. 
b. Townhouse residence minimum lot area: 2,500 square feet per residential unit. 
c. Two-unit multifamily residence minimum lot area: 4,800 square feet. 
d. Multifamily residence with 3 or more units minimum lot area: 2,200 square feet per residential unit. 
For multifamily residences with 3 or more units and in planned developments: By site plan 
approval in accordance with Article II of this chapter. 
(3) ?Building height. Except in planned developments, the maximum building height shall be: 
a. ?Detached, townhouses, or 2-unit multifamily residences: 32 feet or 2 stories. 
b. ?Multifamily residence with 3 or more units: 2 floors of living units. 
c. ?Nonresidential buildings: 40 feet or 4 stories. 
In planned developments no structure shall exceed a height of 60 feet or 6 stories. 
e. ?Skilled nursing facilities: 12,500 square feet. 
f. ?Child day care (except in residences), convents and monasteries, libraries, museums, 
religious assembly, schools, services to the elderly and disabled: 1 acre. 
g. ?Colleges and universities: 5 acres. 
h. ?Golf courses: 15 acres. 
i. ?Cemeteries: 40 acres. 
(2) ?Lot width. Except in planned developments, the minimum lot width shall be: 
a. ?Detached residence: 40 feet. 
b. ?Townhouse residence: 25 feet per residential unit. 
c. ?Two-unit multifamily residence: 20 feet per residential unit. 
d. ?Skilled nursing facilities: 100 feet. 
(4) ?Ground floor area. 
a. ?Minimum for detached residences: 
1. ?1-story without basement or cellar: 1,000 square feet. 
2. ?1-story with basement or cellar: 1,000 square feet. 
3. ?More than 1 story: 650 square feet. 
b. ?Minimum per residential unit for townhouse residences: 
1. ?1-story: 1,000 square feet. 
2. ?More than 1 story: 650 square feet. 
c. ?Minimum per building for 2-unit multifamily residence: 1,000 square feet. 
(5) ?Front yard. The minimum front yard shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, except that multiple-
family structures shall maintain a minimum front yard of 20 feet in depth. 
(6) ?Side yards. 
a. ?Detached or 2-unit multifamily residence: 2 side yards, neither of which is less than 4 feet 
wide. 
b. ?Townhouse residence: The walls containing the greater horizontal dimension of the 
structure shall be no less than 20 feet from any lot line. The walls containing the lesser 
horizontal dimension of the structure shall be no less than 6 feet from any lot line. 
c. ?Multifamily residence with 3 or more units: By site plan approval in accordance with Article 
II of this chapter. 
d. ?Nonresidence uses: 2 side yards, neither of which shall be less than 6 feet. 
e. ?For buildings on corner lots, the side yards abutting the street shall be a minimum of 10 
feet. 
(7) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?The minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet in depth, except where the rear lot line abuts an 
alley it shall be not less than 38 feet when measured from the centerline of the alley. The 
Plan Commission and Mayor and Board of Trustees shall determine the required rear yard 
for multifamily residences with 3 or more units by site plan approval in accordance with 
Article II of this chapter. 
b. ?Parking is prohibited in rear yards within 10 feet of the lot line along a side street. 
(8) ?Maximum land coverage by buildings. The maximum land coverage of the principal buildings 
shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot area. For the purpose of this computation only, a 1-story 
attached garage shall be considered an accessory building and not part of the principal building. 
(9) ?Visual screening. 
a. ?On lots with a multifamily residence with 3 or more units, if any yard or other open space is 
provided between the building or buildings and the side or rear lot lines, then adequate 
visual screening shall be provided on any side or rear lot line abutting residentially zoned 
property. 
b. ?Only the following types of visual screening shall be permitted for the purpose of this 
chapter, or as contained in this chapter: 
1. ?Face brick wall. 
2. ?Reinforced concrete wall with decorative finish. 
3. ?Solid wooden fence. 
4. ?Dense evergreen living shrubs. 
5. ?A combination of the types of screening listed in this subsection. 
c. ?All screening shall be adequately protected from vehicular maneuvers, including parking 
and continual traffic flow. Such protection shall be subject to the approval of the Director of 
Engineering. 
d. ?The screening shall be required to encompass the parking facilities and driveway. 
e. ?When the required screening would be located in a utility easement or an alley boundary 
which is used by 1 or more of the utility companies for its service, the requirement must be 
reviewed by the Director of Engineering. The Director of Engineering shall determine, after 
a review of written statements from the public utility companies, whether each utility 
company is now using the easement or plans to in the future, and the characteristics of 
such use, and the type of utility line, its horizontal and vertical placement, and its 
relationship to other utilities and the access needed for installation and maintenance. When 
the utility easement is or will be in use, the Director of Engineering shall determine when 
the required screening on a lot would interfere with the utility companies' use of the 
easement and shall then determine a suitable location for such screening. If screening 
cannot be so placed to avoid interference with the utilities, alternate screening and location 
shall be determined by the Director of Engineering and the Director of Community 
Development. 
f. ?When none of the foregoing is possible, then the waiver of this requirement may be sought 
from the Plan Commission as part of the site plan review. 
(Zon. Ord., § 8.4; Ord. No. 00-6-Z-2897, § 4, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 00-7-Z-2908, § 3, 7-17-2000; 
Ord. No. 00-12-Z-2954, § 5, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 01-6-Z-2993, § 5, 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-
Z-3021, § 3, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-6-Z-3095, § 1, 6-3-
2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 5, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 
03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3600, § 1, 
2-19-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. 
No. 13-10-C-4010, § 3, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-128. - R5 Elderly and Disabled Housing district. 
    The R5 Elderly and Disabled Housing district is established to encourage and accommodate both 
subsidized and nonsubsidized housing facilities for elderly and physically handicapped persons currently 
residing or expected to reside in the Village. Height, bulk, yard setback and off-street parking 
requirements are established to accommodate the unique characteristics of the housing facility. Under the 
special use provisions, the Mayor and Board of Trustees has the authority to modify the bulk standards 
and regulations of an R5 Elderly and Disabled Housing district. 
(1) ?Building height. The height of any structure shall not exceed 125 feet or 10 stories. 
(2) ?Additional standards. 
a. ?Subsidized developments should be located within reasonable walking distance to 
essential community facilities and services, including but not limited to at least 1 
established public transportation route and 1 supermarket or general food store. 
b. ?Subsidized developments may include the provision of social services, such as but not 
limited to counseling and health care, and those other services which a developer may 
wish to include. 
c. ?Market-rate developments may include such activities and services as are appropriate. It 
shall be the operator's responsibility to justify to the Village's satisfaction that the inclusion 
of such activities and services will serve the best interests of the intended residents of the 
proposed development, and will be clearly ancillary to the primary purpose of the proposed 
development. 
d. ?A covenant shall be placed on the land that guarantees future owners and operators 
comply with the special use provisions. 
(3) ?Yards. Yards shall conform with the applicable health, safety, and fire codes and compatible 
with the adjacent land uses and zoning districts. 
(4) ?Covenant regarding occupancy restrictions. The owner shall execute a covenant running with 
the land ensuring continuous occupancy by the persons eligible for the housing. The Village 
shall be a party to such covenant and such covenant shall not be released without the consent 
of the Village. 
(5) ?Annual certification. Annual certification shall be submitted to the Department of Community 
Development to verify: 
a. ?The age of all occupants and the nature of any disabled occupants. 
b. ?That all required equipment and facilities provided for convenience and/or safety of the 
occupants are maintained in place and in good working order. 
(Zon. Ord., § 8.5; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-
2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Secs. 118-129—118-140. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VII. - BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. III, Div. 3, as Art. 
VII. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 


Sec. 118-141. - Generally. 
(a) ?Purpose. Business district regulations govern the development and use of the full range of business 
and commercial establishments needed to provide services to Village residents and its trading area. 
The various business district regulations provide for the grouping of compatible business and 
commercial establishments in accordance with their functions and extent of services. 
(b) ?General requirements. General requirements are as follows: 
(1) ?Permitted goods and services. Goods and services shall be provided on the premises at retail. 
(2) ?Outside uses. All business, servicing, storing, or processing shall be conducted within 
completely enclosed principal buildings, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, other 
applicable Village codes, or as follows: 
a. ?Activities needing a special use permit, if the activity is conducted with a principal use in 
the district: 
1. ?Outside vending machines and propane sales. 
2. ?Garden and plant material sales. 
3. ?Outside storage, display, sales, or rental of motor vehicles or boats. 
4. ?Shopping carts storage. Use of shopping cart collection corrals within parking lots 
during a business's hours is permissible without a special use permit. 
5. ?Seasonal display of whole, uncut fruits and vegetables that do not need to be 
refrigerated, are stored at least 6" off the ground, and are displayed only during store 
business hours. 
b. ?Activities requiring an administrative permit from the Village Manager or designee: Tent 
sales and events in the B4 Regional Shopping district. One permit per use may be issued 
for a maximum of 10 consecutive calendar days per year. Only 1 tent permit shall be 
issued at a shopping center during any 10-day period. 
c. ?Activities requiring site plan approval, which may be approved through the modified review 
procedure, subject to Health Department approval of food products: Retail merchandising 
units (RMUs) in the B4 Regional Shopping district operated and maintained pursuant to the 
shopping center owner's or manager's design guidelines and rules and regulations and 
located within an interior courtyard of the shopping center, subject to Health Department 
approval of food products. 
d. ?Outdoor dining on private property or in a public way, subject to Section 118-93. 
e. ?Certain parking and loading spaces for commercial vehicles, subject to Section 118-217. 
(3) ?Performance standards. The performance standards established in the general industrial 
regulations shall apply to all activities conducted in the business districts. 
(4) ?Reserved. 
(5) ?Visual screening. 
a. ?Visual screening requirements for B1, B2, and B3 districts are as follows: 
1. ?When any lot in a business district is across an alley from or abutting a residentially 
zoned property, adequate visual screening shall be provided along the side and rear 
lot lines. When a structure is located not more than 5 feet from a public alley, no 
screening shall be required along the alley for the length of the building. Only the 
following types of visual screening shall be permitted for the purpose of this chapter: 
i. ?Face brick wall. 
ii. ?Reinforced concrete wall with decorative finish. 
iii. ?Solid wooden fence. 
iv. ?Dense evergreen living shrubs. 
v. ?A combination of the types of screening listed in this subsection. 
2. ?The height of the screening shall be 6', except as noted in this section and elsewhere 
in this chapter. 
3. ?Where property is abutting residentially zoned property as noted in subsection a.1 of 
this subsection, the height of the screening that is parallel to the required front yard of 
the residential lot shall be no more than 30 inches in height. The height of the 
remainder of the fence shall be no lower than 6 feet and no higher than 8 feet. 
4. ?Screening shall be erected 1 foot within the lot line of the commercial property where it 
abuts the alley. 
5. ?All screening shall be adequately protected from vehicular maneuvers, including 
parking and continual traffic flow. Such protection shall be subject to the approval of 
the Director of Engineering and may include wheel stops, curbing, guard rails and/or 
earth berming. The 1-foot area between the property line and the required screening 
shall be covered with a hard surface, subject to the approval of the Director of 
Engineering. 
6. ?The Director of Engineering shall determine when the required screening on a lot 
would interfere with the utility companies' use of the easement and shall determine a 
suitable location for such screening. If required screening cannot be so placed to 
avoid interference with the utilities, alternate screening and location shall be 
determined by the Director of Engineering and the Director of Community 
Development. 
b. ?Visual screening requirements in the B4 Regional Shopping district and H1 Hospital district 
shall be determined through the site plan approval process. 
(6) ?Reserved. 
(7) ?Sight distance triangle. All objects within a 15-foot sight distance triangle shall not exceed 30 
inches in height. Traffic control devices listed in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
shall be exempt from this provision. 
(8) ?Public sidewalks and parkways. To promote a pedestrian scale environment, the following 
design standards shall apply: 
a. ?Sidewalks must have a minimum paved width of 5 feet and have a common alignment 
within a block. 
b. ?The effective walkway width of a sidewalk shall at all times be at least 5 feet wide. The 
effective walkway width is the shortest hard-surfaced distance between obstructions, 
hazards, or buildings along a walkway. 
c. ?All efforts shall be made to promote and preserve street trees and pedestrian scale 
landscaping and streetscaping. 
d. ?There shall be a 5-foot setback for the purpose of landscaping along an arterial street, 
Main Street, or Howard Street for a distance of 100 feet from the intersection of a public 
right-of-way containing any of these streets. 
e. ?All walls facing a street and all portions of walls facing the required front yard of an 
adjacent residential district must contain at least 1 of the following pedestrian scale 
features: architectural variation in depth, windows, spandrels, landscaping, flower planters, 
or other architectural features required by the Appearance Commission. The quantity and 
extent of these features must be reviewed by the Community Development Department 
and approved by the Appearance Commission. 
(c) ?Restricted Uses. Uses listed as restricted in Appendix A shall be permitted only under the 
circumstances listed in this section. 
(1) ?In addition to the restrictions listed below, uses may be further restricted by sections of this 
chapter specifically referenced in Appendix A and by Subsection 118-147(5). 
(2) ?Textiles, jewelry or silverware manufacturing. The making of textiles, jewelry or silverware shall 
be limited to items for retail sale, primarily from the subject premises, to individual customers. 
(Zon. Ord., § 9.1; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-3074, § 1, 3-4-2002; 
Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3082, § 4, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-
3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-9-Z-3201, § 1, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-
2005; Ord. No. 06-4-C-3429, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 07-1-C-3483, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 
08-1-C-3577, § 2, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-6-C-3621, § 1, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 
11-3-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3691, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. 
No. 10-2-C-3734, § 1, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 
1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 12-4-C-3895, § 1, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015; Ord. 
No. 16-2-C-4201, § 1, 2-1-2016; Ord. No. 16-8-C-4241, § 1, 8-1-2016; Ord. No. 17-2-C-4272, § 
1, 2-6-2017) 


Sec. 118-142. - B1 Service Commercial district. 
    The B1 Service Commercial district is established primarily to provide day-to-day shopping 
convenience for persons residing in the Village's residential areas. It is intended to provide space for 
those establishments offering basic consumer goods, personal services and professional services. It may 
also accommodate other light commercial uses whose general character is such that the use would be 
compatible with adjacent residential districts. The following requirements apply to the B1 district: 
(1) ?Building height. The maximum building height shall be 25 feet. 
(2) ?Side yards. 
a. ?No side yard is required between 2 abutting business properties. However, if one is 
provided, it shall be 6 feet. 
b. ?A side yard of 6 feet is required when abutting a residential district. 
(3) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?A rear yard of 5 feet is required when abutting an alley. 
b. ?A rear yard of 16 feet is required when not abutting an alley and when abutting an R1, R2 
or R3 district. 
(Zon. Ord., § 9.2; Ord. No. 00-6-Z-2897, § 6, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 2, 3-19-2001; 
Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 4, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-6-Z-
3094, § 2, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 6, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-
2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 19-
4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-143. - B2 Commercial district. 
    The B2 Commercial district is established to accommodate the needs of a larger consumer 
population than that serviced by the B1 Service Commercial district. It provides for those establishments 
whose general characteristics are compatible with adjacent residential districts, but whose service area 
may extend outside the immediate neighborhood of the facility. The following requirements apply to the 
B2 district: 
(1) ?Building height. The maximum building height shall be 30 feet except, by special use: 
a. ?Thirty-five feet where the property abuts an R1, R2 or R3 district. 
b. ?Forty feet where the property abuts an R4 district. 
(2) ?Side yards. 
a. ?No side yard is required between 2 abutting business properties. However, if one is 
provided, it shall be 6 feet. 
b. ?A side yard of 6 feet is required when abutting a residential district. 
(3) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?A rear yard of 5 feet is required when abutting an alley. 
b. ?A rear yard of 16 feet is required when not abutting an alley and when abutting an R1, R2 
or R3 district. 
(Zon. Ord., § 9.3; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 2, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 3, 3-19-
2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 4, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-9-Z-3024, § 1, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 01-
10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-6-Z-3094, § 3, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 7, 
10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 
03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-144. - B3 Business district. 
    The B3 Business district is designed to accommodate a larger consumer population than that 
provided for in the B1 Service Commercial and B2 Commercial districts. It provides an appropriate 
category for establishments that are primarily but not entirely retail in nature and is intended for areas that 
do not directly abut properties in the R1, R2, and R3 districts. The following requirements apply to the B3 
district: 
(1) ?Bulk requirements and FAR bonuses. Bulk and floor area ratio requirements shall be 
determined in accordance with the following schedule of bulk requirements and FAR bonuses: 
SCHEDULE OF BULK REQUIREMENTS AND FAR BONUSES 

Zone 

B3 a 
B3 b 
B3 c 
Base height (feet) 
35 
40 
40 
Maximum height with site plan approval south of Church Street (feet) 
39 
51 
75 
Maximum height with site plan approval north of Church Street (feet) 
60 
60 

Yard abutting a street below 51 feet in building height d (feet) 
0 
0 
0 
Yard abutting a street above 51 feet in building height e 

10% 
10% 
Minimum side yard not abutting a residential district d (feet) 
0/6 
0/6 
0/6 
Minimum side yard abutting a residential district d (feet) 
6 
6 
6 
Rear yard abutting an alley (feet) 
5 
5 
5 
Rear yard not abutting an alley (feet) 
16 
0 
0 
Base floor area ratio (FAR) 
2.00 
2.50 
3.00 
Maximum FAR under site plan approval 
3.00 
4.00 
5.00 
FAR adjustments: 



?First-floor commercial use, 0—24.9% of floor area 
-0.60 
-0.80 
-1.00 
?First-floor commercial use, 25—29.9% of floor area 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
?First-floor commercial use, 30—34.9% of floor area 
0.30 
0.40 
0.50 
?First-floor commercial use, 35—39.9% of floor area 
0.45 
0.60 
0.75 
?First-floor commercial use, 40—44.9% of floor area 
0.50 
0.67 
0.84 
?First-floor commercial use, 45—49.9% of floor area 
0.55 
0.73 
0.92 
?First-floor commercial use, 50—59.9% of floor area 
0.65 
0.86 
1.09 
?First-floor commercial use, 60—74.9% of floor area 
0.75 
1.00 
1.25 
?First-floor commercial use, 75—100% of floor area 
0.90 
1.20 
1.50 
?Public art 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 
?Lot facing 2 or more streets 
0.62 
0.62 
0.62 
?Plaza or outdoor amenity for public use, 300—1,000 square feet in area 
0.30 
0.40 
0.50 
?Plaza or outdoor amenity for public use, over 1,000 square feet in area 
0.45 
0.60 
0.75 
 
a Abutting an R1, R2, or R3 district, except transit oriented development. 
b Not abutting an R1, R2, or R3 district, except transit oriented development. 
c Transit oriented development. 
d Except as otherwise provided in this division. 
e Of perpendicular lot depth from any property line fronting a street. 
f No requirement, but if provided, then 6-foot minimum. 
a. ?Height above 40 feet and floor area ratio bonuses shall be cumulative and provided as a 
matter of right if the conditions for the bonuses are met. Height and floor area ratio in 
excess of the base levels, less any penalties in the form of negative bonuses, or any 
development with less than 25 percent of the first-floor area devoted to commercial and 
office uses open to the public or public uses shall be subject to site plan approval in 
accordance with Article II of this chapter. No building that is across an alley from or abuts 
property zoned R1, R2, or R3, except transit oriented developments or planned 
developments north of Church Street as allowed by subsection (3)a. of this section, shall 
exceed 39 feet. 
b. ?The bonus for first-floor commercial use shall be positive or negative and be awarded 
based on the percentage of the first-floor area of the building devoted to uses open to the 
public. Covered or enclosed parking areas shall be included when calculating the first-floor 
area of the building. Commercial uses do not include covered or enclosed parking areas or 
common areas for residences, assisted-living facilities, or skilled nursing facilities. 
c. ?The bonus for public art shall be awarded if space and a piece of art is provided adjacent to 
a public street or a contribution is made to a Village art fund of at least 1 percent of the 
development's construction permit value. 
d. ?The bonus for a lot facing 2 or more streets shall be awarded when at least 2 rights-of-way 
containing different streets abut a lot. 
e. ?The bonus for a plaza or an outdoor amenity for public use shall be awarded for a spaces 
that is open to the public and directly accessible from public sidewalks. A plaza must have 
seating and may include spaces that display public art, fountains, landscaping, or outdoor 
dining areas. The calculation of the plaza shall not include required yards or setbacks. 
f. ?The area of land dedicated as right-of-way as a condition of the development shall be 
included in the area of the lot for the purposes of calculating the floor area ratio. 
(2) ?Additional design requirements for lots north of Jarvis Avenue and south of Church Street. 
a. ?Residences shall not be located on the first floor of any building fronting streets listed in 
subsection b of this subsection. 
b. ?At least 25 percent of the first-floor area of a building fronting Dempster Street, Main Street, 
Oakton Street, Lincoln Avenue, Skokie Boulevard, Niles Center Road, or Gross Point Road 
shall be devoted to commercial and office uses open to the public or public uses. The 
ground floor commercial component of uses on corner lots facing 1 or more of these 
streets shall be designed such that at least 1 commercial use is located at the corner of the 
building that fronts both streets. 
c. ?At least 50 percent of each first-floor facade of a building that faces a public street shall 
abut the public sidewalk or required landscaping yard. 
d. ?At least 60% of those portions of the first-floor building frontage along the public sidewalk 
or required landscaping yard shall be occupied by windows and/or entry doors. These 
windows and doors shall meet the following requirements: 
1. ?Utilize clear transparent glass in order to provide clear views of building interiors from 
the street and to allow natural surveillance of the street and adjacent outdoor spaces. 
2. ?Tint, internal screening, patterns or mirrored coatings are prohibited. 
3. ?Coatings shall be limited to those necessary to meet the minimum U-factor 
requirement in the latest addition of the International Energy Conservation Code 
adopted by the State of Illinois. 
4. ?Be of commercial grade and design. 
5. ?The surface shall not be covered or obstructed by products, signs in excess of the 
requirements in the Signs chapter, or other opaque materials place behind the 
window. 
e. ?The bonus for a plaza or an outdoor amenity for public use shall be awarded for a space 
that is open to the public and directly accessible from public sidewalks. A plaza must have 
seating and may include spaces that display public art, fountains, landscaping, or outdoor 
dining areas. The calculation of the plaza shall not include required yards or setbacks. 
f. ?At least 60 percent of the linear lot frontage of those streets listed in subsection (2)b of this 
section shall be used for commercial and office uses open to the public or public uses of 
the ground floor fronting such streets. Each 2 whole linear feet of the lot frontage along the 
public sidewalk or required landscaping yard used for public art, plaza, or outdoor 
amenities for public use shall be deemed 1 whole linear foot of public use for the purposes 
of this requirement. 
g. ?Streetscape improvements shall be required in accordance with the Village's approved 
streetscaping plan and completed at the developer's expense for all portions of the lot 
abutting a public right-of-way. Streetscape sections shall be developed 1 full block face at 
a time. If the lot does not include a full block face, then cash in lieu of the improvements 
may be provided to the Village at the discretion of the Director of Community Development. 
(3) ?Additional design requirements for lots north of Church Street. 
a. ?Residences shall not be located on the first floor of any building within 300 feet of Church 
Street, Golf Road, Skokie Boulevard, or Gross Point Road. Solely residential buildings 
shall not be located closer than 300 feet to streets listed in this subsection and shall be 
developed only as part of a planned development in conjunction with other permitted and 
special uses in the district, subject to the other regulations of this section. 
b. ?At least 25 percent of the first floor area of a building within 300 feet of Church Street, Golf 
Road, Skokie Boulevard, or Gross Point Road shall be devoted to commercial and office 
uses open to the public or public uses. The ground floor commercial component of uses on 
corner lots facing one or more of these streets shall be designed such that at least one 
commercial use is located at the corner of the building that fronts both streets. 
c. ?The total square footage of buildings used for commercial and office uses open to the 
public or public uses shall be determined by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. 
(Zon. Ord., § 9.4; Ord. No. 00-8-Z-2912, § 2, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 2, 11-20-
2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 4, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 4, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-
9-Z-3024, § 1, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-3073, § 2, 3-
4-2002; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-3074, § 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3082, § 5, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 
02-6-Z-3094, § 4, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 8, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 02-12-Z-3138, §§ 
1—3, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; 
Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3158, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-10-Z-
3212, § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-
2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-
3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 16-12-C-4262, § 1, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 
4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-145. - B4 Regional Shopping district. 
    The Regional Shopping district is established to accommodate business establishments of a wide 
range of retail business and complementary uses to serve a trade area reaching out for several miles or 
more and embracing a large segment of an urban region. All properties within this district shall be 
considered planned developments requiring site plan approval in accordance with Article II of this 
chapter. The following requirements shall apply to the B4 district: 
(1) ?Building height. The maximum building height shall be: 
a. ?Three stories, not to exceed a maximum height of 65 feet. 
b. ?Twelve stories, not to exceed a maximum height of 175 feet, provided that the following 
criteria are met: 
1. ?The third level of such structure shall not be located closer than 250 feet to each 
boundary of the district; and 
2. ?The maximum floor area shall not exceed 12,000 square feet per floor above the third level. 
(2) ?Yards. No building, structure or accessory building shall be erected or maintained within 150 
feet of any boundary of a B4 district. 
(Zon. Ord., § 9.5; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 2, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 5, 3-19-
2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3020, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 4, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 02-
5-Z-3082, § 6, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 02-6-Z-3094, § 5, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 9, 10-
7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 
03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-146. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 2009, repealed § 118-146, which 
pertained to B5 Downtown district and derived from Zon. Ord., § 9.6; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 
2, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 6, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 4, 8-6-2001; 
Ord. No. 01-9-Z-3024, § 1, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-
3074, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-6-Z-3094, § 6, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 10, 10-7-
2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-
4-Z-3158, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-
2005; Ord. No. 08-9-C-3641, § 1, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-2008. 


Sec. 118-147. - B6 Downtown Science and Technology district. 
    The B6 Downtown Science and Technology district is intended to encourage the development of 
science and technology employment opportunities in a transit oriented environment. The design of the 
district will balance taller buildings with ample open spaces and pedestrian ways. Building design and 
placement shall facilitate movement of pedestrians and vehicles within the district, between the district 
and neighboring districts, and to and from public transportation facilities. Some limited retail uses may be 
allowed in the district. However, they are to be kept to a minimum as not to compete with neighboring 
districts. The following requirements shall apply to the B6 district: 
(1) ?Site plan approval required. Development of any lot within this district requires site plan 
approval in accordance with Article II of this chapter. 
(2) ?Design guidelines. Development of any lot within the district shall be in conformance with a set 
of design guidelines that are approved by the Appearance Commission. These guidelines shall 
assure that buildings, circulation, and open spaces conform to the intent of the district. 
Individual buildings are still subject to the review and approval by the Appearance Commission 
to assure that each conforms to the approved design guidelines. The design guidelines shall 
have at minimum the following elements: 
a. ?Building and land use types. 
b. ?Parks and open spaces. 
c. ?Vehicular circulation. 
d. ?Pedestrian circulation. 
e. ?Streetscape elements and design. 
f. ?Loading and service areas. 
g. ?Location of building entries. 
h. ?Building footprints. 
i. ?Building facades and building wall elements and materials. 
j. ?Building envelopes, including heights and setbacks. 
k. ?Vehicle storage. 
l. ?Building and directional signage. 
m. ?Landscaping that both enhances the pedestrian environment and integrates the uses into 
the surrounding neighborhoods. 
(3) ?Bulk requirements. All bulk requirements shall be determined by the Plan Commission subject 
to the following conditions: 
a. ?Buildings shall be a minimum height of 40 feet but shall not exceed 180 feet in height. 
b. ?Yards abutting streets shall promote: 
1. ?A pedestrian environment. 
2. ?Minimal vehicular crossing of sidewalks. 
3. ?Framing by buildings of designated open spaces. 
c. ?Yards abutting residential districts shall be 15% of the building structure height at the yard 
line, but no less than 10 feet. 
d. ?Building envelopes in which each building shall be contained shall be established by the 
Plan Commission. Buildings developed within these envelopes shall not need additional 
approval by the Plan Commission as long as they conform with the design guidelines for 
the development and have received final approval by the Appearance Commission. 
(4) ?Other requirements. 
a. ?Residences are prohibited. 
b. ?In each building, the aggregate square footage of uses that sell goods or services subject 
to sales taxes imposed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes shall not exceed 20% of the total 
ground floor area nor shall any single use exceed 10% of the ground floor area. All such 
uses shall be open to the general public during normal operating hours. 
c. ?At least 25% of the land in each development receiving site plan approval shall be 
designated in the approved site plan as public space and open to use by the general 
public. These spaces shall not be in required yards, have a minimum width of 20 feet, have 
a minimum area of 500 feet 2 , not include roadways, and may be any combination of 
landscaped and hardscaped areas. 
(5) ?Restricted uses. Office uses listed as restricted in Appendix A shall be permitted only if they 
are related to science and technology as determined by the Village Manager or his designee. 
Food service uses listed as restricted in Appendix A with a seating area less than 500 feet 2 
shall be permitted uses and with a seating area of 500 feet 2 or greater shall be special uses. 
(Ord. No. 07-1-C-3483, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-148. - H1 Hospital district. 
    The H1 Hospital district is established for the purpose of enhancing community services and 
promoting development of medical and related facilities in areas surrounding hospitals. All properties 
within this district shall be considered planned developments requiring site plan approval in accordance 
with Article II of this chapter. The following requirements shall apply to the H1 district: 
(1) ?Building height. The maximum building height shall be 7 stories, not to exceed 91 feet. 
(2) ?Front yard. 
a. ?The front yard shall be a minimum of 50 feet for parcels less than 10 acres. 
b. ?The front yard shall be a minimum of 160 feet for parcels 10 acres or greater. 
(3) ?Side yards. Each side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
(4) ?Rear yard. 
a. ?A rear yard of 10 feet is required when abutting an alley. 
b. ?A rear yard of 20 feet is required when no alley is present. 
(5) ?Maximum land coverage by buildings. Land coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 50 
percent of the lot area. 
(Zon. Ord., § 9.7; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 4, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; 
Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 11, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-
Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 07-1-C-3483, § 1, 1-16-
2007; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Secs. 118-148—118-170. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VIII. - INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. III, Div. 4, as Art. 
VIII. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 


Sec. 118-171. - General requirements. 
    General requirements for industrial districts are as follows: 
(1) ?Restrictions as to use. 
a. ?Prohibited uses. No lot, parcel or tract of land shall be used, and no building or structure 
shall be erected, altered or remodeled, for any of the following uses: abattoirs; arsenals; 
creosote treatment of manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or 
explosive manufacture or storage; dumping, reduction or other processing of garbage, 
dead animals, offal or refuse, except as customarily incidental to a permitted principal use; 
ore reduction; petroleum processing or refining; pyroxylin manufacture; natural or synthetic 
rubber, caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment; salt works; sauerkraut 
manufacture; soap manufacture; smelters; stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowls; 
tallow, grease or lard manufacture or treatment; tanning, curing or storage of rawhides or 
skins; tar distillation or manufacture; or cement concrete or asphaltic concrete mixing 
plants. 
b. ?Explosives. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or 
products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except such as are 
specifically licensed by the Village or are used as customarily incidental to the operation of 
a principal use in such quantities and in a manner conforming with applicable performance 
standards set forth in this section. Such materials shall include but shall not be confined to 
all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all 
high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PET and picric acid; propellants and 
components thereof such as cellulose nitrate of a nitrogen content of 12.5 percent or 
greater, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and 
fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting 
explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as 
acetylides, tetrazoles, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in 
concentrations greater than 35 percent; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and 
products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239. 
c. ?Outdoor activities. All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, 
disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of materials, products and 
goods shall be within completely enclosed principal buildings; except outside storage shall 
be permitted in accordance with this division. 
d. ?Residence uses. Residence uses are permitted only in the OR Office Research District, 
except that this provision shall not apply to residences with animal hospitals and 
emergency/critical care animal clinics, mortuaries, self-service storage facilities, or other 
business necessary for the maintenance of public health as special uses for a childless 
couple or a single individual, or for hotels, in accordance with Article II of this chapter, prior 
to their establishment. 
e. ?Limited retail uses. Except for specifically listed retail uses, retail sales of goods that are 
manufactured, processed, or wholesaled on the premises may be allowed with a special 
use permit. The retail use cannot exceed the lesser of 5,000 square feet or 10% of the total gross 
floor area. Parking requirements must be met for the retail portion of the operation. 
f. ?Retail planned developments. As an alternative to uses allowed in the M1 Office Assembly, 
M2 Light Industry, and M3 Industry districts, retail planned developments are allowed with 
a special use permit, subject to the following requirements: 
1. ?Development size. The development site shall either have a minimum area of 5 acres, 
abut a business zoning district, or abut another retail planned development. 
2. ?Location. The development site shall abut a major arterial street as defined in the 
Comprehensive Plan. 
3. ?Uses. Uses in the development shall be restricted only to those in the either the 
General Sales and Service or Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation categories in 
Appendix A for B2 Commercial districts. Uses listed as special uses must obtain a 
special use permit. 
4. ?Other requirements. The site shall be developed as if the site was zoned B2 subject to 
subsection 118-141(b) and section 118-143 except that the maximum building height 
shall be 40 feet. 
g. ?Miscellaneous manufacturing that is not otherwise listed, primary metal manufacturing, and 
transportation equipment, automobiles, etc. Manufacturing uses listed as restricted uses in 
Appendix A shall be a permitted use or a special use, consistent with the intent of the 
district, as determined by the Village Manager or his designee. 
(2) ?Performance standards. Any new use established in an industrial district after the effective date 
of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or any existing use altered or modified, shall 
comply with the performance standards as set forth in this subsection. Prior to the issuance of a 
building permit or occupancy permit, the Village Manager or designee may require the petitioner 
to submit certification from a Village-approved testing laboratory, indicating compliance with the 
applicable performance standards. The Village may contract with any agency or an independent 
expert to perform testing. If a violation is found, the cost for the testing shall be borne by the 
violator. 
a. ?Noise. 
1. ?Maximum sound pressure level. The sound pressure level of continuous sounds, to be 
measured as described in this subsection, shall not exceed the following decibel 
levels in the designated octave bands when adjacent to the designated types of use 
districts: 
Octave Band 
Frequency  
(cycles per second) 
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels  
(decibels) 

Along Residential District 
Boundaries 
Along Mixed-Use and Business District 
Boundaries 
0—75 
58 
73 
75—150 
54 
69 
150—300 
50 
65 
300—600 
46 
61 
600—1,200 
40 
55 
1,200—2,400 
33 
48 
2,400—4,800 
26 
41 
Over 4,800 
20 
35 
 
2. ?Intermittent sounds. Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not 
easily measured shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
3. ?Method of measurement. Measurement is to be made to the nearest boundary of the 
nearest residential district or business district, or at any other point along the 
boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be measured with a sound 
level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the American 
Standards Association. 
b. ?Vibration. No uses shall be located and no equipment shall be installed in such a way as to 
produce vibrations which are noticeable at the property lines of the subject premises. 
c. ?Smoke and particulate matter. 
1. ?The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to 
endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby 
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be unlawful. 
2. ?The emission of smoke and particulate matter shall not exceed the standards 
established in the most current federal and State laws and regulations. 
3. ?For the purposes of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, published 
and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be employed. The emission of 
smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann chart is 
prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided in this subsection. 
4. ?The emission from all sources within any lot area of particulate matter containing more 
than 10 percent by weight of particles having a particle diameter larger than 44 
microns is prohibited. 
5. ?Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources as storage 
areas, yards, roads and the like, within lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by 
landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing or other means. Emission of particulate matter 
from such sources in excess of the weight limitation specified in this subsection is 
prohibited. The emission of more than 8 smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, 
including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 2. However, during 1 1-
hour period in each 24-hour day, each stack may emit up to 16 smoke units when 
blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire-cleaning periods, however, shall smoke 
of Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than 3 minutes. 
d. ?Toxic or noxious matter. No use shall for any period of time discharge across the 
boundaries of the lot wherein it is located toxic or noxious matter in such concentration as 
to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause 
injury or damage to property or business. No discharge of toxic or noxious matter shall be 
permitted into the sanitary or storm sewer system, unless permitted by the Metropolitan 
Water Reclamation District. 
e. ?Odors. The emission of odorous matter from any property which is detectable at any point 
along the property boundaries in such concentrations as to create a public nuisance or 
hazard is prohibited. The emission of odorous matter shall not exceed the standards 
established in the most current federal and State laws and regulations. 
f. ?Storage of materials. 
1. ?All business, servicing, or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed 
buildings except as otherwise provided in accordance with this chapter or other 
applicable Village codes. 
2. ?Outside storage, display, sales, or rental of any product, equipment, motor vehicle, or 
boat shall be allowed by special use permit only, provided that the activity is 
conducted with a principal use allowed in the district. 
3. ?Outdoor storage shall be located behind one of the following types of screening and 
be a minimum of 8 feet in height: 
i. ?A fence screened by dense plantings of trees and shrubs. 
ii. ?Solid fencing. 
iii. ?A wall. 
g. ?Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a 
completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or 
hazard along lot lines. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a 
nuisance across lot lines. 
h. ?Radiation hazards. The use and storage of radioactive materials shall be performed in 
compliance with applicable federal and State regulations. 
i. ?Electromagnetic radiation. There shall be no electromagnetic interference that adversely 
affects the operation of any equipment other than that belonging to the creator of such 
interference, or that does not conform to the regulations of the Federal Communications 
Commission. 
(Zon. Ord., § 10.1; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 3, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-9-Z-3028, § 1, 9-20-
2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3082, § 7, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 
03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 08-6-C-3621, § 1, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-
5-2009; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3659, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3687, § 1, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 
10-2-C-3734, § 1, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 10-2-C-3736, § 2, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 
5-4-2015) 


Sec. 118-172. - Bulk requirements for M1 Office Assembly Industry, M2 Light Industry, and M3 Industry 
zoning districts. 
ZONE 
M1 
M2 
M3 
Maximum building height without site plan approval (feet) 
45 
45 
45 
Maximum building height with site plan approval (feet) 
120 
120 
120 
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 
50 
25 
25 
Minimum side yard when not abutting a street (feet) 
20 


Minimum side yard when abutting a street (feet) 
25 


Minimum side yard not abutting a residential district (feet) 

0 
0 
Minimum side yard abutting a residential district (feet) 

30 
20 
Minimum rear yard abutting an alley (feet) 
0 


Minimum rear yard not abutting an alley (feet) 
20 


Minimum rear yard not abutting a residential district (feet) 

0 
0 
Minimum rear yard abutting a residential district (feet) 

30 
30 
Maximum land coverage by buildings 
50% 
60% 
60% 
 
(Zon. Ord., § 10.2; Ord. No. 00-7-Z-2902, § 2, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 3, 11-20-
2000; Ord. No. 01-3-Z-2977, § 7, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 5, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-
12-Z-3052, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3082, § 8, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 12, 
10-7-2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 
03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 
3-7-2011; Ord. No. 17-3-C-4275, § 1, 3-6-2017) 


Sec. 118-173. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-3-C-4275, § 1, adopted March 6, 2017, repealed § 118-173, which 
pertained to M2 Light Industry district and derived from Zon. Ord., § 10.3, as amended. See the 
Zoning Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. The user's attention is directed to § 
118-172. 


Sec. 118-174. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-3-C-4275, § 1, adopted March 6, 2017, repealed § 118-174, which 
pertained to M3 Industry district and derived from Zon. Ord., § 10.4, as amended. See the 
Zoning Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. The user's attention is directed to § 
118-172. 


Sec. 118-175. - OR Office Research district. 
    The OR Office Research district is established to allow the development of business and 
professional offices, uses with "higher intensity" multifamily residences, and other compatible uses in a 
planned park-like setting. The district is intended to serve the Village and the surrounding urban region. 
Because of the unique character of properties located within this district and its proximity to the Edens 
Expressway, the Old Orchard Interchange, Cook County Forest Preserve and adjacent residential 
properties in other municipalities, all properties within this district require site plan approval in accordance 
with Article II of this chapter. Relief from any of the requirements of this district shall only be granted by 
the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The petitioner shall have the burden of providing evidence and 
persuasion that any such relief is necessary and desirable. Similarly granted relief to existing 
developments in the district shall not be sufficient to base justification for approval upon an already 
existing development. Each development shall be presented and judged on its own merits. The following 
requirements shall apply to the OR district: 
(1) ?Building height. The maximum building height shall be: 
a. ?North of Old Orchard Road: 105 feet. Buildings that exceed a height of 60 feet are required 
to have a yard to building height ratio of 2.5 to 1, from residentially zoned property. 
b. ?South of Old Orchard Road: 180 feet. Buildings that include residences shall have a 
minimum height of 80 feet. 
(2) ?Front yard. A front yard of 50 feet is required. 
(3) ?Side yards. Side yards of 50 feet are required. 
(4) ?Rear yard. A rear yard of 50 feet is required. 
(5) ?Yards abutting residential districts. 
a. ?All yards abutting residentially used property, whether or not such a residential district is 
located within the Village or is separated by a street or other public right-of-way, shall be 
not less than 150 feet in depth, from the nearest lot line of the residentially used property 
outside the OR district. 
b. ?Within the yards abutting residentially used property, no building or structure of any kind is 
permitted. 
c. ?On-grade off-street parking is permitted as close as 50 feet away from a lot line that abuts 
residentially used property, provided it is landscaped or screened as provided in this 
chapter. 
(6) ?Maximum land coverage by buildings. Land coverage of all buildings shall not exceed 30 
percent of the lot area. 
(7) ?Landscaping and site development. Berms, trees, walls and/or other forms of landscaping and 
site development are to be used to screen receiving and service areas as well as off-street 
parking which are visible from side and rear boundaries. This landscape screening may be 
located within the required yards. Earth berms banked on both sides, or with 1 side banked 
toward the yard boundary line and a retaining wall, shall have a side slope ratio of 3 to 1 for 
ease of maintenance. Planting used for screening shall be a mixture of low wide-spreading 
evergreens, with taller deciduous trees. 
(8) ?Landscaping and site development plan. A plan showing the proposed landscaping and site 
development must be prepared. It must be submitted as a part of or in addition to the site plan. 
Such items as embankment ratios, types of planting, materials and their quantities are to be 
spelled out. 
(9) ?Materials testing. All testing activities shall be conducted within a building or enclosed 
structure. Outdoor testing of materials and products, such as done by the Portland Cement 
Association, shall be limited to natural weathering only, and is to be located in either side or rear 
yard areas. The materials and products themselves may not exceed 2 stories or 26 feet in 
height. 
(10) ?[Reserved.] 
(11) ?Restricted uses. Uses listed as restricted uses in the district shall be permitted uses and be 
located within buildings containing other unrestricted uses or residences. Residences shall only 
be located south of Old Orchard Road. 
(Zon. Ord., § 10.5; Ord. No. 00-9-Z-2928, § 1, 9-18-2000; Ord. No. 00-9-Z-2931, § 1, 9-18-
2000; Ord. No. 01-12-Z-3052, § 4, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 15, 10-7-2002; Ord. 
No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-4-Z-3157, § 1, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3182, § 
2, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3183, § 1, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, § 1, 6-16-2003; 
Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-
3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; 
Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 3, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Secs. 118-176—118-180. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IX. - MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. III, Div. 5, as Art. IX. 


Sec. 118-181. - Purpose. 
(a) ?Mixed-use districts are intended to provide for, but not mandate, a vertical mix of commercial, 
institutional, recreational, and residential uses within the same building; a physical pattern of 
development that promotes building designs incorporating environmental sustainability, pedestrian 
orientation, and storefront-style shopping streets consistent with the 2020 Plan for Downtown Skokie: 
Sector A and other updates to the Comprehensive Plan. These districts promote retail sales and the 
health and well being of residents, employees, and consumers by encouraging physical activity, 
alternative transportation, and greater social interaction. 
(b) ?The NX Neighborhood Mixed-Use district is intended for commercial areas adjacent to single-family 
districts that are not adjacent to CX Core Mixed-Use districts. Buildings shall be designed to promote 
walking and pedestrian orientation. Ground floor uses must be commercially used but not 
necessarily reserved for retail and other service uses open to customers. Upper story uses can be 
other commercial uses or residences. Buildings can be up to 39 feet in height, compatible to uses in 
the R1 and R2 Single-Family residential districts. 
(c) ?The TX Transit Mixed-Use district is intended for areas within 2,000 feet of rapid transit or adjacent 
to CX Core Mixed-Use districts. Buildings shall be designed to promote walking and pedestrian 
orientation, with curb cuts discouraged on retail streets. Ground floor uses on commercial streets 
must be reserved for retail and other service uses open to customers. Upper story uses may be 
other commercial uses or residences. Buildings can be up to 75 feet in height, compatible to uses in 
the residential districts that include multifamily housing, but must have a minimum of two usable 
floors along retail streets. Entire blocks shall be zoned TX, where possible, to increase opportunities 
for pedestrian-oriented site and building design, conveniently located public parking, and open 
spaces. 
(d) ?The CX Core Mixed-Use district is intended for areas close to rapid transit hubs and employment 
centers. Buildings shall be designed to promote walking and have a pedestrian orientation, with curb 
cuts on retail streets strongly discouraged. Ground floor uses on retail streets must be reserved for 
retail and other service uses open to customers. Upper story uses may be other commercial uses or 
residences. Taller buildings up to 156 feet in height are encouraged and shall have a minimum of 
two usable floors of building along retail streets. Entire blocks shall be zoned CX, where possible, to 
increase opportunities for pedestrian-oriented site and building design, conveniently located public 
parking, and open spaces. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009) 


Sec. 118-182. - Design guidelines. 
    Development of any lot within the district shall be in conformance with Design Guidelines for Mixed-
Use Districts , a set of design guidelines that are approved by the Appearance Commission. These 
guidelines shall assure that buildings, circulation, and open spaces conform to the intent of the district. 
Individual buildings are still subject to the review and approval by the Appearance Commission to assure 
that each conforms to the approved design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009) 


Sec. 118-183. - Retail streets. 
(a) ?Retail street designations. The following street segments shall be classified as retail streets: 
STREET 
ADDRESS BLOCK 

From 
To 
Odd 
Even 
Babb Avenue 
7940 
7999 
• 
• 
Brown Street 
5100 
5129 
• 
• 
Lacrosse Avenue 
7930 
7999 
• 
• 
Lamon Avenue 
7930 
7999 
• 
• 
Lincoln Avenue 
7691 
7699 
• 

Lincoln Avenue 
7700 
8099 
• 
• 
Lincoln Avenue 
8100 
8120 

• 
Lincoln Avenue 
8200 
8299 

• 
Main Street 
4733 
4799 
• 

Main Street 
4800 
4933 
• 
• 
Niles Avenue 
7940 
8016 
• 
• 
Niles Avenue 
8018 
8156 

• 
Niles Center Road 
8049 
8015 
• 

Niles Center Road 
8227 
8399 
• 

Oakton Street 
4600 
5126 
• 
• 
Skokie Boulevard 
8001 
8199 
• 

Skokie Boulevard 
8200 
8399 
• 
• 
Skokie Boulevard 
8400 
8416 

• 
Warren Street 
4948 
5099 
• 
• 
 
(b) ?Interpretation. 
(1) ?Except for cemeteries, when a lot face that abuts a retail street also abuts a lot designated in 
the Comprehensive Plan of Skokie, Illinois as a park or open space, the side of the lot abutting 
the park or open space shall also be treated as a retail street. 
(2) ?When a lot faces both a retail street and a street that is not a retail street, the Village Manager 
or his designee shall interpret the retail street designation. 
(c) ?Uses on retail streets. 
(1) ?Uses allowed along retail streets are listed in Appendix A. 
(2) ?Uses on retail streets that are subject to these regulations apply to the ground floor of a 
building for a distance of 24 feet from the inside edge of the right-of-way, park or open space 
edge. 
(3) ?Uses designated in Appendix A for retail shall be open to the public for a minimum of 40 hours 
a week. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 18-6-C-4384, § 1, 6-18-2018) 


Sec. 118-184. - Bulk requirements. 
(a) ?Height, setbacks, and yards. Building height, setback, and yard requirements shall be determined in 
accordance with the following: 

Zone 
ZONE 
NX 
TX 
CX 
Minimum height along a retail street (feet) 

25 
25 
Base building height permitted (feet) 
25 
45 
45 
Maximum building height under site plan approval (feet) 
45 
75 
156 
Minimum side yard not abutting a residential district* (feet) 
0/6 
0/6 
0/6 
Minimum side yard abutting a residential district (feet) 
6 
6 
6 
Minimum rear yard abutting an alley (feet) 
5 
5 
5 
Minimum rear yard not abutting an alley (feet) 
16 
0 
0 
 
* No requirement, but if provided, then 6 foot minimum 
(b) ?Floor area ratio. Floor area ratio requirements shall be determined in accordance with the schedule 
and additional provisions below: 

Zone 
ZONE 
NX 
TX 
CX 
Base floor area ratio (FAR) 
1.40 
2.00 
2.50 
Maximum FAR under site plan approval 
2.75 
5.00 
9.00 
FAR adjustments: 



1st floor commercial use, 0-24.9% of floor area 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1st floor commercial use, 25-29.9% of floor area 
0.15 
0.25 
0.00 
1st floor commercial use, 30-34.9% of floor area 
0.30 
0.50 
0.00 
1st floor commercial use, 35-39.9% of floor area 
0.45 
0.75 
0.50 
1st floor commercial use, 40-49.9% of floor area 
0.50 
1.25 
1.00 
1st floor commercial use, 50-59.9% of floor area 
0.65 
1.50 
2.00 
1st floor commercial use, 60-74.9% of floor area 
0.75 
1.75 
3.00 
1st floor commercial use, 75-100% of floor area 
0.90 
2.00 
4.50 
Public art 
0.15 
0.15 
0.15 
Lot facing two or more streets 
0.20 
0.35 
0.65 
Plaza or outdoor amenity for public use, 300-1000 square feet in area 
0.15 
0.25 
0.35 
Plaza or outdoor amenity for public use, over 1000 square feet in area 
0.45 
0.75 
0.90 
Each commercial parking space in excess of parking requirements available for non-
restricted public use 

0.05 
0.05 
Silver LEED rating 
0.10 
0.19 
0.34 
Gold LEED rating 
0.12 
0.22 
0.40 
Platinum LEED rating 
0.37 
0.68 
1.22 
Removal of each whole 12 feet of retail street driveway curb cut 
0.05 
0.09 
0.16 
Upper story non-residential space 
See 118-
184(b)(9) 
 
(1) ?Base height and base floor area ratios are a matter of right. Floor area ratio bonuses shall be 
cumulative and provided as a matter of right if the conditions for the bonuses are met. Height 
and floor area ratio in excess of the base levels shall be subject to site plan approval in 
accordance with Article II of this chapter. 
(2) ?The bonus for first-floor commercial use shall be awarded based on the percentage of the first-
floor area of the building devoted to uses open to the public. Covered or enclosed parking areas 
shall be included when calculating the first-floor area of the building. Commercial uses do not 
include covered or enclosed parking areas or common areas for residences, assisted-living 
facilities, or skilled nursing facilities. 
(3) ?The bonus for public art shall be awarded if space and a piece of art are provided adjacent to a 
public street or a contribution is made to a Village art fund of at least 1 percent of the 
development's construction permit value. 
(4) ?The bonus for a lot facing 2 or more streets shall be awarded when at least 2 rights-of-way 
containing different streets abut a lot. 
(5) ?The bonus for a plaza or an outdoor amenity for public use shall be awarded for a space that is 
open to the public and directly accessible from public sidewalks. A plaza shall have seating and 
may include spaces that display public art, fountains, landscaping, or outdoor dining areas. The 
calculation of the plaza shall not include required yards or setbacks. 
(6) ?The bonus for commercial parking spaces shall be awarded for each commercial parking 
space in excess of parking requirements available for nonrestricted public use or for purchasing 
spaces for such use into the shared parking fund. 
(7) ?The bonus for LEED rating shall be awarded for Silver, Gold, or Platinum certification upon 
receipt of a cash escrow, calculated as the additional square footage provided by the bonus 
multiplied by $100.00, and a signed escrow agreement. The escrow will be released upon the 
applicant providing the Village with proof that the building has received the appropriate LEED 
certification for the bonus provided from the United States Green Building Council. 
(8) ?The bonus for "removal of each whole 12 feet of retail street driveway curb cut" shall be 
awarded when (1) an existing driveway and apron in the right-of-way of a retail street is 
removed and is not replaced along any retail street, and (2) is replaced with streetscaping 
approved by the Village. The measurement used to determine the multiples of whole 12 feet 
shall be the width of the existing driveway apron at the curb line of the retail street. 
(9) ?The bonus for upper-story non-residential space shall be awarded for gross floor area of uses 
except residence and accommodation uses but including hotels above the grade level floor. The 
gross floor area for such uses shall be excluded from the FAR calculation up to an amount of 
the area of the lot. 
(10) ?The area of land dedicated as right-of-way as a condition of the development shall be 
included in the area of the lot for the purposes of calculating the floor area ratio. 
(c) ?Additional building requirements on retail streets. 
(1) ?Buildings shall be a minimum of 25 feet in height and have at least two usable floors for 
allowable uses. 
(2) ?The minimum first floor height measured from grade to the second story finished floor level 
floor shall be 15 feet. 
(3) ?The minimum retail depth on the first floor shall be of 24 feet. 
(4) ?At least 50% of all first floor façades shall abut the public sidewalk. 
(5) ?At least 60% of the first floor linear frontage of total lot frontage along the public sidewalk shall 
be devoted to permitted and special uses on retail streets. Each two whole linear feet of lot 
frontage used for public art, plaza, or outdoor amenities shall be deemed one whole linear foot 
of retail street uses for the purposes of this requirement. 
(6) ?At least 50% of the wall area that is between 2 and 12 feet above grade shall be occupied by 
windows and/or entry doors. These windows and doors shall meet the following requirements: 
a. ?Utilize clear transparent glass in order to provide clear views of building interiors from the 
street and to allow natural surveillance of the street and adjacent outdoor spaces. 
b. ?Tint, internal screening, patterns or mirrored coatings are prohibited. 
c. ?Coatings shall be limited to those necessary to meet the minimum U-factor requirement in 
the latest addition of the International Energy Conservation Code adopted by the State of 
Illinois. 
d. ?Be of commercial grade and design. 
e. ?The surface shall not be covered or obstructed by products, signs in excess of the 
requirements in the Signs chapter, or other opaque materials place behind the window. 
(7) ?At least 25% of the wall area between 3 and 8 feet from the finished floor level of upper stories 
shall consist of glass for all nonresidence uses. 
(8) ?All building entrances located along retail streets shall be at grade. 
(9) ?Recessed entrances shall not be wider than one third of the entire frontage along retail streets. 
(10) ?An entrance to a corner building shall be located at that corner. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 16-12-C-
4262, § 1, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 18-5-C-4379, § 1, 5-22-2018) 


Sec. 118-185. - Restricted uses. 
(a) ?Uses listed as restricted in Appendix A in the district as a whole or along retail streets shall be 
permitted only under the circumstances listed in this section. 
(b) ?Residences. Townhouse residences may be attached as facing to parking decks or commercial 
portions of buildings, except along retail streets. 
(c) ?Limited frontages. The following uses may be permitted with ground floor frontages along retail 
streets not to exceed 30% of the linear feet of building along that retail street: 
(1) ?Uses. 
a. ?Hotels. 
b. ?Department store, warehouse club, or superstore. 
c. ?Motion picture viewing and exhibition services. 
d. ?Storm water detention facilities. 
e. ?Restricted arts, entertainment, and recreation uses 
f. ?Colleges and universities. 
g. ?Funeral homes. 
h. ?Convention and exhibition halls. 
(2) ?Other permitted or special uses located along the retail street that meet the design guidelines 
in Section 118-182 within the uses listed above shall not be considered part of the restricted 
use. 
(d) ?Retail only restrictions. Motor vehicle parts and accessory stores and motorbike, ATV, and other 
similar vehicle sales are limited to retail sales and may not include service, repair, or other non-retail 
activities. 
(e) ?Dental laboratories. Dental laboratories may only operate in conjunction with a clinic or outpatient 
care center. 
(f) ?Residential construction offices. Building, developing, and general contracting offices for residential 
construction are permitted only for current, nearby projects. 
(g) ?Drive-through facilities. 
(1) ?Within the retail street use area, only drive through facility driveways that are shared with other 
parking facilities are permitted. 
(2) ?No part of the drive-through facility shall be visible from the retail street. 
(h) ?Special uses. The following uses listed as restricted shall also need a special use permit: 
(1) ?Hotels. 
(2) ?Motion picture viewing and exhibition services. 
(3) ?Theater, dance, or music establishment. 
(4) ?Funeral homes. 
(5) ?Convention and exhibition halls. 
(i) ?Textiles manufacturing and jewelry and silverware manufacturing. Textiles manufacturing and 
jewelry and silverware manufacturing shall be limited to only custom garments for individual clients. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 10-2-C-3734, § 1, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 12-2-C-
3885, § 1, 2-6-2012) 


Sec. 118-186. - Outside uses. 
    All business, servicing, storing, or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed 
principal buildings, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, other applicable Village codes, or as 
follows: 
(1) ?Outdoor dining on private property or public right-of-way, subject to Section 118-93. 
(2) ?Activities needing a special use permit, if the activity is conducted with a principal use in the 
district: Garden and plant material sales in a roofed area that is at least 40 percent enclosed by 
walls. 
(3) ?Certain parking and loading spaces for commercial vehicles, subject to Section 118-217. 
(4) ?Outdoor pet exercise areas only in conjunction with an animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3691, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 16-10-
C-4250, § 2, 10-6-2016; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-187. - Public sidewalks and parkways. 
    To promote a pedestrian scale environment, the following design standards shall apply: 
(1) ?Sidewalks must have a minimum paved width of 5' and have a common alignment within a 
block. 
(2) ?The effective walkway width of a sidewalk shall at all times be at least 5' wide. The effective 
walkway width is the shortest hard-surfaced distance between obstructions, hazards, or 
buildings along a walkway. 
(3) ?All efforts shall be made to promote and preserve street trees. 
(4) ?All sidewalk and parkway improvements shall be consistent with Village streetscaping plans. 
(Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 19-4-C-
4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 3, adopted May 4, 2015, deleted § 118-187 which 
pertained to sight distance triangle and derived from Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 
2009. Said ordinance also renumbered § 118-188 as § 118-187 to read as set out. 


Secs. 118-188, 118-189. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, adopted Mar. 7, 2011, deleted § 118-189 which 
pertained to rentals and derived from Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 2009. 


Sec. 118-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-7-C-3691, § 1, adopted July 20, 2009, deleted § 118-190. Former § 
118-190 pertained to truck parking and derived from Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 
2009. 


ARTICLE X. - RESERVED 


Secs. 118-191—118-200. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XI. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. IV as Art. XI. 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 106-91 et seq. 


Sec. 118-201. - Scope of regulations. 
    The off-street parking and loading provisions of this article shall apply as follows: 
(1) ?Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by the regulations of this article for 
all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in each district after the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2) ?When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the 
addition of residential units, gross floor area, seating capacity, bedrooms, or other specified 
units of measurement, additional parking and loading shall be provided as required by this 
article. Any additional parking or loading may require additional water detention as required in § 
118-64. 
(3) ?Whenever the existing use of a building or structure changes to a new use, required parking 
and loading shall be provided for the new use. However, if the existing building or structure was 
erected prior to March 2, 1965, additional parking and loading facilities are mandatory only in 
the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use, 
if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this article. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.1; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3078, § 2, 5-6-
2002; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-202. - Enforcement. 
    The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for all inspections and enforcement of the 
provisions of this article. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.16) 


Sec. 118-203. - Existing parking. 
    Off-street parking in existence on March 2, 1965, and located on the same lot as the building or use 
served shall not hereafter be reduced below the requirements, except to meet the State of Illinois 
Accessibility Standards Act. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.2; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003) 


Sec. 118-204. - Permissive parking and loading. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking and loading to 
serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided that all regulations governing the location, design, 
and operation of such facilities are met. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.3; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003) 


Sec. 118-205. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 4, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, repealed § 118-205, which 
pertained to provision of facilities upon damage or destruction of building and derived from Zon. 
Ord. § 11.4. 


Sec. 118-206. - Control of off-street parking. 
(a) ?Required off-street parking and the use it serves shall be on lots with the same titleholder of record, 
except for detached residences as restricted below in (b), off-site parking as allowed in this article, 
and nonresidential uses and residential guest parking in the CX Core Mixed-Use district. 
(b) ?Required off-street parking for detached residences shall be provided on the same lot as the 
principal building. 
(c) ?Required off-street parking shall be solely for patrons, occupants, or employees, including public 
passenger vehicles otherwise parked in compliance with this Code and designated shared parking 
spaces available to the public. 
(d) ?When a parking area is shared by principal users or by the public, vehicles shall not be allowed to 
be parked in or otherwise block common driveways, sidewalks, aisles, or other points of access at 
any time, shall only be parked in designated parking spaces, and shall not overlap the striped lines of 
designated parking spaces, unless parked in a fenced and screened storage area as allowed and by 
this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1(11.5), 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 2, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 08-
1-C-3577, § 3, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-9-C-3641, § 2, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-
5-2009; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3885, § 1, 2-6-2012) 


Sec. 118-207. - Control of off-site parking. 
(a) ?The Engineering Division shall approve the location of any off-site parking. 
(b) ?A covenant running with the land restricting the use of those required off-site parking spaces for 
parking by the grantee shall be filed with the County Recorder of Deeds. The covenant shall require 
that the Village Manager or designee join in its release. 
(c) ?A certified copy of the recorded covenant from the County Recorder of Deeds must be deposited 
with the Village Manager or designee before a building permit is issued. 
(d) ?The covenant shall not be released by the Village Manager or designee until such time as either 
one of the following conditions occur: 
(1) ?The structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed or the principal use terminated; 
or 
(2) ?Replacement required parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1(11.6), 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 3, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 09-
1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009) 


Sec. 118-208. - Outdoor storage lots. 
(a) ?Lots for outdoor storage of vehicles shall not be used for customer or employee parking or vehicle 
preparation activities and may be used for sale or rental of motor vehicles and boats in conjunction 
with a motor vehicle and boat sales facility. 
(b) ?Except for lots used for sale or rental of motor vehicles and boats in conjunction with a motor 
vehicle and boat sales facility, a storage lot shall not be required to meet the design requirements of 
this article, provided that it is surfaced with gravel and drained subject to the approval of the 
Engineering Division. If such a lot is to be paved, it shall comply with the drainage and surfacing 
requirements in § 118-64. 
(Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1(11.7), 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-209. - Assigned parking spaces. 
    For nonresidential uses, no more than 10 percent of required off-street parking shall be assigned. 
Required parking spaces shall not be assigned in nonresidential parking lots serving multiple uses. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.8; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3669, § 1, 3-16-2009) 


Sec. 118-210. - Computations of number of parking spaces resulting in fractional number. 
    When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this article results in a 
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction less than ½ may be disregarded, while a fraction ½ or 
greater shall be counted as 1 parking space. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.9; Ord. No. 07-9-C-3543, § 1, 9-4-2007) 


Sec. 118-211. - Collective use of parking spaces. 
    No parking spaces shall serve as a required space for more than 1 use. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.10) 


Sec. 118-212. - Motor vehicle parking facility design standards. 
(a) ?Size and clearance. 
(1) ?A required off-street parking space shall have a width and a length, exclusive of access drives 
or aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas, as follows: 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARKING STALLS 
 
Minimum Parking Layout Dimensions for Head-In Parking  
for 9-Foot-Wide Regular Parking Stalls at Various Angles 
Reference 
Standard 
Dimensions 
A 
Angle of parking 
45° 
60° 
90° 
B 
Width of stall 
9? 
9? 
9? 
C 
Stall width (parallel to aisle) 
12¾? 
10½? 
9? 
D 
Stall depth (perpendicular to aisle) 
19? 
20? 
18? 
E 
Stall length 
18? 
18? 
18? 
F 
Aisle width 
13? 
17? 
24? 
G 
Stall depth (with a 2?0? bumper overhang) 
17? 
18? 
16? 
H 
Wall to wall 
51? 
57? 
60? 
H 
Head into curb with 2? overhang* 
47? 
53? 
56? 
 
*Vehicular overhang shall not encroach into a walkway or sidewalk area reducing the width to 
less than 3 feet. 
(2) ?Angle interpretation for parking stalls shall be allowed by Village Manager or designee approval 
only. 
(3) ?Where parallel parking is permitted, the stall length shall be 24 feet and the width shall be 8 
feet. Open-end spaces shall have a minimum length of 20 feet. Aisle width shall be a minimum 
of 14 feet. 
(4) ?Parking space(s) for the physically disabled shall be designed and provided in accordance with 
State requirements. 
(5) ?The full width of an alley, but no portion of a street, may be used in computing such aisle or 
access area. All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of 
vehicular access to a street or alley. 
(6) ?For all uses, except detached, duplex, and townhouse residences, required off-street parking 
spaces abutting walls, fences, or other obstructions greater than 15 percent of the length of the 
stall shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. This regulation shall also apply to outdoor required 
parking spaces for townhouse residences. 
(b) ?Ramp and driveway grade. 
(1) ?Exterior ramp grades shall not exceed 6 percent. 
(2) ?Interior ramp grades shall not exceed 10 percent. 
(3) ?Handicapped ramp grades shall be 1 inch per 1 foot. 
(4) ?Driveways for all residential types except multifamily residences with 3 or more units shall have 
a grade between 1 percent and 6 percent on private property sloping downward to the right-of-
way line. 
(5) ?The part of a driveway that is within the public right-of-way shall have a grade between 1 
percent and 10 percent sloping downward to the back of the curb of the street. 
(c) ?Access driveways to off-street parking and loading spaces. 
(1) ?Width of driveways (measured at the street right-of-way line abutting the lot) shall be as 
follows: 
a. ?Residences without shared driveways: Not less than 9 feet wide and not more than 22 feet 
wide. 
b. ?Nonresidence uses and all residences with shared driveways: 
1. ?Not less than 14 feet wide for a one-way driveway; 
2. ?Not less than 20 feet wide for a two-way driveway when less than 20 parking spaces 
are being served; 
3. ?Not less than 24 feet wide for a two-way driveway when 20 or more parking spaces or 
2 or more loading spaces are being served; and 
4. ?Not more than 35 feet wide. 
(2) ?The radius connecting the street pavement edge and driveway edges shall conform with the 
Standards for Parking Lots and Driveways as established by the Engineering Division. 
(3) ?The acute angle formed at the intersection of a driveway and street pavement edges shall be 
not less than 60 degrees. 
(4) ?The spacing between separate driveway entrances on a lot (measured at the street right-of-
way line abutting the lot) shall be as follows: 
a. ?On arterials: Not less than 30 feet. 
b. ?On streets not classified as arterials: Not less than 16 feet. 
(5) ?On corner lots, the spacing between the driveway entrance and the right-of-way line of the 
adjacent intersecting street shall be as follows: 
a. ?To intersecting arterials: Not less than 15 feet. 
b. ?To an intersecting street not classified as an arterial: Not less than 8 feet. 
(d) ?Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such 
applicable width and design as set forth in this article in order to provide safe and efficient means of 
vehicular access to such parking space. Tandem parking shall not be allowed to meet off-street 
parking requirements, except as part of a Village-approved plan in designated redevelopment areas 
in the M1 Office Assembly Industry, M2 Light Industry and M3 Industry districts. In these areas 
tandem parking can be provided, however, only the parking spaces on private property that are 
accessed from a public street where there is approved parkway parking shall be allowed to meet off-
street parking requirements. 
(e) ?Vertical clearance. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least 7 feet. All 
pipes, sprinklers, vent fans and other such obstructions shall not encroach into the clearance. 
(f) ?Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be fully improved with a pavement meeting the Village 
design standards. This standard shall not apply to storage lots unless such lots are paved. Unpaved 
storage lots shall be surfaced with gravel and drained subject to the approval of the Engineering 
Division. 
(g) ?Drainage. Drainage shall be provided in accordance with § 118-64. 
(h) ?Signing and striping. 
(1) ?Signing and pavement markings shall be provided for regulatory purposes pertaining to the 
operation of the parking lot as determined by the Village Manager or designee, and striping of 
the pavement surface shall be provided to define each parking space. 
(2) ?Signage and striping shall be in accordance with this Code. 
(i) ?Curbing and walks. 
(1) ?All surface parking lots shall have continuous curbing located a minimum of 6 feet from, and 
parallel to, any property line which is adjacent to a street frontage, except as noted in this 
subsection. 
(2) ?The required continuous curbing may be located closer than 6 feet to the property line when 
the area between the curbing and the property line does not equal more than 10 percent of the 
total area of the off-street parking lot. 
(3) ?Any parking area serving either detached or 2-unit multifamily residences shall be exempt from 
the curbing requirement of this section. 
(4) ?For unimproved existing lots and deficient existing lots which are to be improved, where the 
continuous curbing is not used as wheel stops, such curbing may be closer than 6 feet to the 
property line when it would result in a reduction in the number of standard off-street parking 
spaces or if it would reduce the width of an access aisle or driveway below the minimum 
requirements. 
(5) ?For unimproved existing lots and deficient existing lots which are to be improved, where the 
continuous curbing is used as wheel stops, such curbing may be located up to a minimum of 3 
feet from the property line if the placement of the curbing at a distance of greater than 3 feet 
would result in a reduction in the number of standard off-street parking spaces which were 
previously provided or if it would reduce the width of an access aisle or driveway below the 
minimum requirements. 
(6) ?When the continuous curbing would fall within a utility easement, the requirement must be 
reviewed by the Director of Engineering. The Director of Engineering shall determine, after a 
review of written statements from the public utility companies, whether each utility company is 
now using the easement or plans to do so in the future, and the characteristics of such use, the 
type of utility line, its horizontal and vertical placement, its relationship to other utilities, and the 
access needed for installation and maintenance. When the utility easement is or will be in use, 
the Director of Engineering shall determine whether the continuous curbing on the easement 
will interfere with the utility companies' use of the easement and shall then determine a suitable 
location for the continuous curbing. 
(7) ?If the continuous curbing cannot be so placed as to avoid interference with the utilities, then 
alternate curbing and/or location shall be determined by the Director of Engineering. When none 
of the foregoing are possible, a variance to waive this requirement may be sought from the 
Zoning Board of Appeals, or, if the subject site is under consideration for a special use permit, 
then the waiver of this requirement may be sought from the Plan Commission as part of the 
special use. 
(8) ?Perimeter curbing shall meet the curve of the street curb. Where this continuous street-to-
parking-area curbing meets a pedestrian sidewalk, there shall be no on grade separation. 
(9) ?Continuous curbing shall be required within the interior of an off-street area, to ensure the 
public safety and protect landscaping, or as required by the Director of Engineering. Adequate 
methods of containing vehicular parking shall be provided, subject to the approval of the 
Director of Engineering, if continuous curbing cannot be provided. Such methods shall include 
but not be limited to wheel stops and approved roping devices. 
(10) ?For all new parking lots with aisles, a minimum 5-foot sidewalk shall be provided alongside a 
building abutting an off-street parking area to provide access to the building from the parking 
area. If the building depth (or width) is less than the depth (or width) of the property, the 
sidewalk shall extend beyond the building and run the length (or depth) of the parking area. In 
addition, the minimum 5-foot sidewalk shall be provided at the rear of a building or structure 
behind which aisle parking is provided. 
(11) ?The required sidewalk may be reduced in width to 3 feet under the following circumstances: 
a. ?Where any parking area has direct access to the parking stalls from an alley and is also 
located directly to the rear of the building; and 
b. ?Where the sidewalk abutting the parking area or which provides access to the building from 
the parking area is not in conflict with vehicular traffic maneuvers, including backup 
maneuvers. 
(j) ?Screening and landscaping. 
(1) ?For all new and existing lot improvements, adequate visual screening shall be erected along 
any lot line of a nonresidential property which abuts residentially zoned property and is not 
separated by an alley from such property. If an intervening alley separates residentially zoned 
property from nonresidentially used property, then the visual screening shall be erected 1 foot 
within the side or rear lot line of the nonresidentially used property to screen the off-street 
parking and/or loading areas. 
a. ?Only the following types of visual screening shall be permitted for the purpose of this 
article: 
1. ?Face brick wall. 
2. ?Reinforced concrete wall with decorative finish. 
3. ?Solid board-on-board wooden fence. 
4. ?Dense evergreen living shrubs. 
5. ?A combination of the types of screening listed in this subsection. 
b. ?The height of the required screening shall be 5 feet, except in residentially zoned districts it 
shall be 4 feet. Screening shall not be required in the R1 and R2 residential districts, 
except by special use permit. 
c. ?Where access to an intervening alley is provided from an off-street parking and/or loading 
area, the height of the required screening on either side of the access area shall be 30 
inches for a minimum of 10 feet. 
d. ?All required screening other than permitted screening types shall be subject to the approval 
of the Appearance Commission. 
e. ?All required screening shall be adequately protected from vehicular maneuvers. Protection 
may include wheel stops, curbing, guardrails and/or earth berming. Where required 
screening other than landscaping is provided at an alley, the 1-foot area between the 
property line and the required screening shall be covered with a hard surface, subject to 
the approval of the Director of Engineering. 
f. ?When the required screening would fall in a utility easement or an alley boundary which is 
used by 1 or more of the utility companies for its service, the requirement must be 
reviewed by the Director of Engineering. The Director of Engineering shall determine, after 
a review of written statements from the public utility companies, whether each utility 
company is now using the easement or plans to in the future and the characteristics of 
such use, the type of utility line, its horizontal and vertical placement, its relationship to 
other utilities and the access needed for installation and maintenance. When the utility 
easement is or will be in use, the Director of Engineering shall determine when the 
required screening on a lot would interfere with the utility companies' use of the easement 
and shall then determine a suitable location for such screening. If required screening 
cannot be so placed to avoid interference with the utilities, alternate screening and location 
shall be determined by the Director of Engineering and the Director of Community 
Development. 
(k) ?Lighting. 
(1) ?Lighting shall be required for all new commercial and industrial off-street parking areas. 
Lighting shall also be required for all residential parking areas with more than 20 spaces. 
Residential developments consisting of only detached residences shall be exempt. 
(2) ?Any lighting shall be directed away from abutting or adjacent properties, streets, or public 
rights-of-way. 
(3) ?The illumination level for all off-street parking areas shall be as follows: 
a. ?The illumination level for an off-street parking area shall be an average maintained 
horizontal footcandle ratio of 1.0 to 3.0 footcandles or per IES required standards for other 
application purposes. 
b. ?Uniform illumination is desirable, and the lowest footcandle value at any point on the 
pavement should not be less than ¼ the designed average maintained horizontal 
footcandles. 
c. ?The type of luminaries, shielding, pole height and the lighting design, uniformity ratio and 
the entire lighting scheme shall be subject to the approval of the Village Traffic Engineer. 
All lighting units shall be of the full cutoff type. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.11; Ord. No. 00-4-Z-2886, § 1, 4-3-2000; Ord. No. 01-6-Z-2987, § 1, 6-4-2001; 
Ord. No. 01-9-Z-3028, § 2, 9-20-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 03-1-
Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3145, § 1, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-
2005; Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 4, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 06-4-C-3429, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 07-
9-C-3543, § 1, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 08-6-C-3621, § 1, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-
3-2008; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3692, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 
11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 4, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 
4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-213. - Parking requirements for additions and improvements in nonresidential zones. 
    If any nonresidential establishment expands its gross floor area, thereby requiring additional off-
street parking spaces, the additional parking area shall conform to all requirements for a new lot. The 
existing parking area shall be made to conform to the requirements for a new lot for paving, drainage, 
curbing, lighting, striping, and landscaping. If any nonresidential establishment expands its gross floor 
area by 50 percent or more, the existing parking area shall be made to conform to the requirements for a 
new lot for paving, drainage, curbing, lighting, striping, and landscaping. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.12) 


Sec. 118-214. - Maintenance of parking areas. 
    All parking areas shall be maintained at all times in broom clean condition, without potholes, broken 
wheel stops and/or curbing or other surface irregularities. All landscaping shall be maintained in a 
flourishing condition, free of weeds and debris, and all dead landscaping shall be replaced. Pavement 
markings shall be visible at all times, and parking lot signage shall be readable at all times, with the 
signpost maintained in an upright manner. Compliance is required with all conditions of the Village's 
private property fire lane sign maintenance program and the Village's designation of private property 
handicapped parking spaces program. All area lighting shall be maintained in functioning condition. 
Drainage systems shall be maintained in a free-flowing working condition. It shall be unlawful to alter any 
aspects of an approved parking lot plan unless approval has been received through the Director of 
Engineering. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.13) 


Sec. 118-215. - Use of parking areas for storage; leasing of parking spaces; charging fee for parking 
spaces. 
(a) ?Parking areas shall be used exclusively for parking purposes and not for storage of vehicles, boats, 
trailers, campers or other personal property, unless allowed under other sections of this article. 
(b) ?Parking spaces may be leased only where the parking spaces provided are in excess of the parking 
requirements of the principal use, and only those excess spaces may be leased. Nothing contained 
in this section shall permit the leasing of parking space for vehicles that are not permitted to be 
parked in the zoning district. 
(c) ?All required off-street parking spaces shall be part of the principal premises lease, and no fee shall 
be charged therefor, unless the space is additional to the parking required by this article. 
(d) ?The provisions of this section shall apply as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this 
section is derived. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.15) 


Sec. 118-216. - Computation of required employee parking. 
    Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the average number of employees 
during the highest period of employment. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.17) 


Sec. 118-217. - Motor vehicle parking in yards. 
(a) ?Inoperable vehicles. No vehicles that are inoperable shall be permitted to be stored in the open in 
any yard. A motor vehicle will be considered inoperable if it is wrecked, dismantled, partially 
dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power upon a public street, or the wheels, engine, 
transmission or any substantial part thereof have been removed. 
(b) ?Surface. Open off-street parking shall be located upon a surface approved by the Director of 
Engineering and constructed in compliance with Village engineering standards. 
(c) ?Residential districts. 
(1) ?Permitted vehicles. 
a. ?Generally. Only the following motor vehicles shall be allowed to be parked in the open on a 
lot in a residential district: 
1. ?Motorcycles. 
2. ?Recreational vehicles, boats, and boat trailers in accordance with § 118-62 and 
elsewhere in this chapter. 
3. ?Noncommercial vehicles with passenger or Class B license plates. 
4. ?Public passenger vehicles as defined in Section 118-31 only under the following 
circumstances: 
a. ?The vehicle has a parking permit issued by the Village. 
b. ?The location has been approved by the Village Manager or his designee. 
c. ?The vehicle must be parked in a rear yard and cannot be parked in a front or side 
yard, except in a parking lot for multiple residence buildings. 
d. ?Not more than 1 vehicle is allowed to park per dwelling unit. 
e. ?Village owned or operated parking lots. 
b. ?Noncommercial vehicles. For the purpose of this section, those factors that determine a 
noncommercial vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following: 
1. ?Single rear wheels only. 
2. ?No signs, advertisements, business identifications or business license plates. 
3. ?No attached auxiliary equipment, including but not limited to plows, equipment racks 
or storage boxes or lockers. 
4. ?No debris, construction materials or equipment intended for commercial or business 
use may be present whether in the open or covered by removable material or fabric. 
5. ?Cargo and panel vans that comply with subsections (c)(1)b.1 through 4 of this section 
and have side and rear windows and seating behind the driver's seat. 
(2) ?Detached, townhouse, and 2-unit multifamily residences. 
a. ?Open off-street parking spaces may be located in any yard except as otherwise stated in 
this section. 
b. ?Open off-street parking spaces shall be: 
1. ?Accessed from a driveway constructed in compliance with Village engineering 
standards. 
2. ?In compliance with yard and lot impermeable surface coverage requirements. 
3. ?Located at least 5 feet from a property line abutting a street. 
4. ?Set back from the nearest street right-of-way line intersection a distance equal to the 
required front and side yards abutting a street. 
5. ?Contiguous, having a common, usable vehicle access aisle that meets the Village 
engineering standards. 
c. ?Required off-street parking in a front or side yard abutting a street shall only be allowed 
when the required parking is eliminated as a direct result of remodeling additions or garage 
conversions and there is no other location on the site for the parking. Parking may also be 
allowed on a circular driveway, for residential lots that abut a traffic arterial, when other 
required parking cannot be provided. Under these circumstances: 
1. ?A maximum of 2 motor vehicles shall be permitted to park in the front or side yard. 
2. ?The addition or remodeling shall not decrease the existing number of off-street parking 
spaces required by this chapter. 
3. ?When required parking can be provided elsewhere or driveway standards cannot be 
met, the existing driveway and approach shall be removed, the parkway returned to 
landscaping, and the public sidewalk and gutter replaced according to Village 
engineering standards. 
d. ?Nonrequired parking in a front or side yard abutting a street shall only be allowed when the 
parking is located on a driveway in compliance with Village engineering standards leading 
to an approved off-street parking area. 
e. ?All motor vehicles not permitted to be parked in the open on a lot must be parked within a 
garage unless a variation is received from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(3) ?Other residential uses. For uses other than detached, townhouse, and 2-unit multifamily 
residences, off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located in any yard except a 
required front yard or a required side yard abutting a street in all residential districts. Off street 
parking spaces are prohibited within 10 feet of a side lot line that abuts a street. 
(d) ?Nonresidential districts. 
(1) ?Parking in a required front yard shall be permitted only in B4 Regional Shopping, M2 Light 
Industry, and M3 Industry districts. 
(2) ?Mixed-use and business districts. 
a. ?Trucks with an Illinois "B" license plate classification or other commercial vehicles with a 
gross weight of 8,000 pounds or less shall be permitted to park in yards, consistent with 
this Section and Section 118-206. 
b. ?Commercial vehicles in excess of 8,000 pounds gross weight shall be permitted to park in 
all allowable yards between 7:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. 
c. ?Commercial vehicles in excess of 8,000 pounds gross weight are prohibited from parking in 
a front yard or corner side yard between 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
d. ?Commercial vehicles in excess of 8,000 pounds gross weight may park in an interior side 
yard or rear yard with an administrative permit from the Village Manager or designee under 
the following conditions: 
1. ?The vehicle is generally screened from view from any public streets in right-of-way 
abutting the lot or an abutting residential zoning district. 
2. ?The vehicle is free from exposed equipment such as racks, ladders, equipment boxes, 
towing or other rigging, compressors, roll-off containers, lifts, open storage, or other 
similar equipment. 
3. ?The vehicle cannot be parked indoors at the location. 
4. ?Parking the vehicle at the location is necessary to the operation of the business. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.18; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 6, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-
2001; Ord. No. 02-4-Z-3075, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3078, § 3, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 
05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 5, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 08-1-C-3577, § 4, 
1-7-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3691, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. 
No. 10-4-C-3757, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 
1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-218. - Required number of motor vehicle parking spaces. 
    The minimum number of off-street motor vehicle parking spaces required for designated uses shall 
be as follows: 
(1) ?Residential and lodging uses. 
Congregate living facilities: For residential units with 5 or less bedrooms, parking shall conform 
to the requirements of the type of residential unit it occupies if the building were not used for a 
congregate living facility. For units with 6 or more bedrooms, the Plan Commission shall 
determine off-street parking. 
Dormitory: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Plan Commission. 
Elderly and disabled housing: 
a. ?Market rate units: 1 parking space for each unit. 
b. ?Subsidized units: 1 parking space for every 3 units. 
c. ?For buildings containing 5 or more units, a minimum of 10 percent of the required parking 
spaces shall be unenclosed and available for guests and/or unit owners on an unrestricted 
first come, first served basis. 
Hotels or private clubs and lodges: 1 parking space for each lodging room, plus 1 parking space 
for each 100 square feet of dining area, meeting rooms, and bars and cocktail lounges. In addition, other 
uses, such as retail sales or offices, which do not exclusively serve the subject establishment, 
shall provide parking spaces on the basis of the off-street parking requirements set forth 
elsewhere in this article. 
Residences: 
a. ?For purposes of this section, any room other than a kitchen, living room, dining room, 
living-dining room, laundry room, bathroom or lavatory shall be deemed a bedroom, if it is 
more than 60 percent enclosed from an adjacent space. 
b. ?For residences built after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is 
derived, all required handicapped and guest parking spaces shall be accessible to the 
public. 
c. ?Off-street parking shall be provided for each unit as indicated in the table below: 
Bedrooms 
Detached, 
and 2-Unit 
Multifamily 
Townhouse 
3 or More Unit Multifamily  
and Upper Story Residences in Mixed Uses 



Except B3 district 
transit oriented 
developments and 
NX, TX, and CX 
districts 
B3 district transit 
oriented 
developments and 
NX and TX districts 
CX district 


Residents 
Guests 
Residents 
Guests 
Residents 
Guests 
Residents 
Guests 
Efficiency 
2.00 
2.00 
0.00 
0.90 
0.10 
0.90 
0.10 
1.00 
0.25 
1 or 2 
2.00 
2.00 
0.00 
1.35 
0.15 
1.35 
0.15 
1.00 
0.25 
3 or more 
2.00 
2.00 
0.50 
1.80 
0.20 
1.35 
0.15 
1.00 
0.25 
 
d. ?Guest parking is eligible for a financial contribution in lieu of providing the parking in a CX 
Core Mixed-Use district, subject to the provisions in (7)e. of this section. The Village 
Manager or designee may waive contribution if it is shown that appropriate shared parking 
or Municipal Parking exists in the area. 
Skilled nursing facilities: 1 parking space for each 3 beds. 
(2) ?Schools, places of worship, institutions, auditoriums and other places of assembly. 
Assembly uses, including religious assembly, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums, 
grandstands, meeting halls and institutional establishments: Off-street parking requirements 
shall be determined by the Plan Commission. 
Religious assembly: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Plan 
Commission. 
Colleges and universities: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Plan 
Commission but such requirements shall not be less than 1 parking space per 300 square feet of net 
floor area. 
Courts: The Plan Commission shall determine off-street parking requirements. 
Cultural centers: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Plan Commission. 
Libraries or archives: 1 parking space for each 800 square feet of net floor area. 
Schools: The greater of the required parking spaces as listed below or the required parking 
spaces for an auditorium or other places of public assembly accessory to the school. 
a. ?Alternate education: 1 parking space for each faculty member and each other full-time 
employee plus 1 parking space for each 7 high school students based on the maximum 
number of students that can be accommodated in accordance with such design capacity of 
the building. 
b. ?Driving: 1 parking space for each school employee plus 1 parking space for each vehicle 
owned, rented or leased by the school. 
c. ?Elementary and middle: 1 parking space for each faculty member and each other full-time 
employee. 
d. ?Fine and performing arts or sports and recreation: 1 parking space for each 2 employees, 
plus 1 space for each 4 students or 1 space per 300 square feet, whichever is greater. 
e. ?Technical and trade: 1 parking space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 2 students, 
or 1 space per 200 square feet, whichever is greater. 
f. ?Senior high: 1 parking space for each 7 students based on the maximum number of 
students that can be accommodated in accordance with the design capacity of the building. 
All other schools, institutions, and assembly uses: Off-street parking requirements shall be 
determined by the Plan Commission. 
(3) ?Arts, entertainment, and recreation uses. 
Bowling alleys: 7 parking spaces for each lane. In addition, other uses, such as restaurants, 
shall provide parking spaces on the basis of the off-street requirements set forth elsewhere in 
this article. 
Dancehalls, including discotheques, and commercial skating rinks: 1 parking space for each 
100 square feet of net floor area. In addition, other uses, such as restaurants, shall provide parking 
spaces on the basis of the off-street parking requirements set forth elsewhere in this article. 
Firing range: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
Games arcade establishment: 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of net floor area, or 1 space per 
4-person capacity plus 1 space per employee, whichever is greater. 
Health and fitness centers and swimming pools: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
Indoor court facilities, racquetball and handball courts: 5 parking spaces for each court. In 
addition, other uses, such as restaurants, shall provide parking spaces on the basis of the off-
street parking requirements set forth elsewhere in this article. 
Museums: 1 parking space for each 800 square feet of net floor area. 
Parks, recreation areas, and community centers: 1 parking space for each 2 employees, plus 
spaces in adequate numbers as determined by the Plan Commission to serve the visiting 
public. 
Tennis courts: 7 parking spaces for each court and 6 additional spaces for staff. Other uses, 
such as restaurants, shall provide parking spaces on the basis of the off-street parking 
requirements set forth elsewhere in this article. 
Theater, dance, music establishments (live performance): 1 parking space for each 3 seats. 
All other arts, entertainment, and recreation uses: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
(4) ?Office, retail, service, and industrial uses. 
Animal shelter: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
Art galleries: 1 parking space for each 800 square feet of net floor area. 
Auction house: 1 parking space for every 100 square feet of auctioneering and seating area if the seats 
to be used are portable; and, in addition, 1 parking space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area 
for all other floor area, or 1 parking space for each 2 employees, whichever is greater number of 
required spaces. 
Automobile sales and service establishments: Off-street parking for all uses under this category 
shall be calculated cumulatively for each use on the site as listed below: 
a. ?Vehicle dealer (all types): 3.0 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area for the first 
1,000 square feet, then 1.2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area thereafter. 
b. ?Automotive fuel station: 2 parking spaces plus 1 parking space for tire inflation. 
c. ?Automotive repair facility and hand car wash: 3.5 spaces for each service bay. Service 
bays are not to be included in meeting the off-street parking requirements, and 
required parking spaces cannot be used as service bays. 
d. ?Car wash: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
e. ?Motor vehicle parts and accessories store: 3.0 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor 
area. 
f. ?Any parking spaces as required for other uses listed in this section. 
Banks and other financial institutions, walk-in: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. 
Banks and other financial institutions, drive-in: Off-street parking and stacking requirements to 
be determined by the Plan Commission. The petitioner must provide a traffic impact study from 
a recognized traffic engineering consultant, indicating the impact on the surrounding road 
network. 
Barbershops, beauty parlors, and other similar establishments: 1 parking space for each 200 square feet 
of net floor area. 
Computer services establishment: 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of net floor area, or 1 space 
per 4-person capacity plus 1 space per employee, whichever is greater. Other uses, such as 
restaurants, training schools, and computer repair, shall provide parking spaces on the basis of 
the off-street parking requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
Construction material sales centers, machinery related contractor, and heavy construction 
businesses: 1 space for each 1,500 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 parking space for each 
employee, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle owned, rented, or leased by the shop. 
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. 
Dry cleaning and laundry plant: 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of net floor area. 
Electronic answering services, collections, or telemarketing: 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of 
net floor area. 
Emergency response: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area or 1 parking space for 
each employee, whichever results in the greater number of off-street parking requirements, plus 
1 parking space for each vehicle owned, rented, or leased by the company. 
Food establishments and food services: 
a. ?Brew pub: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Plan Commission. 
b. ?Caterer: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area, plus 1 parking space for each 
company owned, rented, or leased vehicle kept on site. 
c. ?Carryout restaurant: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. 
d. ?Food establishments (all categories in Appendix A): 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net 
floor area. 
e. ?Limited-service restaurant and full-service restaurant, and bar or drinking place: 1 parking 
space for each 100 square feet of net floor area. 
f. ?Tap room: Off-street parking requirements for production area shall be determined by the 
Plan Commission. 
Funeral homes and mortuaries: 
a. ?Funeral homes: 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of net floor area. 
b. ?Mortuaries: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. 
Furniture and appliance stores, carpet and rug stores, electrical fixture sales and showrooms, 
orthopedic and medical appliance stores, machinery sales and service and establishments for 
sale or repair of major household equipment or furniture or major kitchen or bathroom 
accessories or fixtures: 1 parking space for each 800 square feet of ground floor area, plus 1 parking 
space for each 1,500 square feet of net floor area other than net ground floor area. Any item for sale or 
rent shall not occupy an off-street parking space required by this article. 
Greenhouse, nursery, and floriculture: 
a. ?Floriculture production and food crops grown under cover: 1.5 parking spaces for each 
1,000 square feet of gross floor area, except that if any portion of the facility or operations is for 
retail use then the requirement is 3.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
for the whole facility. 
b. ?Medical cannabis cultivation center: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
Health and human services: 
a. ?Medical and diagnostic laboratories: 1.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 feet 2 of gross floor 
area. 
b. ?Child day care: 2.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 feet 2 not in residences, no additional 
parking required beyond that of the residence use in residences. 
c. ?Child and youth services, community food services, home hospice and home health care 
agencies, and services for the elderly and disabled: 3.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 feet 
2 of gross floor area. 
d. ?Clinics and outpatient care centers, blood and organ banks: 5.0 parking spaces for each 
1,000 feet 2 of gross floor area. 
e. ?Hospitals: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
Health and personal care: 
a. ?Medical cannabis dispensing organization: Determined by the Plan Commission. 
b. ?All other health and personal care uses: 3.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross 
floor area. If a clinic or outpatient care use is operated in conjunction with this use, 5.0 
parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area are required for that portion of the 
use. 
Laundromats: 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of net floor area. 
Mail order and direct selling establishment: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. In 
industrial districts, use manufacturing and whole trade requirements. 
Manufacturing and wholesale trade uses. Off-street parking for all uses under this category shall 
be calculated cumulatively for each activity on site as listed below: 
a. ?Electronic answering services, collections, or telemarketing and retail uses: as listed 
for that use elsewhere in this section. 
b. ?Office uses and dental laboratories: 1 parking space per 300 square feet of net floor area. 
c. ?Manufacturing uses, including production, processing, printing, repackaging, 
assembling, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repairing of materials, goods, or products, 
and limited manufacturing processes as permitted in mixed-use and business districts: 
1 parking space for each 600 square feet of net floor area. 
d. ?Conventional warehouses, including storage, wholesale, and mail order 
establishments where no other activities involving the product are performed, and 
where the product remains intact in the same physical state as it arrived, except for 
necessary packaging (but not repackaging), storage, or mailing containers: 1 parking 
space for each 1,500 square feet of net floor area. 
e. ?Self-service storage facility: determined by the Plan Commission. 
Microbrewery, microdistillery or micro-winery: Off-street parking requirements for production 
area shall be determined by the Plan Commission. 
Motion picture viewing or exhibition services: 1 parking space for each 3 seats. 
Newspaper distribution agencies: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area or 1 parking 
space for each employee, whichever results in the greater number of off-street parking 
requirements, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle owned, rented or leased by the distribution 
agency. 
Offices, nonmedical and nontreatment: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor area. 
Private security agencies, including canine patrols: 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of net floor 
area, excluding animal quarters, or 1 parking space for each employee, whichever results in the 
greater off-street parking requirements, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle owned, rented or 
leased by the agency or patrol. 
Public utility and public service uses: 1 parking space for each 2 employees, plus 1 parking 
space for each vehicle owned, rented, leased by or assigned to the establishment. 
Rental and leasing uses: 
a. ?Leasing of commercial or industrial machinery or equipment: 1.2 parking spaces for each 
1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 parking space for each vehicle owned or rented by the 
establishment kept on-site. 
b. ?All other rental and leasing uses: 3.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
plus 1 parking space for each vehicle owned or rented by the establishment kept on-site. 
Research and development services: 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of net floor area. 
Road, ground, passenger, and transit transportation: 
a. ?Local transit systems: no parking required. 
b. ?Interurban and charter bus establishments, school and employee bus transportation, and 
taxi and limousine service: 3.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus 
1.0 parking space for each vehicle owned, rented, or leased by the establishment that 
parks on premises. 
Road materials recycling: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Plan 
Commission. 
Truck and freight transportation services: Off-street parking requirements shall be determined 
by the Plan Commission. 
All other retail, business offices and commercial establishments: 1 parking space for each 300 ft 
2 of net floor area. 
(5) ?Parking determinations. The Plan Commission will base their determination of off-street parking 
on a signed statement describing the operation of the proposed use, information and 
recommendations contained in the Staff Report of the Plan Commission, and any other 
information that affects the type and amount of parking necessary for the use, as determined by 
Staff and listed on the Petition for Parking Determination. This additional information may 
include, but is not limited to, professional parking studies measuring real parking demand, the 
number of employees at the location throughout the day, peak use periods, parking spaces 
needed for specific functions (e.g. pick-up/drop-off, vehicles used or stored by the use, et 
cetera), occupancy of different spaces and usage of different areas within the location. 
(6) ?Uses in B4 Regional Shopping district. For the purpose of determining the required number of 
parking spaces, the B4 Regional Shopping district shall be divided into 2 categories: 
a. ?Category A: When less than 50% of the floor area is devoted to retail sales, the required 
number of parking spaces for each use established in the B4 district shall be the same as 
the required number of parking spaces as set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this 
section for such uses. 
b. ?Category B: When 50% or more of the floor area is devoted to retail sales, the required 
number of parking spaces shall be 4 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of the total 
horizontal area of all floors that are at least 6 feet 9 inches in height, measured from the 
exterior faces of the exterior walls, except those areas used for parking facilities. The 
parking requirement is reduced to 3.8 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet if a transit station 
serving at least 4 routes exists on-site. 
(7) ?Uses in mixed-use districts. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be 
determined as follows: 
a. ?In CX districts, 2.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for permitted and 
special uses, except that the following uses shall have the parking requirements so 
indicated: 
Uses 
Parking Requirement 
•Congregate living  
•Dormitories  
•Elderly and disabled 
housing  
•Residences 
In accordance with (1) of this section 
•Elementary, middle, and 
junior high schools  
•Colleges and universities  
•Libraries and archives  
•Museums 
In accordance with (2) of this section 
•Animal shelters 
In accordance with (4) of this section 
•Hotels and motels  
•Private clubs and lodges 
1 parking space for each lodging room, plus 2.0 parking spaces for each 
1,000 square feet of gross floor area of uses not exclusively serving the subject 
establishment 
•Assembly uses  
•Motion picture viewing 
and exhibition  
•Theater, dance, or music 
establishment 
1 parking space for each 4 seats or for each 80 lineal inches of seating space 
in the main auditorium or assembly 
 
b. ?Parking requirements as listed in (1), (2), (3), and (4) of this section for non-conforming 
uses in CX districts and all uses in NX and TX districts. 
c. ?No additional off-street parking shall be required for the continued use, change of use when 
the parking requirement for the new and old use are the same, or remodeling of existing 
structures or buildings for permitted and special uses in the district. 
d. ?In CX districts, for the following use categories listed in Appendix A: consumer goods, food 
establishments, health and personal care, and food services: 
1. ?No additional off-street parking shall be required for new construction and building 
additions when the total gross floor area after the addition is less than 8,000 square feet . The 
Village Manager or designee, may waive an additional 2,000 square feet (up to 10,000 square feet ) or 
the conversion of the existing second floor to a maximum of 2 dwelling units if it can 
be demonstrated that appropriate shared parking or Municipal Parking exists in the 
area. 
2. ?Off-street parking shall be required at 2.0 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross 
floor area after the first 8,000 square feet . 
e. ?Financial contribution in lieu of providing off-street parking. Since a variance or relief from 
providing required off-street motor vehicle parking is not permitted, a payment shall be 
made to the Village, to be held in a reserve account to provide for the acquisition, erection, 
construction, or installation of public parking structures or lots within or adjacent to a 
mixed-use district, for each deficient required parking space under the following conditions: 
1. ?The off-street parking space is not a required resident space for residence use in (1) 
of this section but may be a space required for guests. 
2. ?The off-street parking space is required for a use other than in (7)e.1. 
3. ?The off-street parking space is being used as a credit for an FAR bonus in Section 
118-184(b) for a commercial parking space in excess of required parking 
requirements available for nonrestricted public use. 
4. ?A contribution of $15,000 for each of the first 5 parking spaces requested and $24,000 
for each additional parking space requested thereafter must be paid prior to the 
issuance of a building permit. 
(8) ?Uses in B6 Downtown Science and Technology district. The number of off-street parking 
spaces required for nonresidential uses shall be reduced by 15% from the required number of 
parking spaces as set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this section for such uses. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.19; Ord. No. 00-6-Z-2898, § 1, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 00-8-Z-2912, § 3, 8-7-
2000; Ord. No. 00-11-Z-2952, § 4, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-1-Z-2967, § 1, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 
01-3-Z-2977, § 9, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-8-Z-3021, § 6, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 
10-1-2001; Ord. No. 02-3-Z-3073, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-5-Z-3082, § 11, 5-6-2002; Ord. 
No. 02-6-Z-3094, § 7, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 02-10-Z-3120, § 16, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 05-8-C-
3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 6, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 06-3-C-3422, § 3, 3-6-2006; 
Ord. No. 07-1-C-3483, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 07-3-C-3491, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-4-C-
3499, § 1, 4-4-2007; Ord. No. 07-12-C-3566, § 1, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3600, § 1, 2-19-
2008; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3604, § 1, 3-17-2008; Ord. No. 08-9-C-3641, § 3, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 
09-1-C-3657, § 2,1-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3669, § 1, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3690, § 1, 
7-20-2009; Ord. No. 10-2-C-3734, § 1, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3822, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 
11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3885, § 1, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4036, § 2, 
2-18-2014; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4064, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4065, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 
14-12-C-4108, § 1, 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 16-8-C-4241, § 1, 8-1-2016; Ord. No. 16-10-C-4250, § 
3, 10-6-2016; Ord. No. 18-3-C-4363, § 1, 3-5-2018; Ord. No. 18-3-C-4368, § 1, 3-19-2018; Ord. 
No. 18-8-C-4404, § 2, 8-6-2018; Ord. No. 18-10-C-4416, § 3, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 19-4-C-
4450, § 1, 4-15-2019; Ord. No. 19-6-C-4463, § 1, 6-3-2019) 


Sec. 118-219. - Parking spaces for handicapped persons. 
    Parking space(s) for the physically handicapped shall be provided in accordance with State 
requirements. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.20) 


Sec. 118-220. - Off-street loading. 
    Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as follows: 
(1) ?Location. All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served. No 
permitted or required loading space shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of 
intersection of any 2 streets. No loading space shall be located in a required side yard abutting 
a residential district or a required front yard. Any loading space located in a required yard shall 
be open to the sky. 
(2) ?Access. Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with appropriate means of 
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner conforming with standards set forth in Section 
118-212. Design vehicles shall be allowed to back into loading spaces from local streets only. 
(3) ?Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be improved with pavement and stormwater 
drainage facilities in accordance with such standards set forth in this article and § 118-64. 
(4) ?Access through parking areas. Employee and customer parking areas may be used for access 
to loading docks. Truck standing is prohibited in customer parking areas. 
(5) ?Required number of loading spaces. 
a. ?Residential, mixed-use, and business districts. The minimum number of off-street loading 
spaces for nonresidential shall be: 1 loading space for buildings containing 10,000 to 
100,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 additional loading space for each additional 100,000 
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. The minimum required size of such loading 
spaces shall be 10 feet in width and 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering 
space, and spaces shall have a vertical clearance of not less than 12 feet. 
b. ?Industrial districts. The minimum number and size of off-street loading spaces in industrial 
districts shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
Floor Area of Establishment  
(square feet ) 
Required  
Number 
Minimum  
Size  
(feet) 
Minimum  
Vertical Clearance  
(feet) 
5,000 to 10,000 
1 
10 by 35 
12 
10,000 to 25,000 
2 
10 by 35 
12 
25,000 to 40,000 
2 
12 by 50 
14 
40,000 to 100,000 
3 
12 by 50 
14 
 
For each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof, 1 additional loading 
space is required. Such additional space shall be at least 12 feet in width by 50 feet in 
length and have a vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. Vehicles shall be allowed to 
back into loading spaces from local streets only. 
(Zon. Ord., § 11.21; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 03-1-Z-3144, § 1, 1-6-
2003; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


Sec. 118-221. - Bicycle parking location and design. 
(a) ?The location of required bicycle parking spaces shall be located within 40 feet of a building 
entrance. If there is no such feasible location within 40 feet of a building entrance then an alternate 
location maybe be utilized with the approval of the Director of Community Development or designee. 
(b) ?Directional signage shall be provided if the parking spaces are not readily visible from a building 
entrance. 
(c) ?In the spaces provided, there shall be a bicycle rack(s) which will allow a bicycle to be secured in 2 
locations on the frame. The style of said rack is subject to approval by the Director of Community 
Development or designee. The bicycle rack that is utilized must be installed per the manufacturer's 
specifications and the parking pad for the space shall be constructed of concrete. 
(d) ?The minimum size for a single parking space is 2 feet by 6 feet, with a 5-foot wide access aisle, 
running parallel with the short side of the required spaces. A sidewalk adjacent to the space may 
serve as the access aisle. 
 
(Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 7, 9-6-2005) 


Sec. 118-222. - Required number of bicycle parking spaces. 
(a) ?Bicycle parking shall be required for all new construction or when a change in use results in the 
requirement for additional off-street motor vehicle parking. 
(b) ?The minimum number of required off-street bicycle parking spaces is as follows: 
(1) ?Residential and lodging uses. 
(a) ?Detached, 2-unit multifamily, and townhouse residences: none. 
(b) ?Residences within transit oriented developments (TODs) and in mixed-use districts: 15% 
of motor vehicle parking requirements with a minimum of 1 space. 
(c) ?Multifamily residences neither in TODs nor in mixed-use districts and all other uses: 10% 
of motor vehicle parking requirements with a minimum of 1 space. 
(2) ?Schools, places of worship, institutions, auditoriums and other places of assembly. 
(a) ?Schools: 10% of the number of students. 
(b) ?All other uses: 5% of motor vehicle parking requirements, with a minimum of 1 space. 
(3) ?Arts, entertainment, and recreation uses. 10% of motor vehicle requirements, with a minimum 
of 10 spaces for games arcade establishments and 3 spaces for all other uses. 
(4) ?Office, retail, service, and industrial uses. 5% of motor vehicle parking requirements, with a 
minimum of 1 space. 
(5) ?Uses in B4 Regional Shopping district. 5% of motor vehicle parking requirements. 
(6) ?Uses with motor vehicle parking requirements determined by the Plan Commission. Bicycle 
parking requirements are determined by the Plan Commission. 
(c) ?Where the motor vehicle parking requirements are determined by the Plan Commission, the 
Commission shall also determine bicycle parking requirements. 
(d) ?The required bicycle parking spaces for a multi-tenant commercial or industrial development may be 
combined at one location on the site provided that the total number of spaces is not less than the 
required sum for the combined square footage of all of the tenants, and the location is within 200 feet 
of each tenant entrance. If space is not available on a site to provide the required number of bicycle 
parking spaces, the Director of Community Development or designee may determine that fewer or 
no spaces be provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-9-C-3383, § 8, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 14-6-C-
4064, § 1, 6-2-2014) 


Secs. 118-223—118-230. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XII. - LANDSCAPING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. V as Art. XII. 


Sec. 118-231. - Scope of article. 
    Landscaping shall be provided within a development and on public rights-of-way adjacent to a 
development as follows: 
(1) ?When any development of a parcel of land involves the construction of more than 1 detached, 
or 2-unit multifamily residence or any townhouse residence, multiple-family residence, 
congregate living facility, assisted-living facility, elderly and disabled housing, or skilled nursing 
facility. 
(2) ?When any nonresidential development of a parcel of land involves the construction of any new 
building(s) or structure(s) having a total floor area in excess of 500 square feet . 
(3) ?When the intensity of use of any existing building, structure or premises is increased through 
the addition of 1 or more residential units or the gross floor area of a building is increased, such 
as to require the construction of 1 or more additional off-street parking spaces to meet the 
parking requirement. 
(4) ?When any building or use is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause 
or is expanded or reconstructed in excess of 60 percent of the floor area of the structure. 
(5) ?When a special use permit is required or a variance is requested for a use other than a 
detached or 2-unit multifamily residence. 
(Zon. Ord., § 14.1; Ord. No. 01-10-Z-3034, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 03-11-Z-3222, § 2, 11-3-
2003; Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 5, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-232. - Parkway landscaping. 
(a) ?Trees and sod shall be planted in all parkways and shall be placed subject to the direction and 
approval of the Village. 
(b) ?Parkway trees shall be planted 30 feet apart whenever possible, and shall have a minimum trunk 
diameter of 2½ inches measured at a distance of 6 inches above ground level. 
(c) ?Trees able to withstand adverse environmental conditions and that are appropriate for planting 
along streets and parkways shall conform to the "Approved Species for Parkway Tree Planting" list, 
as approved by the Village Manager or designee and as may be amended from time to time. 
(d) ?All unpaved areas within the dedicated right-of-way shall be graded and sodded in an approved 
manner. Restoration work shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. 
(e) ?All trees shall be planted and parkways sodded in compliance with Chapter 90. 
(Zon. Ord., § 14.2; Ord. No. 03-11-Z-3222, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 5, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-233. - Private property landscaping. 
(a) ?Tree preservation for development activity. 
(1) ?[ Required. ] The preservation of trees is required for all public and private new construction, 
enlargement or expansion of buildings or structures and other increases in impermeable surface 
over 600 square feet in area in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2) ?Tree removal permit. Trees having a diameter of 8 inches or greater measured at 4.5 feet 
above the ground line, at construction sites described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, shall 
not be removed without first obtaining a tree removal permit. The only exception to this 
requirement shall be in emergency situations posing a threat to a person, property, or the 
community where such emergency renders compliance with the permit process unreasonable. 
The person removing the tree must contact the Community Development Department within 48 
hours of the removal of the tree. 
(3) ?[ Submissions. ] Prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or tree removal permit, a tree 
survey, final grading plan, and tree preservation plan shall be submitted to the Community 
Development Department for review and approval. 
a. ?Tree survey. The tree survey shall be indicated on a recent plat of survey, with land 
contours, and include the location and size of all trees 8 inches or greater in diameter. 
b. ?Final grading plan. The final grading plan shall integrate the existing trees on the tree 
survey to be preserved into the proposed development. If the Community Development 
Department determines that integration of trees into the final grading plan cannot be 
accomplished, the developer or property owner may remove the trees in dispute and 
replace the trees with new trees based upon the exchange rate set forth in subsection (5) 
of this section. 
c. ?Tree preservation plan. The tree preservation plan shall indicate the location and species of 
those trees to be preserved and the methods to be used to preserve such trees. This plan 
shall also indicate the protective fencing of trees, methods of protecting trees from 
construction activities, material storage, and the protection of trees and vegetation on 
adjacent property along the property line. The plan shall be in compliance with the Village 
of Skokie Standard Tree Protection Requirements for Construction Projects. 
(4) ?Removal of trees. 
a. ?Trees approved for removal for which a permit has been issued shall be removed prior to 
the implementation of the final grading plan. 
b. ?Removal of trees designated for preservation shall be allowed by amending the final 
grading plan with the approval of the Director of Community Development or designee. The 
amended plan shall indicate the location and size of all trees being removed and all 
replacement trees in accordance with the approval of the Director of Community 
Development or designee. 
c. ?Field adjustments to trees designated for preservation on the preservation plan may be 
necessary during the course of the construction. In such instances, the developer or 
property owner shall not remove any trees designated for preservation prior to site 
inspection and approval by the Director of Community Development or designee. 
Adjustments approved by the Director of Community Development or designee shall be 
reflected on the final grading plan. 
(5) ?Replacement of trees. 
a. ?The replacement of trees 8 inches or greater in diameter and trees designated for 
preservation shall be replaced with new trees from the approved list of trees by the Village 
Forester, each of which shall have a minimum diameter of 2.5 inches measured at a 
distance of 6 inches above ground level. Trees shall be replaced based on the Village of 
Skokie Parkway Tree Removal and Replacement Policy, as amended from time to time, 
within 6 months of the tree removal. These trees must be planted on site in accordance 
with an approved grading plan. If the Director of Community Development or designee 
determines that adequate or suitable space is not available on site for the replacement 
trees the developer shall pay into a tree fund for the trees, based on the Village of Skokie 
Parkway Tree Removal and Replacement Policy. 
b. ?Any relocated or replaced trees shall be guaranteed survival for up to one growing season. 
In the event that a relocated or replaced tree dies or is in declining condition, the tree shall 
be replaced with a new 2.5-inch diameter tree. 
(b) ?Any development subject to the provisions of this chapter shall provide a landscape plan to be 
approved by Village Manager or designee and the Village Appearance Commission. The landscape 
plan shall include existing and proposed plantings, including species, spacing, quantity, and size, 
areas to be sodded, and locations and specifications of other materials. The landscape plan shall 
address all requirements of this chapter. 
(c) ?Maximum feasible (live) landscaping shall be provided. 
(1) ?For existing developments, landscaping shall be provided at parking lots between the property 
line and the continuous curbing adjacent to street frontages. 
(2) ?For new developments, additions and uses requiring a special use permit, landscaping shall be 
provided along street frontages, along the perimeter and interior of parking lot areas, and 
adjacent to buildings and other areas of the site not dedicated to parking, drives, sidewalks or 
other improvements. 
(d) ?All unpaved areas not planted by trees, shrubs, ground cover, etc., shall be sodded. Grass seeding 
shall not be allowed. 
(e) ?New parking lots and improved existing commercial lots shall provide, at a minimum, 1 tree within 
the interior of the parking area for every 15 parking spaces. Open sales lots and storage lots shall be 
exempt from this landscaping requirement. Trees to be used in the interior portions of parking areas 
shall be limited to those on the "Approved Species for Parking Lot Tree Planting" list, approved by 
the Village Manager or designee as may be amended from time to time. All trees shall have a 
minimum trunk diameter of 2.5 inches measured at a distance of 6 inches above ground level. 
(f) ?Trees, shrubs, ground cover and other plants selected for planting at a site shall be acclimated to 
Northern Illinois. 
(g) ?Planting used for screening shall be a combination of tall, low and wide shrubbery. 
(h) ?Earth berms banked on both sides, or with 1 side banked toward the yard boundary line and a 
retaining wall, shall have a maximum side slope ratio of 3 to 1 for ease of maintenance. The 
embankment ratio shall be indicated on the required landscape plan. 
(i) ?Perimeter curbing, landscaping timbers, railroad ties, etc., shall be used to delineate and protect 
landscaped areas from motor vehicles. 
(Zon. Ord., § 14.3; Ord. No. 03-11-Z-3222, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 5, 10-
7-2013) 


Sec. 118-234. - Maintenance. 
(a) ?All landscaping on public or private property that is part of an approved development plan shall be 
properly maintained, by the owner of the development, in a vigorous growing condition. Any 
landscaping which has been permitted to deteriorate shall be replaced. 
(b) ?All shrubbery, trees, plants or vegetation within a 10-foot sight distance triangle in R1, R2, R3, and 
R4 districts, or within a 15-foot sight distance triangle in all other districts, shall not exceed 30 inches 
in height. 
(c) ?Shrubbery planted in such a manner as to create a continuous barrier along a street frontage of a 
property shall not exceed 4 feet in height, except in mixed-use, business, and industrial districts 
where the purpose of the landscaping is to screen outdoor storage or along the side or rear yards of 
residential property. 
(d) ?The entire site must be free of weeds, including areas behind required screening and along fences. 
(e) ?The property owner shall sign an agreement for installation and maintenance of landscaping with 
the Village. This agreement recognizes that the installation and maintenance of landscaping is an 
integral part of the property owner's plan for the development and/or use of the property and is 
necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the Village's land use objectives, and that the 
permits would not have been approved by the Village without the assurance that this agreement 
would be executed by the property owner. The purpose of this agreement is to ensure installation of 
the landscaping in accordance with the landscaping plan approved by the Village, and continued 
maintenance and care of the landscaping, including any landscaping indicated in the parkway. 
(Zon. Ord., § 14.4; Ord. No. 08-6-C-3621, § 1, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; 
Ord. No. 11-3-C-3823, § 1, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 5, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-235. - Relief. 
    When the landscaping required pursuant to this article for an existing development will interfere with 
required off-street parking, loading, driveway or aisle facilities, or the site is dimensionally deficient to 
provide landscaping pursuant to this article, the Director of Community Development and the Director of 
Engineering may require alternate landscaping requirements. 
(Zon. Ord., § 14.5; Ord. No. 03-11-Z-3222, § 2, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 5, 10-7-
2013) 


Secs. 118-236—118-250. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XIII. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, LOTS, AND USES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. VI as Art. XIII. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 


Sec. 118-251. - Continuance. 
    Except as otherwise required by law, a structure or use legally established may be continued 
unchanged. The owner, occupant, or user shall have the burden to show that the structure, lot, or use 
was lawfully established. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 6, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-252. - Discontinuance. 
(a) ?Vacancy. Any lot or structure, or portion thereof, occupied by a nonconforming use with a valid 
certificate of occupancy, which becomes vacant for a period of 6 consecutive months, must be re-
occupied by a conforming use in compliance with this chapter. Any nonconforming use without a 
valid certificate of occupancy is prohibited to be reestablished upon vacancy. 
(b) ?Damage. If any nonconforming structure or use is, by any cause, damaged to the extent of 50% of 
its value immediately prior to the event as determined by the Zoning Official, it shall only be 
reconstructed in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 6, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-253. - Enlargements and modifications. 
(a) ?Maintenance and repair. Maintenance, repairs, and alterations to structures shall be permitted to 
nonconforming structures or to a building housing a nonconforming use with valid permits. 
(b) ?Changes to a nonconforming use. A change in use from a nonconforming use must only be made 
into a conforming use and cannot be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(c) ?Additions. All additions to nonconforming structures and parking areas shall conform to the 
requirements of this chapter. Additions to structures housing nonconforming uses that increase the 
nonconforming use shall not be made. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 6, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-254. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a) ?No lot of record may be improved unless it is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, 
except that a lot of record in a residential district that does not meet the requirements of this chapter 
as to area or lot width may nonetheless be improved for a detached residence in the district, 
provided that it shall meet all the other requirements of this chapter. 
(b) ?Where 2 or more abutting lots shown in a plat properly recorded with the office of the County 
Recorder are held or become held in common legal or equitable ownership at any time subsequent 
to March 2, 1965, and the use of such abutting lots as separate parcels would not meet the 
requirements of this chapter, the ownership of the lots shall not be separated nor shall any of the lots 
be used in any way to conflict with the regulations of this chapter. No building permits shall be issued 
for the use of any lot or portion of lot sold, transferred or conveyed in violation of the provisions of 
this section; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the dividing of presently existing 
townhouses and multifamily residences into separate ownership units. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 6, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-255. - Relief. 
(a) ?Relief from the provisions of this article may be granted by the Village Board to continue the use of 
nonconforming buildings, structures or uses, after consideration of the following factors: 
(1) ?The condition of the building or structure; 
(2) ?Improvements made to the original building or structure; 
(3) ?The nature of the nonconforming use; 
(4) ?Compatibility of the use and/or the building or structure with the neighborhood in which it is 
located. 
(b) ?Upon a finding that relief is justified, the property owner shall enter into a covenant or agreement 
with the Village for the continuation of the nonconforming building, structure or use. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 6, 10-7-2013) 


Secs. 118-256—118-270. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE XIV. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, adopted April 15, 2019, renumbered Art. VII as Art. XIV. 


Sec. 118-271. - General. 
(a) ?Approval. Planned developments (PDs) are allowed with site plan approval in all zoning districts. No 
PD shall be granted unless it conforms to the use limitations, densities, bulk regulations, and design 
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, except as those requirements may be lawfully 
modified as allowed by this chapter. Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no way 
excuses the developer from the applicable requirements of the subdivision chapter of this code, 
unless those modifications are specifically authorized in the approval of the PD. 
(b) ?Intent. These regulations are to encourage and provide means to promote desirable and quality 
development by permitting greater flexibility and design freedom than is permitted under the basic 
district regulations and to accomplish a well-balanced, aesthetically-satisfying, and economically-
desirable development of building sites within a PD. These regulations are established to permit 
latitude in the development of the building site if such development is found to be in accordance with 
the purpose, spirit, and intent of this chapter and is found not to be hazardous, harmful, offensive, or 
otherwise adverse to the environment, property values, or the character of the neighborhood or the 
health, safety and welfare of the community. It is intended to permit and encourage diversification 
and imagination in the relationship of uses, structures, open spaces, and bulk requirements for 
developments conceived and implemented as comprehensive and cohesive unified projects. It is 
further intended to encourage more rational development with relationship to public services, 
preservation of open lands, and storm water management. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 7, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-272. - Conditions. 
(a) ?Exceptions to use. A PD may only contain allowable uses listed in Appendix A of this chapter for the 
zoning district in which it is located, except as listed in this section with a special use permit for the 
additional uses and based on findings of fact for a special use permit. 
(1) ?Sites in multiple districts. If a site is located in more than 1 zoning district, the uses applicable 
to such property in 1 district may be extended into the adjacent district as part of the special use 
permit. 
(2) ?Proportionate exception. Up to 20% of the ground floor area or 20% of the gross floor area of 
the PD may be devoted to additional uses listed in Appendix A. 
(b) ?Ownership. The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time of application, or 
the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of the property. 
(c) ?Design. The Commission shall require such arrangements of structures and open spaces within the 
site development plan as necessary to ensure that adjacent properties will not be adversely affected. 
(1) ?Density. When units per acre requirements exist, the number of units per acre may be 
increased in no case higher than 9.6 in R1, 12.1 in R2, 23.2 in R3 and, 24.8 in R4. 
(2) ?Floor area ratio (FAR). When FARs requirements exist, the FAR may be increased in no case 
higher than what may be allowed in the zoning district with site plan approval, except for 
demonstration projects in (6). 
(3) ?Arrangement. Where feasible, the height and density of buildings and uses shall be arranged in 
a way that is complementary with the regulations of adjacent and abutting districts. 
(4) ?Specific regulations. The area of lots, lot width, required yards, and coverage regulations shall 
be determined by site plan approval. 
(5) ?Specific design requirements. Additional relief may be granted from design requirements only 
when such relief is consistent with the purpose of the district and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(6) ?Demonstration projects. Relief may be granted from FAR and height requirements beyond the 
maximum allowed in the zoning district. The calculation of the FAR may also be reduced by the 
floor area of the parking spaces that are required for residence uses and adjacent driveways 
that would otherwise be calculated in the FAR. 
(d) ?Open spaces. Preservation, maintenance, and ownership of required open spaces within the PD 
shall be accomplished by either: 
(1) ?A dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system, or 
(2) ?Creating a permanent open space easement on and over the said private open spaces to 
guarantee that the open space remain perpetually in recreational use, with ownership and 
maintenance being the responsibility of an owners' association established with articles of 
association and bylaws, which are satisfactory to the Village Board. 
(e) ?Landscaping. Landscaping, fencing, screening, grading, and drainage related to the uses within the 
site and as a means of integrating the proposed PD into its surroundings must planned and 
presented to the Commission for approval, together with other required plans for the PD. 
    A planting plan showing proposed trees, shrubs, and other perennial plantings shall be prepared for 
the entire site to be developed. 
(f) ?Signs. If relief is requested from the Signs chapter, the size, location, design and nature of signs 
relevant to the relief detailed in the application must be presented to the Commission for approval. 
(g) ?Additional findings of fact. In addition to the findings of fact for site plan approval, the Commission 
must make the following findings for PDs: 
(1) ?The proposed use of the particular site, including any exceptions to use, shall be shown as 
necessary or desirable to provide a service, amenity, or facility that will contribute to the general 
well-being of the surrounding area. 
(2) ?Under the circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use will not be detrimental to the 
health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing within or in the vicinity of the PD. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 7, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 16-8-C-4241, § 1, 8-1-2016) 


Sec. 118-273. - Intent and authorization to make requirements. 
(a) ?Professional expertise. Site and building plans for a PD must be prepared by a designer or team of 
designers having professional competence in urban planning, architecture, landscape architecture, 
and engineering, as proposed in the application. The Commission shall be permitted to require the 
applicant to engage additional professional expertise if it deems the application team is lacking such 
services. 
(b) ?Design. It is the intent of this section that the design control exercised be the minimum necessary to 
achieve the purpose of this section. 
(c) ?Conditions. The Commission is authorized to recommend approval or disapproval of an application 
for a PD and to attach any conditions it deems necessary to secure compliance with the purposes 
set forth in this chapter. 
(d) ?Contributions. The Village Board, as part of the approval of a PD, is permitted to require an 
applicant to make reasonable contributions , including, but not limited to, any combination of the 
following: 
(1) ?Dedication of land for public park purposes. 
(2) ?Dedication of land for public school purposes. 
(3) ?Dedication of land for public right-of-way purposes. 
(4) ?Construction of, or addition to, roads serving the proposed project when such construction or 
addition is reasonably related to the traffic to be generated. 
(5) ?Installation and maintenance costs of required traffic safety devices. 
(6) ?Installation of lighting, landscaping, sidewalks, and bus shelters on public right-of-way and 
private property. 
(7) ?Preservation of areas containing significant natural, environmental, historic, archeological or 
similar resources. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 7, 10-7-2013) 


Sec. 118-274. - Commission action. 
(a) ?Approval. The Commission has the authority to require that the following conditions for a PD 
(among others it deems appropriate) be met by the applicant: 
(1) ?That the applicants intend to start construction within 1 year of either the approval of the project 
or of any necessary zoning district change, and intend to complete said construction, or 
approved stages thereof, within 4 years from the date construction begins. 
(2) ?That the PD is planned as 1 complex land use rather than as an aggregation of individual and 
unrelated buildings and uses. 
(b) ?Limitations on application. 
(1) ?Upon approval of a PD by the Village Board, construction must proceed only in accordance 
with the approved ordinance. 
(2) ?An amendment to approved plans and specifications for a PD must be obtained only by 
following the procedures in this chapter. 
(3) ?The Zoning Official is only authorized to issue a permit for a proposed building, structure, or 
use within the PD if such building, structure, or use is in accordance with the approved site plan 
and with any ordinance conditions imposed in conjunction with its approval. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 7, 10-7-2013) 


Secs. 118-275—118-280. - Reserved. 


APPENDIX A. - USE TABLE 
P: 
Permitted use 
S: 
Special use 
A: 
Accessory use 
R: 
Restricted in the district regulations or referenced sections 
 

Residential 
Mixed-Use 
Business 
Industrial 
USE 
R1 
R2 
R3 
R4 
R5 
NX 
TX 
CX 
retail 
street 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B6 
H1 
M1 
M2 
M3 
OR 
RESIDENCE OR 
ACCOMMODATION 



















? Private Households 



















??Residence, detached 
P 
P 
P 
S 















??Residence, 
townhouse 
S 
S 
P 
P 


R 
R 











??Residence, 2-unit 
multifamily 


P 
P 















??Residence, 3- or 
more unit multifamily 


S 
P 


P 
P 










R 
??Residence, 3- or 
more unit multifamily, 
north of Jarvis Avenue, 
subject to § 118-144 











R 







??Residence, funeral 
home 





S 
S 
S 


S 
S 







??Residence, upper-
story over 
nonresidential use 





P 
P 
P 











? Housing Services of 
the Elderly or Disabled 



















??Assisted-living 
facility, subject to § 
118-96 



S 

S 
S 
S 


S 
S 


S 




??Congregate living 
facility, subject to § 
118-95 
R 
R 
R 
R 

R 
R 
R 











??Elderly and disabled 
housing, with site plan 
approval 




P 
P 
P 
P 











??Skilled nursing 
facility 



S 


S 
S 


S 
S 


S 




? Hotels, and Other 
Accommodation 
Services 



















??Dormitory 
A 
A 
A 
A 

S 
S 
S 











??Hotel 





S 
S 
S 
R 

S 
S 
P 





P 
GENERAL SALES OR 
SERVICES 



















? Retail Sales or Service 



















??Automobile sales or 
service establishment, 
subject to § 118-92: 



















???Car dealer and 
marine craft dealer 











P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Large vehicle 
dealer 















S 
S 
S 

???Motorbike, ATV, 
and other similar 
vehicle dealer 





P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Motor vehicle parts 
and accessories store 





P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
P 
P 







???Automotive fuel 
station 





S 
S 



S 
S 





S 

???Automotive repair 
facility 





R 
R 



R 
R 
R 


R 
R 
R 

???Hand car wash 





S 
S 



S 
S 
S 


S 
S 
S 

???Car wash 











S 



S 
S 
S 

???Parking, as a 
principal use 



P 
P 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

??Heavy consumer 
goods sales or service: 



















???Construction 
material sales center 















P 
P 
P 

???Department store, 
warehouse club, or 
superstore 





P 
P 
P 
R 

P 
P 
P 






???Electronics and 
appliances repair or 
service 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Electronics and 
appliances sales 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Furniture or home 
furnishings 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Hardware stores 
and locksmith shops 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Heating and 
plumbing equipment 















P 
P 
P 

???Lawn and garden 
supplies 





P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Paint and 
wallpaper store 





P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 






??Durable consumer 
goods sales and 
service: 



















???Book, magazine, 
music, or stationery 
store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 



R 
???Camera and 
photographic supplies 
store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Clothing, jewelry, 
luggage, shoes, etc. 
store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Computer and 
software store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Sporting goods, toy 
and hobby, and 
musical instruments 
store, except firearms 
seller 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






??Other consumer 
goods: 



















???Antique and thrift 
shop 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Art dealer, 
supplies, sales, and 
service 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Auction house 





S 
S 
S 


S 
S 







???Collector's items 
shop 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Florist 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 





R 
???Mail order or direct 
selling establishment 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
???Monument dealer 









S 
S 
S 



P 
P 
P 

???Tobacco or 
tobacconist 
establishment 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






??Food 
establishments, 
subject to § 118-93: 



















???Beer, wine, and 
liquor store (package 
only) 





S 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 






???Convenience store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 




R 
???Farmers market as 
permitted by Chapter 
26, Article XIII 







P 











???Fruit and vegetable 
store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 







???Grocery store, 
supermarket, or 
bakery 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Specialty food 
store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






??Health and personal 
care: 



















???Pharmacy or drug 
store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 



R 
???Cosmetic and 
beauty supplies store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Optical store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 



R 
???Other medical 
supplies store 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 



R 
???Medical cannabis 
dispensing 
organization, subject 
to § 54-283 
















S 
S 

? Finance and 
Insurance 



















??Bank, credit union, 
or other savings 
institution, including 
currency exchanges 





P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 


S 
S 
S 

??Financial 
institutions, except 
banks, credit unions, 
other savings 
institutions, or loan 
offices 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
??Loan offices 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 






? Real Estate and 
Leasing 



















??Real estate services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
??Property 
management services: 



















???Commercial 
property management 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Rental housing 
management 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
??Rental and leasing: 



















???Automobile rental, 
subject to § 118-92 











S 
S 


S 
S 
S 

???Recreational goods 
rental 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Leasing or 
commercial or 
industrial machinery or 
equipment 















P 
P 
P 

???Consumer goods 
rental 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Video, music, 
software, and other 
intellectual property 
rental 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






? Business, 
Professional, Scientific, 
and Technical Services 



















??Professional 
services: 



















???Accounting, tax 
bookkeeping, and 
payroll services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Advertising, media, 
and photography 
services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Architectural, 
engineering, and 
related services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Consulting services 
(management, 
environmental, etc.) 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Graphic, industrial, 
interior design services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Legal services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Research and 
development services 
(scientific, etc.)-
including limited 
research-related 
production 













P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
???Veterinary services 





S 
P 
P 

S 
S 
P 
P 



S 


??Administrative 
services: 



















???Office and 
administrative services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
R 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Facilities support 
services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Employment 
agency 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 






???Business support 
services 





P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
R 
???Electronic 
answering services, 
collections, or 
telemarketing 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
???Travel arrangement 
and reservation 
services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






???Investigation and 
security services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
??Services to buildings 
and dwellings: 



















???Carpet and 
upholstery cleaning 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Extermination and 
pest control 





P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 



P 
P 
P 

???Janitorial services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

???Landscaping 
services 





P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 



P 
P 
P 

???Packing, crating, 
and convention trade 
show services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
R 

P 
P 
P 

???Other services to 
buildings and dwellings 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

? Food Services, 
subject to § 118-93 



















??Bar or drinking place 





S 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 





R 
??Caterer 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 

??Brew pub 





S 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 





R 
??Restaurant, carryout 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


S 


R 
??Restaurant, full 
service 





P 
P 
P 
P 
S 
P 
P 
P 


S 


R 
??Restaurant, limited 
service—without drive-
through (except 
carryout restaurant) 





P 
P 
P 
P 
S 
P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
S 


R 
??Restaurant, limited 
service—with drive-
through (except 
carryout restaurants) 










S 
S 



S 



??Tap room 





S 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 


S 
S 
S 
R 
? Personal Services 



















??Barbershops, beauty 
parlors, or similar 
personal services 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 





R 
??Dry cleaning and 
laundry establishments 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 





R 
??Dry cleaning and 
laundry plant 















P 
P 
P 

??Laundromat 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






??Massage therapy 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 





R 
??Tattoo parlor 






S 
S 



S 







? Pet and Animal Sales 
and Services 



















??Animal shelters, 
subject to § 118-97 






S 












??Pet sales 





P 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 






??Pet services (except 
kennels) 





P 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 






??Pet services (except 
kennels)-dog day care 
only 










S 
P 
P 



S 


??Pet supplies sales 





P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 






??Taxidermist 










P 
P 
P 






??Veterinary services 
(see professional 
services) 



















? Other Retail 



















??Limited retail uses, 
subject to § 118-
171(1)f 















S 
S 
S 

MANUFACTURING 
AND WHOLESALE 
TRADE 



















? Food, Textiles, and 
Related Products 



















??Food and beverages: 



















???Alcoholic beverage 
production 















P 
P 
P 

???Microbrewery, 
microdistillery, and 
micro-winery 





S 
P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 





R 
???All other food and 
beverage 
manufacturing 















P 
P 
P 

??Textiles 





R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 


P 
P 
P 

??Leather and allied 
products, except 
tanning and curing 















P 
P 
P 

? Wood, Paper, and 
Printing Products 



















??Wood products 
establishment, except 
furniture, veneers, 
plywood, paper, pulp 
or paperboard 
products, and other 
laminated wood 
products 















P 
P 
P 

??Printing materials 















P 
P 
P 

??Furniture and 
related products 















P 
P 
P 

? Chemicals, and 
Metals, Machinery, 
and Electronics 
Manufacturing 



















??Chemicals, plastics 
and rubber products, 
except rubber 
production 













S 


P 
P 

??Nonmetallic mineral 
products, except 
mining 
















P 
P 

??Primary metal 
manufacturing 















R 
P 
P 

??Machinery 
manufacturing 
















P 
P 

??Electrical 
equipment, appliance, 
and component 
manufacturing 















P 
P 
P 

??Transportation 
equipment 















R 
P 
P 

? Miscellaneous 
Manufacturing 



















??Jewelry and 
silverware 





R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 


P 
P 
P 

??Dolls, toys, games, 
and musical 
instruments 















P 
P 
P 

??Office supplies, inks, 
etc., except paper 















P 
P 
P 

??Signs 





P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 



P 
P 
P 

??Dental laboratories 





R 
R 
R 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 

??Miscellaneous 
manufacturing, not 
otherwise listed 















R 
R 
R 

? Wholesale Trade 
Establishment 



















??Wholesale trade 
establishments 















P 
P 
P 

? Warehouse and 
Storage Services 



















Conventional 
warehouse 















P 
P 
P 

??Self-service storage 
facility 















S 
S 
S 

TRANSPORTATION, 
COMMUNICATIONS, 
INFORMATION, AND 
UTILITIES 



















? Transportation 
Services 



















??Helipad, medical 














P 




??Road, ground, 
passenger, and transit 
transportation 



















???Local transit 
systems 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
???Interurban and 
charter bus 
establishments 






S 
S 







S 
P 
P 

???School and 
employee bus 
transportation 















S 
S 
S 

???Taxi and limousine 
service 















P 
P 
P 

??Truck and freight 
transportation services 















S 
S 
P 

??Courier and 
messenger services 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 






??Postal services (U.S. 
Post Offices) 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






? Communications and 
Information 



















??Publishing: 



















???Newspaper, books, 
periodicals, etc., 
except printing 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
???Software 
publishing 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
??Motion pictures and 
sound recording: 



















???Motion picture and 
video production, 
publishing, and 
distribution 
establishments 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






???Motion picture 
viewing and exhibition 
services (includes 
movie theaters) 






S 
S 
R 

S 
S 
S 






???Sound recording, 
production, publishing, 
and distribution 
establishments 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 



??Information services 
and data processing 
industries: 



















???Computer services 
establishments 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 






???Libraries and 
archives 
S 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 





???Newspaper 
syndicate 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






???Online information 
services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
? Utilities and Utility 
Services 



















??Antennas, non-
public utility or non-
government 















S 
P 
P 

??Antennas, public 
utility or government 
S 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 
P 
S 
S 
S 
S 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

??Construction and 
demolition debris 
recycling facility—not 
within 500 feet of 
residentially used 
property, an arterial, 
or the Edens 
Expressway 
















S 
S 

??Natural gas, 
petroleum, fuels, etc. 
distribution 















S 
S 
S 

??Public utility 
distribution facility 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 


S 
S 
S 

P 

P 
P 
P 

??Public works facility 















P 
P 
P 

??Sewage treatment 
plants and lift stations 















S 
S 
P 

??Storm water 
detention facilities 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
??Water works 















P 
P 
P 

ARTS, 
ENTERTAINMENT, AND 
RECREATION 



















??Bowling, billiards, 
pool halls, etc. 





S 
P 
P 
R 

S 
S 
P 






??Firearms range, 
subject to Chapter 70, 
Article V, Division 2 

















S 

??Games arcade 
establishment 





S 
S 
S 
S 


S 
P 






??Golf course 
S 
S 
S 
S 















??Health and fitness 
centers 





S 
S 
P 
R 

S 
S 
P 





P 
??Museums 
S 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 
R 
S 
P 
P 
P 





P 
??Park 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
??Public recreation 
facility 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
S 
S 
S 

??Recreation facility: 
dance halls, 
racquetball, handball, 
and tennis courts 










S 
S 
P 






??Skating rinks, roller 
rinks, etc. 






S 



S 
S 
P 






??Theater, dance, or 
music establishment 






S 
S 
R 

S 
S 
S 






EDUCATION, PUBLIC 
ADMINISTRATION, 
HEALTH CARE, & 
OTHER INSTITUTIONS 



















? Educational Services 



















??Grade schools: 



















???Alternative 
education 











P 







???Elementary 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 







???Middle and junior 
high 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 







???Senior high 
P 
P 
P 
P 















???Colleges and 
universities 
S 
S 
S 
S 


P 
P 
R 
S 
P 
P 

P 

P 


P 
??Technical and trade: 



















???Driving education 





S 
S 



S 
S 







???Fine and 
performing arts 
education 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






???Sports and 
recreation education 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






???Other technical, 
trade, and specialty 
school 






P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
S 

P 
P 
S 

? Public Administration 



















??Legislative and 
executive functions 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
??Courts 







P 










P 
? Public Safety Uses 



















??Emergency response 














P 
P 
P 
P 

??Fire and rescue 
S 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
??Police 
S 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
? Health and Human 
Services 



















??Ambulatory or 
outpatient care: 



















???Clinics and 
outpatient care 
centers 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
S 
P 



P 
???Medical and 
diagnostic laboratories 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
???Blood and organ 
banks 





P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
P 



P 
???Home hospice and 
home health care 
agencies 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
???Hospital 














P 




??Social assistance, 
welfare, and charitable 
services: 



















???Child and youth 
services 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 



P 
???Child day care in a 
residence, subject to § 
118-94 
R 
R 
R 
R 

R 
R 
R 

R 
R 
R 






R 
???Child day care not 
in a residence, subject 
to § 118-94 
R 
R 
R 
R 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
P 
P 
P 
S 
S 
S 
R 
???Community food 
services 
S 
S 
S 
S 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 




???Services to the 
elderly and disabled, 
except primarily office 
uses 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 


P 




???Services to the 
elderly and disabled, 
primarily office uses 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 



P 
? Religious Institutions 



















??Convents and 
monasteries 
S 
S 
S 
S 















??Religious assembly 
P 
P 
P 
P 

S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 







? Death Care Services 



















??Funeral homes and 
services 






S 
S 
R 

S 
S 







??Cemeteries 
S 
S 
S 
S 



S 











??Cremation services 















S 
S 
S 

??Mortuary, not 
associated with a 
funeral home 














P 

P 
P 

? Associations, Non-
Profit Organizations, 
etc. 



















??Business 
associations and 
professional 
membership 
organizations 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
??Civic, social, and 
fraternal organizations 





S 
S 
S 


S 
S 







??Labor and political 
organizations 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 






CONSTRUCTION-
RELATED BUSINESSES 



















? Building, developing, 
and general 
contracting 
(office uses only) 



















??Industrial, 
commercial, and 
institutional building 
construction 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
??Land development 
and subdivision 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
??Residential 
construction 
S 
S 
S 
S 

P 
P 
P 
R 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
P 
P 
P 
? Other construction 
related businesses 



















??Heavy construction 
business 





P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 



P 
P 
P 

??Machinery related 
contractor 















P 
P 
P 

??Special trades 
contractors 





P 
P 
P 

S 
P 
P 



P 
P 
P 

AGRICULTURE, 
FORESTRY, FISHING, 
AND  
HUNTING 



















? Crop Production 



















??Greenhouse, 
nursery, and 
floriculture: 



















???Floriculture 
production 






S 
S 





P 





???Food crops grown 
under cover 






S 
S 





P 





???Medical cannabis 
cultivation center 

















S 

HYBRID AND OTHER 
USES 



















??Adult uses, subject 
to § 118-90 







S 



S 







??Agricultural research 
and education 

















S 

??Drive-through 
facilities, except 
restaurant uses as 
listed in this table and 
those uses that 
specifically prohibit 
such facilities 





S 
S 
S 
R 

S 
S 
S 






??Junk yards—not 
within 500 feet of 
residentially used 
property, an arterial, 
or the Edens 
Expressway 
















S 
S 

??Office, not 
otherwise listed 





P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
R 

P 
P 
P 
P 
??Public assembly 
uses, not otherwise 
listed: 



















???Convention and 
exhibition halls 







S 
R 

S 
P 
P 






???Meeting halls 






S 
S 


S 
S 
S 






??Retail planned 
development, subject 
to § 118-171(1)g. 















S 
S 
S 

??Road materials 
recycling 

















S 

??Transit oriented 
developments 











P 







 
(Ord. No. 03-6-Z-3187, app. A, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 03-10-Z-3212, § 2, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 
04-1-Z-3244, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. No. 05-8-C-3375, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 05-11-C-3400, § 1, 
11-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-1-C-3409, § 1, 1-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-3-C-3422, § 4, 3-6-2006; Ord. 
No. 06-4-C-3429, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-4-C-3431, § 1, 4-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-06-C-
3446, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 07-1-C-3483, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 07-3-C-3491, § 1, 3-5-
2007; Ord. No. 07-3-C-3492, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 07-4-C-3499, § 1, 4-4-2007; Ord. No. 07-
12-C-3566, § 1, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 08-2-C-3600, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 08-3-C-3604, § 1, 
3-17-2008; Ord. No. 08-11-C-3649, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 09-1-C-3657, § 2, 1-5-2009; Ord. 
No. 09-1-C-3659, § 1, 1-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-3-C-3669, § 1, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3687, 
§ 2, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 09-7-C-3690, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 09-8-C-3700, § 1, 8-17-2009; 
Ord. No. 10-2-C-3734, § 2, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 10-2-C-3736, § 3, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 11-3-C-
3823, § 2, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 12-2-C-3885, § 1, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-6-C-3906, § 1, 6-4-2012; 
Ord. No. 13-10-C-4010, § 8, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 14-2-C-4036, § 3, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 14-6-
C-4064, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-6-C-4065, § 1, 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 14-12-C-4108, § 1, 12-1-
2014; Ord. No. 15-5-C-4142, § 5, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 16-10-C-4250, § 3, 10-6-2016; Ord. No. 
17-7-C-4304, § 1, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. 18-3-C-4364, § 1, 3-5-2018; Ord. No. 18-8-C-4404, § 3, 
8-6-2018; Ord. No. 18-10-C-4416, § 4, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 18-12-C-4422, § 1, 12-3-2018; 
Ord. No. 19-4-C-4451, § 1, 4-15-2019) 


ZONING CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Chapter of those sections of the original Zoning Code, as 
updated through 1999, which are included herein. Sections of the Zoning Code, as supplemented, 
not listed herein have been omitted as repealed or superseded. For the location of ordinances 
adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Zon
ing 
Cod
e  
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cha
pte
r 
art. 
1 
118
-1 
art. 
2 
118
-2 
3.1, 
3.2 
118
-3, 
118
-4 
4.1 
118
-5 
5.1, 
5.2 
118
-6, 
118
-7 
6.1
—
6.5 
118
-
61
—
118
-65 
7.1
—
7.2
0 
118
-
66
—
118
-85 
8.1
—
8.5 
118
-
111
—  
118
-
115 
9.1
—
9.7 
118
-
141
—  
118
-
147 
10.
1—
10.
5 
118
-
171
—  
118
-
175 
11.
1 
118
-
201 
11.
2—
11.
4 
118
-
203
—  
118
-
205 
11.
8—
11.
13 
118
-
209
—  
118
-
214 
11.
15 
118
-
215 
11.
16 
118
-
202 
11.
17
—
11.
21 
118
-
216
—  
118
-
220 
12.
1—
12.
5 
118
-
251
—  
118
-
255 
13.
1—
13.
4 
118
-
31
—  
118
-34 
14.
1—
14.
5 
118
-
281
—  
118
-
285 
 


ZONING CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Chapter of those ordinances adopted since the Zoning 
Code, as updated through 1999, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such 
date were incorporated into the Zoning Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since 1999, 
not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed or superseded. 
Ord
ina
nce  
Nu
mb
er 
?
Dat
e 
Sec
tion 
?
Sec
tion  
this 
Cod
e 
00-
4-Z-
288
6 
?4-?
3-
200
0 
1 
118
-
212 
00-
6-Z-
289
7 
?6-
19-
200
0 
1—
4 
118
-
111
—  
118
-
114 


6 
118
-
142 
00-
6-Z-
289
8 
?6-
19-
200
0 
1 
118
-
218 
00-
7-Z-
290
1 
?7-?
5-
200
0 
1 
118
-75 


2 
118
-80 


3 
118
-32 
00-
7-Z-
290
2 
?7-?
5-
200
0 
1 
118
-5 


2—
4 
118
-
172
—
118
-
174 
00-
7-Z-
290
3 
?7-?
5-
200
0 
1 
118
-62 
00-
7-Z-
290
8 
?7-
17-
200
0 
1, 2 
118
-
111
,  
118
-
112 


3 
118
-
114 
00-
8-Z-
291
2 
?8-?
7-
200
0 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-
144 


3 
118
-
218 
00-
9-Z-
292
8 
?9-
18-
200
0 
1 
118
-
175 
00-
9-Z-
293
1 
?9-
18-
200
0 
1 
118
-
175 
00-
11-
Z-
294
8 
11-?
6-
200
0 
1 
118
-82 
00-
11-
Z-
295
2 
11-
20-
200
0 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-
143
—  
118
-
146 


3 
118
-
171
—  
118
-
174 


4 
118
-
218 
00-
12-
Z-
295
4 
12-?
4-
200
0 
1 
118
-86 


2—
5 
118
-
111
—  
118
-
114 
00-
12-
Z-
296
1 
12-
18-
200
0 
1 
118
-85 
01-
1-Z-
296
7 
?1-?
2-
200
1 
1 
118
-
218 
01-
3-Z-
297
7 
?3-
19-
200
1 
1 
118
-5 


2—
6 
118
-
142
—  
118
-
146 


7 
118
-
172
,  
118
-
173 


8 
118
-
174 


9 
118
-
218 
01-
6-Z-
298
7 
?6-?
4-
200
1 
1 
118
-
212 
01-
6-Z-
298
8 
?6-?
4-
200
1 
1 
118
-73 
01-
6-Z-
299
3 
?6-
18-
200
1 
1 
118
-77 


2—
5 
118
-
111
—  
118
-
114 
01-
8-Z-
302
0 
?8-?
6-
200
1 
1 
118
-
145 
01-
8-Z-
302
1 
?8-?
6-
200
1 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-73 



118
-75 



118
-82 



118
-87 


3 
118
-
114 


4 
118
-
142
—  
118
-
147 


5 
118
-
172
—  
118
-
174 


6 
118
-
217
,  
118
-
218 
01-
9-Z-
302
4 
?9-?
4-
200
1 
1 
118
-
143
,  
118
-
144 



118
-
146 
01-
9-Z-
302
8 
?9-
20-
200
1 
1 
118
-
171 


2 
118
-
212 
01-
10-
Z-
303
4 
10-?
1-
200
1 
1 
118
-5 



118
-31 



118
-61 



118
-68 



118
-70 



118
-72, 
118
-73 



118
-
75
—
118
-81 



118
-83 



118
-88, 
118
-89 



118
-
111
—  
118
-
115 



118
-
141
—  
118
-
144 



118
-
146
,  
118
-
147 



118
-
171 



118
-
173 



118
-
201 



118
-
212 



118
-
217
,  
118
-
218 



118
-
220 



118
-
254 



118
-
281 
01-
12-
Z-
305
1 
12-
17-
200
1 
1 
118
-33 
01-
12-
Z-
305
2 
12-
17-
200
1 
1—
4 
118
-
172
—  
118
-
175 
01-
12-
Z-
305
3 
12-
17-
200
1 
1 
118
-73 
01-
12-
Z-
305
4 
12-
17-
200
1 
1 
118
-34 
02-
3-Z-
307
2 
?3-?
4-
200
2 
1 
118
-5 


2, 3 
118
-72, 
118
-73 
02-
3-Z-
307
3 
?3-?
4-
200
2 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-
144 


3 
118
-
218 
02-
3-Z-
307
4 
?3-?
4-
200
2 
1 
118
-
141 


2 
118
-
144 


3 
118
-
146 
02-
4-Z-
307
5 
?4-?
1-
200
2 
1, 2 
118
-
217 
02-
5-Z-
307
8 
?5-?
6-
200
2 
1 
118
-75 


2 
118
-
201 


3 
118
-
217 
02-
5-Z-
308
2 
?5-?
6-
200
2 
1, 2 
118
-5 


3 
118
-76 


4 
118
-
141 


5, 6 
118
-
144
, 
118
-
145 


7—
10 
118
-
171
—  
118
-
174 


11 
118
-
218 
02-
6-Z-
309
4 
?6-?
3-
200
2 
1 
118
-5 


2—
6 
118
-
142
—  
118
-
146 


7 
118
-
218 
02-
6-Z-
309
5 
?6-?
3-
200
2 
1 
118
-
114 
02-
10-
Z-
312
0 
10-?
7-
200
2 
1 
118
-5 


2—
5 
118
-
111
—  
118
-
114 


6—
11 
118
-
142
—  
118
-
147 


12
—
15 
118
-
172
—  
118
-
175 


16 
118
-
218 
02-
12-
Z-
313
8 
12-
16-
200
2 
1—
3 
118
-
144 
03-
1-Z-
314
4 
?1-?
6-
200
3 
1 
118
-5 



118
-73 



118
-75, 
118
-76 



118
-78 



118
-82, 
118
-83 



118
-
111
—  
118
-
114 



118
-
141
—  
118
-
147 



118
-
171
—  
118
-
175 



118
-
201 



118
-
203
,  
118
-
204 



118
-
212 



118
-
220 


1(1
1.5)
—  
1(1
1.7) 
118
-
206
—  
118
-
208 
03-
1-Z-
314
5 
?1-?
6-
200
3 
1 
118
-
212 
03-
1-Z-
314
6 
?1-?
6-
200
3 
1, 2 
118
-34 
03-
4-Z-
315
7 
?4-?
7-
200
3 
1 
118
-
31
—
118
-34 



118
-
141
—  
118
-
147 



118
-
172
,  
118
-
173 



118
-
175 
03-
4-Z-
315
8 
?4-?
7-
200
3 
1 
118
-
144 



118
-
146 
03-
6-Z-
318
2 
?6-
16-
200
3 
2 
118
-
175 
03-
6-Z-
318
3 
?6-
16-
200
3 
1 
118
-
175 
03-
6-Z-
318
7 
?6-
16-
200
3 
1 
118
-
111
—  
118
-
115 



118
-
142
—  
118
-
147 



118
-
172
—  
118
-
175 


2 
118
-5 



118
-66 



118
-85 


2(7.
25) 
118
-90 


app
. A 
App
. A 
03-
8-Z-
319
5 
?8-
18-
200
3 
1 
118
-80 
03-
9-Z-
320
1 
?9-
15-
200
3 
1 
118
-5 



118
-
141 
03-
10-
Z-
321
2 
10-
20-
200
3 
1 
118
-
144 


2 
App
. A 
03-
11-
Z-
322
2 
11-?
3-
200
3 

118
-
282 


1 
118
-
283 


2 
118
-
281  
118
-
283 



118
-
285 
03-
11-
Z-
322
8 
11-
17-
200
3 
1 
118
-5 
03-
12-
Z-
323
9 
12-
15-
200
3 
1 
118
-
111
,  
118
-
112 
04-
1-Z-
324
4 
?1-?
5-
200
4 
1 
App
. A 
04-
8-Z-
329
1 
?8-?
2-
200
4 
1 
118
-
111
,  
118
-
112 
05-
1-
C-
333
3 
?1-?
3-
200
5 
1—
3     
  
Add
ed 
Ado
pt. 
Ord
. 
05-
6-
C-
335
9 
?6-?
6-
200
5 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-
144 
05-
7-Z-
336
4 
?7-?
5-
200
5 
1 
118
-32 
05-
7-Z-
336
7 
?7-
18-
200
5 
1 
118
-
34(
c)(1
) 
05-
8-
C-
337
5 
?8-?
1-
200
5 
1 
118
-4, 
118
-5 



118
-31, 
118
-32 



118
-34 



118
-63 



118
-74 



118
-76, 
118
-77 



118
-80 



118
-82 



118
-
111
—
118
-
115 



118
-
141 



118
-
144 



118
-
146 



118
-
173
—
118
-
175 



118
-
212 



118
-
217
, 
118
-
218 



118
-
255 



App
. A 
05-
8-
C-
337
9 
?8-
15-
200
5 
1 
118
-31 


2 
118
-33 
05-
9-
C-
338
3 
?9-?
6-
200
5 
1 
118
-75 


2, 3 
118
-
206
, 
118
-
207 


4 
118
-
212 


5, 6 
118
-
217
, 
118
-
218 


7, 8 
      
Add
ed 
118
-
221
, 
118
-
222 
05-
10-
C-
339
5 
10-
27-
200
5 
1 
118
-31 
05-
10-
C-
339
6 
10-
27-
200
5 
1 
118
-31 


2 
118
-32 
05-
11-
C-
340
0 
11-
21-
200
5 
1 
App
. A 


2 
118
-5 
06-
1-
C-
340
9 
?1-
17-
200
6 
1 
App
. A 
06-
3-
C-
342
2 
?3-?
6-
200
6 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-85 


3 
118
-
218 


4 
App
. A 
06-
4-
C-
342
9 
?4-
17-
200
6 
1 
118
-5 



118
-31 



118
-
141 



118
-
212 



App
. A 
06-
4-
C-
343
0 
?4-
17-
200
6 
1 
118
-32 
06-
4-
C-
343
1 
?4-
17-
200
6 
1 
App
. A 
06-
5-
C-
343
4 
?5-?
1-
200
6 
1, 2 
118
-
111
, 
118
-
112 


3 
118
-
253 
06-
6-
C-
344
6 
?6-
19-
200
6 
1 
App
. A 
06-
10-
C-
200
6 
10-?
3-
200
6 
1 
118
-75 
06-
10-
C-
346
9 
10-
16-
200
6 
1 
118
-80 
07-
1-
C-
348
3 
?1-
16-
200
7 
1 
118
-5 



118
-31 



118
-61 



118
-
141 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
147 


      
Rnb
d 
188
-
147 


      
As 
118
-
148 



118
-
218 


2 
App
. A 
07-
3-
C-
349
1 
?3-?
5-
200
7 
1 
118
-
218 



App
. A 
07-
3-
C-
349
2 
?3-?
5-
200
7 
1 
App
. A 
07-
4-
C-
349
9 
?4-?
4-
200
7 
1 
118
-
218 



App
. A 
07-
5-
C-
350
3 
?5-?
7-
200
7 
1 
118
-73 



118
-78 
07-
5-
C-
350
4 
?5-?
7-
200
7 
1 
118
-75 


2     
  
Add
ed 
118
-91 
07-
9-
C-
354
2 
?9-?
4-
200
7 
1 
118
-34 
07-
9-
C-
354
3 
?9-?
4-
200
7 
1 
118
-
210 



118
-
212 
07-
12-
C-
356
6 
12-?
3-
200
7 
1 
118
-
218 



App
. A 
08-
1-
C-
357
7 
?1-?
7-
200
8 
2 
118
-
141 


3 
118
-
206 


4 
118
-
217 
08-
2-
C-
360
0 
?2-
19-
200
8 
1 
118
-5 



118
-86 



118
-
111
—
118
-
114 



118
-
218 



App
. A 
08-
3-
C-
360
4 
?3-
17-
200
8 
1 
118
-5 



118
-85 



118
-
218 
08-
4-
C-
360
7 
?4-?
7-
200
8 
2 
118
-80 
08-
6-
C-
362
1 
?6-?
2-
200
8 
1 
118
-5 



118
-80 



118
-
141 



118
-
171 



118
-
212 



118
-
284 
08-
9-
C-
364
1 
?9-
15-
200
8 
1 
118
-
146
(3) 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
146
(4) 


2 
118
-
206 


3 
118
-
218 
08-
11-
C-
364
9 
11-?
3-
200
8 
1 
118
-5 



118
-31 



118
-33 



118
-64 



118
-72 



118
-73 



118
-75 



118
-77 



118
-81 



118
-
114 



118
-
141 



118
-
144 



118
-
146 



118
-
175 



118
-
212 



118
-
217 



118
-
127 



118
-
254 



App
. A 
09-
1-
365
7 
?1-?
5-
200
9 
2 
118
-4 



118
-5 



118
-61 



118
-72 



118
-73 



118
-76 



118
-83 



118
-84 



118
-85 


      
Add
ed 
118
-92 



118
-
141 



118
-
144 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
146 



118
-
171 



118
-
175 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
181
—
118
-
190 



118
-
206 



118
-
207 



118
-
218 



118
-
220 



118
-
284 



App
. A 
09-
1-
365
9 
?1-?
5-
200
9 
1 
118
-
171 



App
. A. 
09-
3-
C-
366
9 
?3-
16-
200
9 
1 
118
-
209 



118
-
218 



App
. A 
09-
5-
C-
367
4 
?5-?
4-
200
9 
1 
118
-5 


      
Add
ed 
118
-93 
09-
6-
C-
368
3 
?6-
15-
200
9 
2 
118
-32 
09-
7-
C-
368
7 
?7-?
6-
200
9 
1 
118
-
171 


2 
App
. A 
09-
7-
C-
369
0 
?7-
20-
200
9 
1 
118
-
218 



App
. A 
09-
7-
C-
369
1 
?7-
20-
200
9 
1 
118
-75 



118
-
141 



118
-
186 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
190 



118
-
217 
09-
7-
C-
369
2 
?7-
20-
200
9 
1 
118
-
212 
09-
8-
C-
370
0 
?8-
17-
200
9 
1 
App
. A 
10-
2-
C-
373
4 
?2-?
1-
201
0 
1 
118
-
141 



118
-
171 



118
-
185 



118
-
218 


2 
App
. A 
10-
2-
C-
373
5 
?2-?
1-
201
0 
2 
118
-32 
10-
2-
C-
373
6 
?2-?
1-
201
0 
1 
118
-5 


2 
118
-
171 


3 
App
. A 
10-
4-
C-
375
7 
?4-?
7-
201
0 
1 
118
-5 



118
-31 



118
-73 



118
-82 



118
-90 



118
-
141 



118
-
144 



118
-
172 



118
-
175 



118
-
184 



118
-
212 



118
-
217 
10-
11-
C-
379
5 
11-?
1-
201
0 
1 
118
-85 
11-
3-
C-
382
2 
?3-?
7-
201
1 
1 
118
-31, 
118
-32 



118
-
218 
11-
3-
C-
382
3 
?3-?
7-
201
1 
1 
118
-5 



118
-61 



118
-66 



118
-75 



118
-77, 
118
-78 



118
-80, 
118
-81 



118
-
85
—
118
-87 



118
-91 



118
-
113
, 
118
-
114 



118
-
141 



118
-
144 



118
-
172
—
118
-
175 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
189 



118
-
212 



118
-
217
, 
118
-
218 



118
-
222 



118
-
254 



118
-
281 



118
-
284 


2 
App
. A 
12-
2-
C-
388
5 
?2-?
6-
201
2 
1 
118
-5 



118
-
73(
e) 



118
-82 



118
-87 



118
-
185
(d) 



118
-
206
(d) 



118
-
218
(4) 



ch. 
118
, 
App
. A 
12-
4-
C-
389
5 
?4-
16-
201
2 
1 
118
-5 


      
Add
ed 
118
-94 



118
-
141
(b)(
2)a 
12-
6-
C-
390
6 
?6-?
4-
201
2 
1 
App
. A 
12-
9-
C-
393
5 
?9-?
4-
201
2 
1 
118
-
31(
a) 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
80(
c) 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-
80(
d)
—
(f) 


      
as 
118
-
80(
c)—
(e) 
12-
9-
C-
393
7 
?9-
19-
201
2 
1 
118
-
85(
e)(2
), 
(4) 
12-
11-
C-
394
8 
11-?
5-
201
2 
1 
118
-5 
13-
10-
C-
401
0 
10-?
7-
201
3 
1     
  
Rpl
d 
118
-
1—
118
-7 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
1—
118
-10 


2     
  
Rpl
d 
118
-
31
—
118
-34 


      
Add
ed 
118
-31, 
118
-32 


3     
  
Rpl
d 
118
-65 



118
-66 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-67 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-69 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-77 



118
-
111
(1)a 



118
-
112
(1)a 



118
-
113
(1) 



118
-
114
(1), 
(12)
b 



118
-
175
(5)c 


4     
  
Rpl
d 
118
-
205 


5     
  
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VI,  
§§ 
118
-
281
—
118
-
285 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
V,  
§§ 
118
-
231
—
118
-
235 


6     
  
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
V 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VI 



118
-
251
—
118
-
255 


7     
  
Add
ed 
118
-
271
—
118
-
274 


8 
Ch. 
118
, 
App
. A 
14-
2-
C-
403
6 
?2-
18-
201
4 
1 
118
-32 


2 
118
-
218 


3 
Ch. 
118
, 
App
. A 
14-
6-
C-
406
4 
?6-?
2-
201
4 
1 
118
-32 



118
-
218 



118
-
222
(b) 



App
. A 
14-
6-
C-
406
5 
?6-?
2-
201
4 
1 
118
-32 



118
-
218 



App
. A 
14-
12-
C-
410
8 
12-?
1-
201
4 
1 
118
-32 



118
-
218
(4) 



App
. A 
15-
5-
C-
414
1 
?5-?
4-
201
5 
1 
118
-88 
15-
5-
C-
414
2 
?5-?
4-
201
5 
1 
118
-3 



118
-7 



118
-
8(a)
(1) 


2 
118
-32 


3     
  
Rnb
d 
118
-
61
—
118
-63 


      
as 
118
-
41
—
118
-43 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-64 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-66 


      
as 
118
-44 


      
Add
ed 
118
-51, 
118
-52 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-68 


      
as 
118
-53 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
69
—
118
-72 


      
Add
ed 
118
-54, 
118
-55 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-73 


      
as 
118
-56 


      
Add
ed 
118
-57 



118
-79 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-80 



118
-84 



118
-
93(
b)(
1) 



118
-
141
(b)(
5) 



118
-
171
(1) 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
187 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-
188 


      
as 
118
-
187 


4     
  
Rpl
d 
118
-
212
(j)(
2) 


5 
App
. A 
16-
2-
C-
420
1 
?2-?
1-
201
6 
1 
118
-
141
(b)(
2)a 
16-
7-
C-
423
6 
?7-
18-
201
6 
1 
118
-32 



118
-
85(
c), 
(e)(
1) 
16-
8-
C-
424
1 
?8-?
1-
201
6 
1 
118
-32 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
141
(b)(
8) 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-
141
(b)(
9) 


      
as 
118
-
141
(b)(
8) 



118
-
218
(7)
d.1.
, 
e.4. 



118
-
272
(c)(
2) 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
272
(c)(
6) 
16-
10-
C-
425
0 
10-?
6-
201
6 
1 
118
-32 


2     
  
Add
ed 
118
-95 



118
-
186
(3) 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
86(
4) 


3 
118
-
218
(4), 
(7)a
. 



App
. A 
16-
10-
C-
425
4 
10-
19-
201
6 
1 
118
-
7(d
)(1)
f. 


2     
  
Add
ed 
118
-58 
16-
12-
C-
426
2 
12-
19-
201
6 
1 
118
-
144
(2)
d. 



118
-
184
(c)(
6) 
17-
1-
C-
426
4 
?1-?
3-
201
7 
1 
118
-
83(
1)
—
(3), 
(7) 
17-
2-
C-
427
2 
?2-?
6-
201
7 
1 
118
-
141
(b)(
2)a.
4. 
17-
3-
C-
427
5 
?3-?
6-
201
7 
1 
118
-
172 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
173 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
174 
17-
7-
C-
430
4 
?7-?
6-
201
7 
1 
App
. A 
18-
3-
C-
436
3 
?3-?
5-
201
8 
1 
118
-
218
(1), 
(7) 
18-
3-
C-
436
4 
?3-?
5-
201
8 
1 
App
. A 
18-
3-
C-
436
8 
?3-
19-
201
8 
1 
118
-32 



118
-
218
(6) 
18-
5-
C-
437
9 
?5-
22-
201
8 
1 
118
-
184
(a) 
18-
6-
C-
438
4 
?6-
18-
201
8 
1 
118
-
183
(a) 
18-
8-
C-
440
4 
?8-?
6-
201
8 
1 
118
-32 


2 
118
-
218
(4) 


3 
App
. A 
18-
10-
C-
441
6 
10-
15-
201
8 
1 
118
-32 


2     
  
Add
ed 
118
-96 


3 
118
-
218
(4) 


4 
App
. A 
18-
12-
C-
442
2 
12-?
3-
201
8 
1 
App
. A 
19-
2-
C-
444
3 
?2-?
4-
201
9 
1 
118
-
75(
3)a.
, 
(4)e
. 


2 
118
-91 
19-
4-
C-
445
0 
?4-
15-
201
9 
1 
118
-
218
(2) 
19-
4-
C-
445
1 
?4-
15-
201
9 
1 
18-
32 



Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III 
(tit.
) 


      
Rpl
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III, 
Div. 
1 
(tit.
) 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III, 
Div. 
1.1 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
IV 



118
-
55
—
118
-57 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
59
—
118
-70 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
74
—
118
-76 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-78, 
118
-79 


      
Rpl
d 
118
-
81
—
118
-90 


      
Add
ed 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
V 
(tit.
) 


      
Add
ed 
118
-90 



118
-
91
—
118
-94 


      
Add
ed 
118
-95, 
118
-96 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-95, 
118
-96 


      
as 
118
-97, 
118
-98 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III, 
Div. 
2 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VI 


      
Add
ed 
118
-
122
, 
118
-
213 


      
Rnb
d 
118
-
111
—
118
-
115 


      
as 
118
-
124
—
118
-
128 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III, 
Div. 
3 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VII 



118
-
142
—
118
-
145 



118
-
147
, 
118
-
148 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III, 
Div. 
4 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VIII 



118
-
175 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
III, 
Div. 
5 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
IX 



118
-
186
, 
118
-
187 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
IV 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
XI 



118
-
201
(2) 



118
-
208
(b) 



118
-
212
(g) 



118
-
217
(c)(
1)a.
2. 



118
-
220 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
V 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
XII 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VI 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
XIII 


      
Rnb
d 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
VII 


      
as 
Ch. 
118
, 
Art. 
XIV 



App
. A 
19-
6-
C-
446
3 
?6-?
3-
201
9 
1 
118
-
218
(2), 
(5) 
 


ZONING STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this chapter, either in the text or notes following the text, of 
references to Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
ILC
S  
Cha
pte
r 
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
65 
5/1
1-
13-
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
118 
205 
695
/1 
et 
seq
. 
118
-32 
210 
9/1 
et 
seq
. 
118
-93 
430 
65/
1.1 
118
-32 
625 
5/1
-
100 
et 
seq
. 
118
-32 
 
