
Sparta, IL Code of Ordinances


SPARTA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 18-04, passed 6-25-2018; and
State legislation current through 2018 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
No. 6









Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS



 




Mayor Jason Schlimme




Commissioner Gary Stephens




Commissioner Michael Kelley




Commissioner Bobby Klausing




Commissioner Gary Hanna




City Manager Corey Rheinecker




City Clerk Angie Peters




City Attorney Alan Farris




Chief of Police Sean Lukes




Fire Chief Brian Adams





 



 



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   CITY STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Unauthorized alteration or tampering with code



   10.20   Imprisonment until fine and costs paid



   10.21   Performance of community service; credit against fine and
costs



   10.22   Imposition of convenience fees for payments made by credit
or debit cards



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Sparta,
Illinois, shall be designated as the “Code of Sparta, Illinois” and may
be so cited.



(1994 Code, § 10.01)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



(1994 Code, § 10.02)



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



(1994 Code, § 10.03)



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



(1994 Code, § 10.04)



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Specific definitions. For the purpose of this code, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Sparta,
Illinois.



      CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The legislative body of the city.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This  city code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY. Randolph County, Illinois.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission or department of the city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Illinois.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to
the words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



(1994 Code, § 10.05)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



(1994 Code, § 10.06)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



(1994 Code, § 10.07)



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



(1994 Code, § 10.08)



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



(1994 Code, § 10.09)



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such
spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.



(1994 Code, § 10.10)



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.



(1994 Code, § 10.11)



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



(1994 Code, § 10.12)



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



(1994 Code, § 10.13)



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



(1994 Code, § 10.14)



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring
publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof,
unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



(1994 Code, § 10.15)



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in anyway be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



(1994 Code, § 10.16)



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the
existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.



      (2)   In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in
the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in
concise form above the ordinance.



(1994 Code, § 10.17)



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the 1994 Code section, the
specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example: (1994 Code, § 38.04)  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed
1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same
as the statute. Example:  (65 ILCS 5/3-2-1)  (1994 Code, § 38.04)  (Ord.
10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   The city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the state’s Freedom of Information Act.



Statutory reference:



      Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.



(1994 Code, § 10.18)



§ 10.19  UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATION OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any
manner whatsoever that will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented.



(1994 Code, § 10.19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.20  IMPRISONMENT UNTIL FINE AND COSTS PAID.



   The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed, upon order of the
court before which the conviction is had, may be imprisoned until the fine,
penalty and costs are paid. No imprisonment, however, shall exceed six months
for any one offense.



(1994 Code, § 10.20)



§ 10.21  PERFORMANCE OF COMMUNITY SERVICE; CREDIT AGAINST FINE AND COSTS.



   The city may allow and permit, in lieu of the payment of monies, any
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this code of ordinances to
perform community service to the city and its residents within the city
limits, for not more than eight hours per day. Such person shall be allowed a
credit not to exceed $80 for each eight hours of service to be applied to
such fine, penalty and costs.



(1994 Code, § 10.21)  (Ord. 438, passed 12-27-1993; Ord. 15-07, passed
7-27-2015)



§ 10.22  IMPOSITION OF CONVENIENCE FEES FOR PAYMENTS MADE BY CREDIT OR
DEBIT CARDS.



   The city may impose a convenience fee for any and all payments
authorized by this code made by credit or debit card. The amount of the
convenience fee, whether paid online or in person at City Hall, shall be
$2.50 for each transaction.



(1994 Code, § 10.22)  (Ord. 15-06, passed 7-27-2015; Ord, 18-04, passed
6-25-2018)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
city for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS
5/1-2-1.1



   Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see 65
ILCS 5/1-2-1



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Design of corporate seal



   11.02   Fiscal year



   11.03   Datum



§ 11.01  DESIGN OF CORPORATE SEAL.



   The corporate seal of the city shall be a disc, circular in form, with
the words “Seal of the City of Sparta, May 1, 1859” and, in the interior
and center of the circle, the word “Illinois”, and a symbol representing
two sheaves of wheat.



[IMAGE]



(1994 Code, § 11.01)



§ 11.02  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on April 1 of each year and end
on March 31 of the year following.



(1994 Code, § 11.02)



§ 11.03  DATUM.



   (A)   The datum for the establishment of grades in the city is
hereby established as a horizontal plane, 538 feet above sea level, as
established by the United States Geodetic Survey.



   (B)   The city bench mark is hereby established as the pipe with a
brass cap located at the northwest corner of Broadway and James Streets.



(1994 Code, § 11.03)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL



      31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



      32.   ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      35.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY



      36.   FUNDS



      37.   TAXATION



      38.   ELECTIONS



      39.   EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY



      40.   INVESTMENT POLICY



      41.   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Composition; term; powers



   30.02   Vacancies



   30.03   Departments of city government



   30.04   Compensation of Mayor and Commissioners



   30.05   Mayor; supervisory positions



Meetings; Rules of Order



   30.20   Regular meetings



   30.21   Special meetings



   30.22   Mayor to preside over meetings



   30.23   Order of business; modification



   30.24   Addressing meetings; consent required



   30.25   Disturbing of meetings prohibited



   30.26   Bidding requirements



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  COMPOSITION; TERM; POWERS.



   The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and four Commissioners
elected for a four-year term; the Council shall be the governing body of the
city and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by statute. The term of
the newly elected Mayor and four Commissioners shall commence at the first
regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities in the month of May
following their election.



(1994 Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. 326, passed 5-23-1983)



Editor’s note:



   It is the practice of the city to designate members of the City Council
as Commissioners. Each Council member is appointed as a Commissioner (i.e.,
superintendent) of one of the departments of city government.



§ 30.02  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies occurring in the Council shall be filled as provided by state
law.



(1994 Code, § 30.02)



§ 30.03  DEPARTMENTS OF CITY GOVERNMENT.



   The city government shall be divided into five departments and each
Commissioner shall be the superintendent of a department. The Mayor shall be
Superintendent of the Department of Public Affairs, and the other
Commissioners shall be allotted to the other four departments by the City
Council, which departments shall be the Department of Accounts and Finances,
the Department of Public Health and Safety, the Department of Streets and
Public Improvements and the Department of Public Property.



(1994 Code, § 30.03)



§ 30.04  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   Compensation of Mayor. The Mayor shall receive as compensation
for the performance of his or her duties of the office of Mayor an annual
salary of $6,600, which shall be payable in 12 equal, monthly installments
commencing in the month of May, 1991.



   (B)   Compensation of Commissioners. Each Commissioner of the city
shall receive as compensation for the performance of his or her duties as
Commissioner of the city an annual salary of $4,800, which shall be payable
in 12 equal, monthly installments commencing in the month of May, 1991.



(1994 Code, § 30.04)  (Ord. 392, passed 2-11-1991)



§ 30.05  MAYOR; SUPERVISORY POSITIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall be Superintendent of the Department of Public
Affairs and he or she shall have supervision over and be responsible for the
proper performance of that Department.



   (B)   The Mayor, as chief executive, shall be generally charged with
and be responsible for the proper conduct of the city’s affairs and the
enforcement of the provisions of this code of ordinances and other ordinances
of the city.



   (C)   The Mayor shall have supervision and control over the Chief of
Police and all members of the Police Department, which officer and all
officers, employees and assistants subordinate to him or her are hereby
assigned to the Department of Public Affairs.



   (D)   In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary, the
Mayor shall sign all contracts on behalf of the city and, unless otherwise
provided, no contract shall be binding upon the city without his or her
signature.



   (E)   The Mayor shall exercise temporary supervision over the
department of any Commissioner during the absence or inability to act of the
Commissioner in charge of the department.



(1994 Code, § 30.05)



MEETINGS; RULES OF ORDER



§ 30.20  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on
the second and fourth Mondays of each month in the Council room of the City
Hall. If any date for a regular meeting shall be a holiday recognized as such
by state law or the United States, these regular meetings shall be held on
the day following at the same time and place. In the event a different day
for the same holiday is recognized by state law and the United States, the
day recognized as a holiday by state law shall control.



(1994 Code, § 30.15)  (Ord. 257, passed 5-19-1975)



§ 30.21  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the
Mayor or any two Commissioners upon a 24-hour notice to each member of the
Council; however, the requirement of a notice as between the members of the
Council shall not be binding in any special meeting at which all of the
members of the Council are present.



   (B)   Notices required by this section may be served by any member
of the Police Department or by any other person in the city. It shall be the
duty of the City Clerk, when given copies of the notices, to serve them or
cause them to be served immediately.



(1994 Code, § 30.16)



§ 30.22  MAYOR TO PRESIDE OVER MEETINGS.



   The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the City
Council; in the absence of the Mayor, the Commissioner of Accounts and
Finances shall be the presiding officer.



(1994 Code, § 30.17)



§ 30.23  ORDER OF BUSINESS; MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The following shall be the order of business for the regular
meetings of the City Council:



      (1)   Reading of minutes of previous meeting;



      (2)   Communications and reports of officers;



      (3)   Presentation of bills; and



      (4)   Other business.



   (B)   The order of business may be changed or varied from at any
regular meeting upon the vote of a majority of the Council members (i.e., the
Commissioners) present.



(1994 Code, § 30.18)



§ 30.24  ADDRESSING MEETINGS; CONSENT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to address or attempt to address
any regular or special meeting of the City Council, except upon request of
the Mayor or with the consent of a majority of the members present.



(1994 Code, § 30.19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.25  DISTURBING OF MEETINGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any regular or
special meeting of the City Council.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined as provided in § 10.99 of this code of ordinances and may be summarily
ejected from the Council room and the City Hall.



(1994 Code, § 30.20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.26  BIDDING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all contracts,
of whatever character, pertaining to public improvement, or to the
maintenance of the public property of the city involving an outlay of $2,000
or more, shall be based upon the specifications to be approved by the Council.



   (B)   Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid
for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when the
expense thereof will exceed $20,000 shall be constructed as follows:



      (1)   By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertising for bids, by public notice, except that any such contract may be
entered into by the proper officers without the advertising for bids, if
authorized by a vote of four of the five Council members elected; or



      (2)   In the following manner, if authorized by a vote of four
of the five Council members elected: the Commissioner of Public Property or
other designated officers, shall superintend and cause to be carried out the
construction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ
exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and
artisans whom the city shall pay by the day or hour, but all material of the
value of $20,000 and upward used in the construction of the work or other
public improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest
responsible bidder in the manner prescribed herein. Nothing contained in this
section shall apply to any contract by the city with the United States of
America or any agency thereof.



(1994 Code, § 30.21)  (Ord. 2002-10, passed 7-8-2002; Ord. 11-04, passed
11-14-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Specifications for contracts over $1,500 and over $5,000, see 65 ILCS
5/4-5-11



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Scope of provisions



   31.02   Oath



   31.03   Bonds



   31.04   Compensation; remittance of fees



   31.05   Duties upon termination of office



   31.06   Term of appointive positions; vacancies



   31.07   Removal of appointed persons; statement required



   31.08   Mayor may assign certain duties; resolution of conflicts of
authority



   31.09   Records to be open for inspection



   31.10   Remittance of funds; reports



   31.11   Indemnification of city officers and employees



   31.12   Social Security



   31.13   Contracts not binding unless approved by the Council



   31.14   Conservators of the peace enumerated



   31.15   Hiring of city employees



   31.16   Termination of employment of city employees



Commissioners



   31.30   Commissioners may make department rules; enforcement;
submission of department budgets



   31.31   Commissioner of Accounts and Finances



   31.32   Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements



   31.33   Commissioner of Public Health and Safety



   31.34   Commissioner of Public Property



Appointed Officials



   31.45   City Attorney



   31.46   City Treasurer



   31.47   City Clerk



Coordinator of Public Affairs/City Manager



   31.60   Office created; appointment



   31.61   Compensation and term



   31.62   Duties and authorities



   31.63   Supervision by Mayor



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  SCOPE OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all officers and
employees of the city, regardless of the time of the creation of the office
or of the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.



(1994 Code, § 31.01)



§ 31.02  OATH.



   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon his or her
duties, take the oath prescribed by state law.



(1994 Code, § 31.02)



§ 31.03  BONDS.



   (A)   The Mayor and each Commissioner shall give a bond in the sum
as may be determined by the City Council, but the bond shall not be less than
$3,000, and shall be approved by the circuit court in and for the county.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall give bond in the sum as may be
required by the City Council with the surety as the City Council may approve,
but the bond shall not be less than the amount required by state law.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall give bond in the sum as may be required
by the City Council with the surety as the City Council may approve, but the
bond shall not be less than the amount required by state law.



   (D)   All other officers and employees shall, before entering upon
the duties of his or her office, give a bond in the sum as may be required by
the City Council, with the surety as the City Council may approve,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office
or position.



   (E)   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the city is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, to the
issuance of a license or permit or the exercise of any special privilege, the
surety on the bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in the state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by this code or other ordinances of the city.



   (F)   (1)   Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an
additional surety may be needed on any bond given to indemnify the city
against loss or liability, because of the insolvency of the existing surety
or sureties or for any other reason, the Council may order a new surety or
sureties to be secured for the bond.



      (2)   If the new surety or sureties are not procured within
ten days from the date the order is transmitted to the principal on the bond
or his or her assignee, the City Council shall declare the bond to be void
and, thereupon, the principal or assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered
the privilege or position as a condition of which the bond was required.



(1994 Code, § 31.03)



§ 31.04  COMPENSATION; REMITTANCE OF FEES.



   (A)   All officers and employees of the city shall receive the
salaries as may be provided from time to time by the City Council.



   (B)   No officer or employee receiving a salary from the city shall
be entitled to retain any portion of any fees collected by him or her in the
performance of his or her duties as a city officer or employee, in the
absence of a specific provision in this code or other ordinance of the city
to that effect.



(1994 Code, § 31.04)



§ 31.05  DUTIES UPON TERMINATION OF OFFICE.



   Each officer of the city, upon the termination of his or her office for
any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his or her successor all books and
records which may be the property of the city and, if no successor has been
appointed within one week after the termination of his or her position, the
property shall be delivered either to the City Clerk or to the City Treasurer.



(1994 Code, § 31.05)



§ 31.06  TERM OF APPOINTIVE POSITIONS; VACANCIES.



   (A)   Every appointive officer or employee of the city shall hold
office for a term of one year or until his or her successor is appointed and
qualified, unless it is otherwise provided by this code of ordinances or
other ordinances of the city.



   (B)   In case of a vacancy in any appointed office, the person
making the original appointment shall appoint a new officer or employee.



(1994 Code, § 31.06)



§ 31.07  REMOVAL OF APPOINTED PERSONS; STATEMENT REQUIRED.



   Any appointed officer or employee may be removed from office by the
person appointing him or her. A statement of the removal, with the reasons
therefor, shall be given to the City Council at the meeting next following
the removal.



(1994 Code, § 31.07)



§ 31.08  MAYOR MAY ASSIGN CERTAIN DUTIES; RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS OF
AUTHORITY.



   The Mayor shall have the authority to assign to any appointed officer
any duty which is not assigned by law to some other specific officer, and the
Mayor shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers
or duties of officers, after consultation with the City Attorney.



(1994 Code, § 31.08)



§ 31.09  RECORDS TO BE OPEN FOR INSPECTION.



   All records kept by an officer of the city shall be open to inspection
by the Mayor or any member of the City Council at all reasonable times,
whether or not the records are required to be kept by statute, this code or
other ordinances of the city.



(1994 Code, § 31.09)



§ 31.10  REMITTANCE OF FUNDS; REPORTS.



   Every officer of the city shall, at least once each month, turn over
all funds received by him or her in his or her official capacity to the City
Clerk, with a statement showing the source from which the funds were received.



(1994 Code, § 31.10)



§ 31.11  INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Every officer and employee of the city shall be indemnified
and reimbursed by the city against and for all expenses and liabilities,
including attorney’s fees, reasonably incurred by or imposed upon him or
her in connection with any proceeding to which he or she may be made a party
or in which he or she may become involved, by reason of his or her being or
having been an officer or employee of the city, or any settlement thereof,
made with court approval whether or not be is an officer or employee at the
time such expenses are incurred, except in such cases wherein the officer or
employee is adjudged to be liable for willful negligence or intentional
misconduct or wrongdoing in the performance of his or her duty, or for
misappropriation of city funds or city property, and further excepting those
cases in which the officer or employee is adjudged to be liable in
proceedings brought by the city against the officer or employee; provided
that, in the event of a settlement, the indemnification and reimbursement
herein shall apply only when the City Council as well as the court approves
the settlement and reimbursement as being for the best interests of the city.



   (B)   The foregoing right of indemnification shall be in addition to
and not exclusive of all other rights to which the officer or employee of the
city may be entitled to.



(1994 Code, § 31.11)  (Ord. 281, passed 6-12-1978)



§ 31.12  SOCIAL SECURITY.



   (A)   Declaration of policy; authority of City Clerk to act.



      (1)   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of
the city to extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective as of
11-1-1954, the benefits of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance System
as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto.



      (2)   In pursuance of this policy and for that purpose, the
City Clerk shall take action as may be required by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.



   (B)   Agreement with state authorized. The City Clerk is hereby
authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the State Employees’
Retirement System of the state, Social Security Unit, to secure coverage of
eligible employees in conformance with the policy of the city.



   (C)   Withholding from employees’ salaries. Withholdings from
salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in this section are
hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at the times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and the
deductions shall be paid over to the state in the amounts and at the times as
are designated by state laws or regulations.



   (D)   Payment of employer’s contribution and administrative
expenses. Employer contributions and administrative expenses shall be paid to
the state in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations from
amounts appropriated for such purposes.



   (E)   Records and reports. The City Clerk shall maintain records and
submit reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.



(1994 Code, § 31.12)  (Ord. 79, passed 10-25-1954)



§ 31.13  CONTRACTS NOT BINDING UNLESS APPROVED BY THE COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts to
which the city may be a party, and no contract shall be entered into on
behalf of or be binding on the city unless it is entered into by ordinance or
resolution or is reduced to writing and approved by the City Council or
expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution.



(1994 Code, § 31.13)



§ 31.14  CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE ENUMERATED.



   The Mayor, members of the City Council (i.e., the Commissioners),
members of the Fire Department, as well as every member of the Police
Department, are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace with the
powers to make arrests as are given to the conservators of the peace by state
law.



(1994 Code, § 31.14)



§ 31.15  HIRING OF CITY EMPLOYEES.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this code, the hiring of all
city employees shall be conducted by a nomination from the Mayor or
respective Commissioner to whom the supervisory responsibility of said
employee is entrusted under this chapter, and approved by the majority vote
of the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 31.15)  (Ord. 15-01, passed 1-26-2015)



§ 31.16  TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CITY EMPLOYEES.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this code or by the terms of
an applicable collective bargaining agreement, the termination of employment
of all city employees shall be conducted by a recommendation from the Mayor
or respective Commissioner to whom the supervisory responsibility of said
employee is entrusted under this chapter and approved by a three-fourths vote
of the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 31.16)  (Ord. 15-01, passed 1-26-2015)



COMMISSIONERS



§ 31.30  COMMISSIONERS MAY MAKE DEPARTMENT RULES; ENFORCEMENT; SUBMISSION
OF DEPARTMENT BUDGETS.



   (A)   Each Commissioner shall have the authority to make rules and
regulations to govern the conduct of the officers and employees assigned to
the department of which the Commissioner is the superintendent. The rules
shall be binding on and obeyed by all officers and employees in the
respective department until and unless the rules or regulations are revoked
or altered by the City Council.



   (B)   Each Commissioner shall have the power and authority to
enforce all provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city relating
to anything under his or her control as superintendent of a department of the
city.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of each Commissioner to present to the
Commissioner of Accounts and Finances on or before the third meeting of May
of each year a detailed statement of the expenses which it is anticipated
will be necessary for the operation of each Commissioner’s department for
the coming fiscal year.



(1994 Code, § 31.25)



§ 31.31  COMMISSIONER OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCES.



   (A)   Supervision of Department of Accounts and Finances. The
Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall be Superintendent of the
Department of Accounts and Finances and he or she shall have supervision over
and be responsible for the proper performance of the Department.



   (B)   Supervision of records and accounts; inspections; audit. The
Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall have charge of and supervision
over all accounts and records of the city and the records and accounts of all
officers, boards or departments required to keep or make accounts, records or
reports. The Commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected all records
or accounts required to be kept in any of the offices or departments of the
city and shall cause proper accounts and records to be kept and reports to be
made. The Commissioner shall audit or cause to be audited, at frequent
intervals, the accounts of every officer or employee who does or may receive
or disburse money belonging to the city or any department thereof.



   (C)   Supervision of purchasing. The Commissioner of Accounts and
Finances shall have charge of the purchase, care and distribution of all
supplies and other articles not otherwise provided for by law or ordinance,
including printing and stationery, on requisitions signed by the heads of the
departments.



   (D)   Examination, report of all claims against city. The
Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall examine or cause to be examined
and report to the City Council upon all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims
before they are acted upon or allowed, unless otherwise provided by law.



   (E)   Public utilities.



      (1)   The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall procure
from all persons operating public service utilities in the city the reports
as are required by law to be made to the city and cause the reports to be
placed on file. The Commissioner shall also procure copies of reports made by
public utilities operating in the city as are made to the state or any public
office or department and cause the reports to be placed on file.



      (2)   The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall,
whenever the city has authority to do so, cause to be examined the accounts
and records of any person operating a public service utility in the city or
within the jurisdiction thereof, and the Commissioner shall report the result
of the inspection to the City Council and he or she shall also report any
refusal of the public utility to permit such an examination.



   (F)   Collection of funds. The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances
shall collect or cause to be collected, all license fees, franchise fees,
taxes, special assessments and rentals, including water, and all other
moneys, due or to become due to the city, unless otherwise provided by this
code, other ordinances of this city or state law.



   (G)   Reports to the City Council; recommendations. The Commissioner
of Accounts and Finances shall report to the City Council failure by any
person to make reports or pay money due to the city with the recommendations
in relation thereto as he or she may deem proper.



   (H)   City Treasurer and City Clerk assigned to Department of
Accounts and Finances. The City Treasurer, the City Clerk and their
respective officers, employees, bookkeepers and accountants are hereby
assigned to the Department of Accounts and Finances and they shall be under
the direction and supervision of the Commissioner.



   (I)   Duties upon absence of Mayor. The Commissioner of Accounts and
Finances, in the absence of the Mayor or the Mayor’s inability to act,
shall preside over the City Council and shall perform the usual duties of the
Mayor and act as the head of the Department of Public Affairs.



(1994 Code, § 31.26)



§ 31.32  COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Supervision of Department of Streets and Public Improvements.
The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall be Superintendent
of the Department of Streets and Public Improvements, and he or she shall
have supervision over and be responsible for the proper functioning of the
Department.



   (B)   Personnel assigned to the Department.



      (1)   The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements
shall have supervision over the City Engineer, if any is appointed, the
Superintendent of Streets and any other officers and employees as may be
assigned to the Department of Streets and Public Improvements.



      (2)   All officers and employees of the department shall
perform their duties and exercise their powers subject to the
Commissioner’s directions.



   (C)   Authority over public construction and repair work. The
Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall have charge of and
authority over the repair of streets, alleys and public places, except as may
otherwise be provided and the entire construction and reconstruction of all
street improvements, paving, curbing, sidewalks, storm sewers, bridges,
viaducts and all public improvements and the repair thereof, unless otherwise
provided by law.



   (D)   Approval of cost estimates, city construction and repair work.
The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall approve the
estimates of the City Engineer, which may be made from time to time, of the
cost of repair and construction work by or for the city as the work
progresses and recommend to the City Council the acceptance of work done or
improvements made, when completed according to contract and the Commissioner
shall perform any other duties as may be required by the City Council or
resolution.



   (E)   Supervision of utilities; reports to City Council. The
Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall have supervision over
all public service utilities and all persons rendering services in the city
under any franchise, contract or grant made or granted by the city or state,
and the Commissioner shall report to the City Council or other proper officer
any failure of the person or utility to render service or to observe the
requirements or conditions of the franchise, contract or grant under which
the public service utility is operated.



   (F)   Enforcement of certain code provisions and ordinances. The
Commissioner shall have charge of enforcing the provisions of this code and
other ordinances of the city relating to street obstruction, signs over
streets and street wastepaper receptacles.



(1994 Code, § 31.27)



§ 31.33  COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   (A)   Supervision over Department of Public Health and Safety. The
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall be Superintendent of the
Department of Public Health and Safety and he or she shall have supervision
over and be responsible for the proper performance of the Department.



   (B)   Supervision over building construction and inspectors. The
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall have supervision over the
enforcement of all provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city
relating to the construction and repair of buildings, and the Commissioner
shall have supervision over the Building, Plumbing and Electrical Inspectors.



   (C)   Enforcement of provisions relating to food. The enforcement of
all provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city relating to the
quality, care and sale of food and drink are hereby assigned to the
Department of Public Health and Safety.



   (D)   Supervision over Fire Department and Fire Chief. The
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall have supervision over the Fire
Department and over the Fire Chief.



(1994 Code, § 31.28)  (Ord. 363, passed 4-27-1987)



§ 31.34  COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Supervision of city water system and excavations. The
Commissioner of Public Property shall be Superintendent of the Department of
Public Property and he or she shall have supervision over and be responsible
for the proper functioning of the Department.



   (B)   Supervision of city water system and excavations. The
Commissioner of Public Property shall have charge of the laying and
constructing of water mains and the repair thereto and the operation of the
city water system and he or she shall have charge of the location of
excavations to be made in paved streets or alleys or other places, for the
purpose of repairing, tapping, inspecting or otherwise and of issuing permits
for excavations subject to the consent of the Commissioner of Streets and
Public Improvements.



   (C)   Supervision of public buildings and places. The Commissioner
of Public Property shall have supervision over all city-owned buildings and
all public parks and playgrounds not assigned to some other commissioner or
governing body by this code or other ordinances of the city.



   (D)   Sewerage system. The public sanitary sewer system of the city
shall be under the supervision of the Commissioner of Public Property.



(1994 Code, § 31.29)



APPOINTED OFFICIALS



§ 31.45  CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Office created; appointment. There is hereby created the
Office of City Attorney, an executive office of the city. The City Attorney
shall be appointed by the City Council.



   (B)   Duties. The City Attorney shall perform the following duties:



      (1)   Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law
or equity to which the city may be a party or in which it may be interested
or which may be brought against or by any officer of the city on behalf of
the city or by or against an officer of the city, in his or her capacity as
an officer;



      (2)   See to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees
rendered or entered in favor of the city and of all interlocutory orders
rendered in favor of the city;



      (3)   Be the legal adviser of the city and shall be authorized
to render advice on all legal questions affecting the city; and



      (4)   Draft or supervise the drafting of any contracts, leases
or other documents or instruments to which the city may be a party and upon
request by the City Council, draft ordinances covering any subjects within
the powers of the city.



   (C)   Special counsel; appointment, compensation.



      (1)   The City Council, whenever it may deem it necessary, may
employ an attorney on a fee basis to assist the duly appointed City Attorney
in any legal proceeding or in any legal action or matter in law or equity
which may or does affect the city.



      (2)   In the event there is no duly appointed and acting City
Attorney, the City Council may employ on a fee basis any qualified attorney
to represent the city in any legal matter pertaining to the welfare of the
city.



   (D)   Compensation. The City Attorney shall not be deemed an officer
or employee of the city and shall not be entitled to receive a salary from
the city for the performance of the legal services set forth in division (B)
above, or as otherwise provided in this code. The City Council shall
determine, whenever it may deem it necessary, the fee basis on which the City
Attorney shall be paid in the performance of the duties. General legal
services shall be performed according to an hourly charge, to be determined
from time to time by the City Council and for legal services rendered in
issuing bonds for the city or commissions created by the city, the usual and
customary fee of attorneys for the service determined in accordance with a
percentage of the amount of the bond issue shall be the basis for
establishing the fee to the City Attorney; in such cases and in any other
case wherein the hourly charge shall be determined not to be applicable as a
fee basis, the City Council shall determine in advance the fee to be paid to
the City Attorney for the services to be performed.



(1994 Code, § 31.40)  (Ord. 4, passed 4-11-1938; Ord. 282, passed 6-12-1978)



§ 31.46  CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   Appointment. The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the City
Council and shall reside within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Duties. The City Treasurer shall perform the duties as may be
prescribed for him or her by statute, by this code, other ordinances of the
city and the City Council.



   (C)   Receipt, disbursement of funds. The City Treasurer shall
receive all money paid into the city, either directly from the person paying
it or from the hands of any other officer of the city as may receive it, and
the Treasurer shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed
by the City Clerk and the Mayor.



   (D)   Depositing city funds; commingling prohibited. The City
Treasurer shall deposit the city funds in the depositories as may be selected
from time to time in accordance with law, and he or she shall keep the city
money separate and distinct from his or her own and shall not intermingle his
or her own money with it or make private or personal use of the city funds.



   (E)   Register of warrants and other disbursements. The City
Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds, vouchers or orders
filed with him or her or paid by him or her.



   (F)   Required records; contents. The City Treasurer shall keep
records showing all money received by him or her, the source from which it
was received and the purpose for which city funds were paid out and he or she
shall keep a record showing at all times the financial status of the city.



   (G)   Books of account; form. The City Treasurer shall keep books
and accounts as may be required by the City Council and he or she shall keep
them in the manner required by the City Council.



   (H)   Monthly and annual reports; contents. The City Treasurer shall
make monthly reports to the City Council showing the state of the finances of
the city and the amounts received and disbursed during the month, which
reports shall be filed. The Treasurer shall make an annual report between May
1 and May 10, with the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the
city and a statement of his or her transactions as Treasurer during the
preceding year.



(1994 Code, § 31.41)  (Ord. 97-03, passed 6-9-1997)



§ 31.47  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Appointment. The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City
Council and shall reside within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Ex-officio City Collector; duties. The City Clerk shall be
ex-officio City Collector and he or she shall collect all special taxes and
perform all other duties of the City Collector as provided by law.



   (C)   Custody of seal. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the
city seal.



   (D)   Attestation, sealing of documents. The City Clerk shall seal
and attest all contracts of the city and all licenses, permits and other
documents as shall require this formality.



   (E)   Records. In addition to the record of ordinances and other
records which the City Clerk is required by law to keep, he or she shall keep
a register of all licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon and a
record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the city and
other records as may be required by the City Council.



   (F)   Custody of documents. The City Clerk shall be the custodian of
all documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of
some other officer by the City Council.



   (G)   Maintenance of indices. The City Clerk shall keep and maintain
a proper index to all documents and records kept by him or her, so that ready
access to the documents and use thereof may be had.



   (H)   Account required; contents. The City Clerk shall keep accounts
showing all money received by him or her and the source and disposition
thereof and the City Clerk shall keep other accounts as may be required by
state law, this code or other ordinances of the city.



   (I)   Remittance of city funds; report. The City Clerk shall turn
over all money received by him or her, on behalf of the city, to the City
Treasurer, promptly upon receipt of the funds and with the remittance, the
City Clerk shall give a statement as to the source thereof.



   (J)   Additional duties. In addition to the duties provided in this
section, the City Clerk shall perform other duties and functions as may be
required by statute, this code or other ordinances of the city.



   (K)   Deputy Clerk. There is hereby created the office of Deputy
Clerk, who shall be appointed by the City Clerk. In the absence or disability
of the City Clerk, the Deputy Clerk shall have the powers and duties of the
City Clerk.



   (L)   Clerk Pro Tem. In the event of the absence or disability of
both the City Clerk and the Deputy Clerk, the City Council shall have the
authority to appoint a Clerk Pro Tem. The Clerk Pro Tem shall have all of the
authority and duties of the Clerk, and shall hold office until the return of
the City Clerk or the Deputy Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 31.42)  (Ord. 97-03, passed 6-9-1997)



COORDINATOR OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS/CITY MANAGER



§ 31.60  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the Office of Coordinator of Public
Affairs/City Manager who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 31.43)  (Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-28-2002)



§ 31.61  COMPENSATION AND TERM.



   The Coordinator of Public Affairs/City Manager shall receive
compensation as from time to time shall be authorized by the Mayor and City
Council.



(1994 Code, § 31.44)  (Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-28-2002)



§ 31.62  DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES.



   The Coordinator of Public Affairs/City Manager shall perform the
following duties:



   (A)   Act as a liaison between the city engineers, architects,
contractors or subcontractors, developers and the Mayor and City Council.
This shall include the authority to take action and make decisions relating
to projects necessary for the work to continue when a representative of the
engineers/architects is not on the job site. Coordinate, implement and
administer tax increment finance (TIF) projects entered into between the city
and developers;



   (B)   Assist in grant writing and grant administration with regard
to all grants received on behalf of the city; devise, formulate and monitor
programs and guidelines for documentation and record keeping, appropriate and
timely, for compliance with state and federal law and compliance with
regulatory agencies;



   (C)   Keep abreast of legislation affecting city functions, policies
and programs; recommending policies or procedures for implementing compliance
with such legislation, and informing the Council of necessary action required
by such legislation;



   (D)   File, catalog and store plans, specifications and maps in
secure and accessible locations for use as reference materials by city
departments, Council and City Hall staff;



   (E)   Process citizens complaints and requests from the initiation
of action through completion within the latitudes outlined by the Mayor and
City Council;



   (F)   Provide Council with timely information which is suitable,
necessary and appropriate for its use and knowledge and to serve as a basis
for Council’s action;



   (G)   Counsel and coordinate with the city’s Code Enforcement
Officer and Building, Plumbing and Electrical Inspectors in code enforcement
and zoning matters within the scope of knowledge or experience of the
Coordinator as requested or directed by the Commissioner of Health and Safety;



   (H)   Attend at the direction of the Mayor and City Council,
continuing education with regard to all aspects of the municipal government,
including, but not limited to, those conferences sponsored by the state’s
Municipal League and the state’s Tax Increment Association;



   (I)   Provide daily supervisory decision-making authority over the
City Clerk and City Hall employees in the absence of the Mayor and/or
Commissioner of Finance in order to achieve greater efficiency, prevent
duplication of services, implement the issuance of building permits, code
enforcement procedures, Zoning Board of Appeals and other administrative
matters;



   (J)   Under the direction of the Mayor and appropriate Commissioner,
negotiate necessary land acquisitions, easements, road dedications and other
issues as to rights-of-way as may be necessary in the development and
implementation of city projects;



   (K)   Coordinate with the City Clerk the implementation of risk
management programs and directives; inspect and review physical properties of
the city with representatives of risk management; implement compliance with
directives concerning safety and prepare and implement accident prevention
procedures as requested by the Risk Management Association; assist City Clerk
in investigating and reporting all accidents involving city personnel or
occurring on city property;



   (L)   Act as liaison with Sparta Area Chamber of Commerce in the
promotion of new commercial and industrial enterprises and support of
existing commercial and industrial enterprises for the development and
welfare of the city; and



   (M)   Provide daily supervisory decision-making authority over all
city employees, subject to the oversight of, and periodic consultation with
the Mayor and respective Commissioner assigned to each department.



(1994 Code, § 31.45)  (Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-28-2002; Ord. 08-07, passed
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-04a, passed 5-28-2013)



§ 31.63  SUPERVISION BY MAYOR.



   The Coordinator of Public Affairs/City Manager shall serve under the
direct supervision and shall report periodically to the Mayor as to the
status of all city projects and other pending matters.



(1994 Code, § 31.46)  (Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-28-2002)



CHAPTER 32:  ORGANIZATIONS



Section



Library Board



   32.001   Public library and reading room established



   32.002   Composition of Board



   32.003   Tax to establish and maintain library



Commission on Human Relations



   32.015   Created; composition



   32.016   Purpose



   32.017   Qualifications, compensation of members



   32.018   Appointment, terms of members



   32.019   Organization; officers; meetings



   32.020   Mayor to requisition and contract on behalf of Commission



Plan Commission



   32.035   Created; composition; ex-officio members



   32.036   Purpose



   32.037   Qualifications of members; terms; compensation



   32.038   Organization; records; annual report



   32.039   Powers and duties



   32.040   Adoption of official map; conformance by subdividers



   32.041   City Clerk to furnish data relative to public improvements;
reports



   32.042   Employment of personnel; expenditures



Board of Directors of the Mr. and Mrs. Alfred A. Brown Memorial Museum



   32.055   Establishment



   32.056   Purpose of museum



   32.057   Composition of Board; appointment; qualification; terms;
Chairperson



   32.058   Duties and responsibilities



Cultural Arts Planning Commission



   32.070   Created; composition



   32.071   Purpose



   32.072   Qualifications of members; term; compensation



   32.073   Organization; records; annual report



   32.074   Powers and duties



   32.075   Employment of personnel; expenditures



Board of Directors of the Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund



   32.090   Organization



   32.091   Exoneration and indemnification



   32.092   Duties and responsibilities



   32.093   Duty and responsibility to make investments



   32.094   Duty and responsibility as to accounting procedures



   32.095   Execution of instruments



   32.096   Dissolution of Board of Directors



Board of Trustees of the Misselhorn Art Foundation



   32.110   Short title



   32.111   Establishment of Board of Trustees



   32.112   Purpose of foundation



   32.113   Organization; composition; qualification; term; Chairperson



   32.114   Duties and responsibilities



LIBRARY BOARD



§ 32.001  PUBLIC LIBRARY AND READING ROOM ESTABLISHED.



   There shall be established and maintained in the city, a free public
library and reading room for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the
city.



(1994 Code, § 32.001)  (Ord. 18, passed 3-22-1943)



§ 32.002  COMPOSITION OF BOARD.



   The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the approval of the City Council,
a board of nine directors in whom shall be vested the supervision, management
and control of the library, as is provided by state statutes.



(1994 Code, § 32.002)  (Ord. 18, passed 3-22-1943)



§ 32.003  TAX TO ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN LIBRARY.



   There is hereby levied the sum of one and two-tenths mills on the
dollar on all taxable property in the city for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining a free public library and reading room for the use and
benefit of the inhabitants of the city, as above set forth.



(1994 Code, § 32.003)  (Ord. 18, passed 3-22-1943)



COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS



§ 32.015  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Commission on Human Relations which shall
consist of 12 members.



(1994 Code, § 32.015)  (Ord. 99, passed 7-22-1963; Ord. 218, passed
12-20-1970)



§ 32.016  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the Commission on Human Relations are as follows:



   (A)   To promote the American ideal of equality and justice;



   (B)   To promote further understanding between people;



   (C)   To encourage and facilitate wise adjustments to social
problems and opportunities;



   (D)   To study the nature and causes of prejudices and make
recommendations for improvements; and



   (E)   To provide for mediation through conferences and conciliation.



(1994 Code, § 32.016)  (Ord. 99, passed 7-22-1963)



§ 32.017  QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Commission on Human Relations shall be residents of
the city and shall be representative of all segments of the community, such
as religious, racial, educational, labor, civic, management and governmental
groups. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(1994 Code, § 32.017)  (Ord. 99, passed 7-22-1963)



§ 32.018  APPOINTMENT, TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The members of Commission on Human Relations shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, the
terms of which appointments shall be as follows:



      (1)   Three members for a term of four years;



      (2)   Three members for a term of three years;



      (3)   Three members for a term of two years; and



      (4)   Three members for a term of one year.



   (B)   Annually thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint three members to
the Commission, from a list of nominees to be submitted by the existing Human
Relations Commission, who shall hold their office for a term of four years or
until their successors are appointed, unless sooner removed for cause.



(1994 Code, § 32.018)  (Ord. 99, passed 7-22-1963; Ord. 218, passed
12-20-1970; Ord. 220, passed 2-8-1971)



§ 32.019  ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; MEETINGS.



   As soon as practicable after the appointment of the members of the
Commission on Human Relations the members shall meet and elect a President, a
Secretary and other officers as they deem necessary and adopt rules for the
transaction of business and make arrangements for the taking and preserving
of minutes of all their meetings. Thereafter, the Commission shall meet at
least once each month.



(1994 Code, § 32.019)  (Ord. 99, passed 7-22-1963)



§ 32.020  MAYOR TO REQUISITION AND CONTRACT ON BEHALF OF COMMISSION.



   The Mayor is hereby designated as the requisitioning authority and
contracting officer for the Commission on Human Relations.



(1994 Code, § 32.020)  (Ord. 99, passed 7-22-1963)



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 32.035  CREATED; COMPOSITION; EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS.



   There is hereby created a Plan Commission which shall consist of 12
members; the Mayor and the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements
shall be ex-officio members of the Plan Commission.



(1994 Code, § 32.030)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.036  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Plan Commission is to assure that adequate
provisions be made for the preparation of a comprehensive city plan for the
guidance, direction and control of the growth and development or
redevelopment of the city and territory contiguous thereto not more than one
and one-half miles beyond the city limits and not included in any
municipality.



(1994 Code, § 32.031)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.037  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; TERMS; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The members of the Plan Commission shall be residents of the
city and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council, upon the basis of the fitness of the prospective members for
the duties of their offices.



   (B)   (1)   The terms of the initial appointments of members to
the Plan Commission shall be as follows:



         (a)   Four members shall be appointed for terms of one
year each;



         (b)   Four members shall be appointed for terms of two
years each; and



         (c)   Four members shall be appointed for terms of three
years each.



      (2)   After the initial appointments, the members of the Plan
Commission shall be appointed for a term of three years each. Vacancies shall
be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only.



   (C)   All members of the Plan Commission shall serve without
compensation; except that, if the City Council shall deem it advisable, the
members of the Plan Commission may receive the compensation as may be fixed
from time to time by the City Council and provided for in the annual
appropriation ordinance.



(1994 Code, § 32.032)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.038  ORGANIZATION; RECORDS; ANNUAL REPORT.



   (A)   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the
Plan Commission shall meet, organize, elect officers as they may deem
necessary, and adopt and later change or alter rules and regulations of
organization and procedure consistent with city and state laws.



   (B)   The Plan Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection.



   (C)   The Plan Commission shall file an annual report with the
Mayor, and with the City Council, setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.



(1994 Code, § 32.033)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.039  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive
Plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the city and
contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half miles
beyond the corporate limits of the city and not included in any other
municipality. The plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the Official
Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, of the city. The plan shall be advisory,
except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly
enacted by the City Council. All requirements for public hearing, filing of
notice of adoption with the county’s Recorder of Deeds, and filing of the
plan and ordinances with the City Clerk shall be complied with as provided
for by law;



   (B)   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of
the inhabitants of the city and contiguous territory, the plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements, as herein defined, and shall establish
reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing
of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds,
size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water
supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment.
The requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted
by ordinance;



   (C)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the city and the
recommended zoning classification for the land upon annexation;



   (D)   To recommend to the City Council from time to time changes in
the Comprehensive Plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary;



   (E)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time
plans or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the
Official Comprehensive Plan;



   (F)   To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or
parts thereof, to further the making of the improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan;



   (G)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;



   (H)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions
and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to
assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area; and



   (I)   To exercise other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the General Assembly of the state, entitled Illinois
Municipal Code, approved 5-29-1961, and effective 7-1-1961, and as amended,
as may be conferred by the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 32.034)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.040  ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL MAP; CONFORMANCE BY SUBDIVIDERS.



   (A)   At any time or times, before or after the formal adoption of
the Official Comprehensive Plan by the City Council, any official map may be
designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area included
within the Official Comprehensive Plan or one or more separate geographical
or functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous
unincorporated area within one and one-half miles from the corporate limits
of the city. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of
adoption with the county’s Recorder of Deeds, and filing of the plan and
ordinances including the official map with the City Clerk shall be complied
with as provided for by law.



   (B)   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented
for record, affecting land within the city, or within contiguous territory
which is not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits of
the city, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
street lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential
purposes, storm and flood water runoff channels and basins, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment, in
conformity with the applicable requirements of the ordinances including the
official map.



(1994 Code, § 32.035)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.041  CITY CLERK TO FURNISH DATA RELATIVE TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS;
REPORTS.



   The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission, for its
consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation
thereto, if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration
of the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 32.036)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



§ 32.042  EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL; EXPENDITURES.



   The Plan Commission may, at the discretion of the City Council, employ
a paid secretary or staff, or both, whose salaries, wages and other necessary
expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the City
Council from the public funds. If the Plan Commission shall deem it advisable
to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from
the City Council and appropriations by the City Council therefor.



(1994 Code, § 32.037)  (Ord. 95, passed 12-3-1962)



BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE MR. AND MRS. ALFRED A. BROWN MEMORIAL MUSEUM



§ 32.055  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a Board of Directors of the Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred A. Brown Memorial Museum, which shall have control, supervision and
direction of the museum of the city, subject to the direction or approval of
the City Council as may be in this subchapter limited, or as may hereafter by
city ordinance be limited.



(1994 Code, § 32.050)  (Ord. 256, passed 3-3-1975)



§ 32.056  PURPOSE OF MUSEUM.



   The museum shall be for the collection and exhibition of objects of
interest or curiosity, works of art, scientific specimens and historical
objects, and all those artifacts which are generally considered to be worthy
of exhibiting to the public in a building or place designated as a museum.



(1994 Code, § 32.051)  (Ord. 256, passed 3-3-1975)



§ 32.057  COMPOSITION OF BOARD; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATION; TERMS;
CHAIRPERSON.



   The museum shall be governed by a Board of Directors consisting of
seven members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the city, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
Each member of the Board so appointed shall be selected because of his or her
particular interest and knowledge in the collection of historical objects,
art, artifacts and other cultural exhibits normally associated with a museum.
Two members of the Board of Directors shall be appointed for a term of one
year; two shall be appointed for a term of two years; and three shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Those so appointed shall file a written
acceptance of the appointment with the City Clerk. All members appointed
after the initial appointments are made and approved shall be appointed for
terms of three years, except where an appointment is made to fill a vacancy,
in which case the appointment shall be for the remaining term of the position
so vacated. A director shall continue to serve after the expiration of his or
her term until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. One of
the persons appointed for the terms of three years in the initial appointment
of the Board of Directors shall be designated the Chairperson by the
appointment to serve for a term of one year. Thereafter the Chairperson shall
be elected annually by the Board of Directors.



(1994 Code, § 32.052)  (Ord. 256, passed 3-3-1975)



§ 32.058  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Board of Directors shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:



      (1)   To operate, maintain and manage the museum and museum
facility and to make and enter into contracts for the use, operation and
management of, and to expend funds therefor, and to provide rules and
regulations for the operation, management and use of the museum facility;



      (2)   To collect and preserve objects of scientific and
artistic value, representing past and present fauna and flora, the life and
work of man, geological history, natural resources and the manufacturing and
fine arts; to interpret for and educate the public concerning the foregoing;



      (3)   To determine, in its judgment, if necessary, charges for
admission and collect reasonable fees from the public for the privilege of
admission into the museum;



      (4)   To employ or enter into contracts for the employment of
any person, firm or corporation, and for professional services necessary or
desirable for the accomplishment of the objects of the museum facility;



      (5)   To maintain the museum for the benefit of the
inhabitants of the area, and the public generally;



      (6)   To adopt rules and regulations concerning the management
and operation of the museum facility, and the hours and days that the museum
shall be open to the public; and



      (7)   To elect annually the officers of the Board of
Directors, including a Secretary and Treasurer, who need not be members of
the Board.



   (B)   The Board of Directors shall annually on or before April 30 in
each year hereafter submit to the City Council a budget, which budget shall
be in the usual and customary form of budgets, and City Council shall reserve
the right to approve or accept the budget, and such items as the City Council
approves, or may add thereto, to be incorporated into the annual
appropriation ordinance of the city.



   (C)   The Board of Directors is further empowered and authorized to
receive in trust from any person, firm or corporation, gifts of money,
artifacts, objects of historical significance, other art objects, loans of
artifacts, art objects or items for display in the museum, and shall have
full power and authority to regulate the display of the artifacts or objects
of historical or cultural value with the persons so loaning or donating such
items to the museum.



   (D)   The Board of Directors is further authorized and empowered to
receive in trust, gifts, devises or bequests of money or property, either
real, personal or mixed, as may be donated to the museum. That the trust fund
and all accumulations thereto now held by the city, received by it from the
administrators of the estate of Anna Wehrheim Brown, shall be assigned and
transferred to the Board of Museum Directors, to hold the principal of the
trust fund, as devised to the city in trust, and to expend the income only,
including the accumulated income, on the maintenance of the museum as
directed by the third clause of the last will and testament of Anna Wehrheim
Brown.



   (E)   The Board of Directors is further authorized or required to
perform the following duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   To expend other funds as may be from time to time
obtained by gift or otherwise by the Board of Directors shall be expended by
it in accordance with the provisions of the gift so made, if the gift is so
limited; and



      (2)   To annually submit to the City Council a report of gifts
or donations made to it and all other income received by it and for what
purposes expended, which the report shall be submitted along with its budget
as herein provided.



   (F)   The Board of Directors shall, as soon as possible after their
organization, adopt by-laws in keeping with its duties and responsibilities
as a Board of Directors of the Museum, and as trustees of the funds to be
placed under their control. The by-laws shall be submitted to the City
Council for its approval.



   (G)   The first meeting of the Board of Directors shall be held
within 30 days after its appointment, upon the call of the Chairperson, the
time and place to be set by the Chairperson and included in the call of the
first meeting of the Board.



(1994 Code, § 32.053)



CULTURAL ARTS PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.070  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Cultural Arts Planning Commission which shall
consist of seven members. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of the
Commission.



(1994 Code, § 32.080)  (Ord. 361, passed 12-8-1986)



§ 32.071  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Cultural Arts Planning Commission is to examine the
needs of cultural organizations and the cultural desires of the community and
to provide for long term cultural arts planning and coordination of cultural
arts activities; to secure the services of professionally qualified persons
or firms to conduct cultural needs assessments; to determine the feasibility,
scope, design and to construct a cultural facility; to advise and assist in
the management and administration of the facility; and in general, to promote
the arts and improve the quality of life in the city.



(1994 Code, § 32.081)  (Ord. 361, passed 12-8-1986)



§ 32.072  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; TERM; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The members of the Cultural Arts Planning Commission shall be
residents of the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council, one member to be appointed from the Library
Board, one member to be appointed from the Museum Board, and five members to
be appointed at large from the city, upon the basis of the fitness of the
perspective members for the duties of their offices.



   (B)   (1)   The terms of the initial appointments of members to
the Cultural Arts Planning Commission shall be as follows.



         (a)   Three members shall be appointed for terms of one
year each.



         (b)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of two
years each.



         (c)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of three
years each.



      (2)   After the initial appointments, the members of the
Cultural Arts Planning Commission shall be appointed for a term of three
years each. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms
only.



   (C)   All members of the Cultural Arts Planning Commission shall
serve without compensation; except that, if the City Council shall deem it
advisable, the members of the Commission may be reimbursed for the
expenditures as may be determined from time to time by the City Council and
provided for in the annual appropriation ordinance.



(1994 Code, § 32.082)  (Ord. 361, passed 12-8-1986)



§ 32.073  ORGANIZATION; RECORDS; ANNUAL REPORT.



   (A)   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the
Cultural Arts Planning Commission shall meet, organize, elect the officers as
they may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter by-laws and
rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with the
ordinances of the city and laws of the state.



   (B)   The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings,
which records shall be open at all times to public inspection.



   (C)   The Commission shall file an annual written report with the
Mayor and with the City Council setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.



(1994 Code, § 32.083)  (Ord. 361, passed 12-8-1986)



§ 32.074  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Cultural Arts Planning Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:



   (A)   To recommend to the City Council competent, professional firms
or persons to conduct cultural needs, assessments within the city and to
recommend the services of the professions to the City Council;



   (B)   To identify the scope and use of a cultural facility in the
city and to recommend architectural firms with recognized competency in the
design of cultural facilities;



   (C)   To recommend land suitable for the site of a cultural facility;



   (D)   To recommend from time to time cultural activities and
programs to be promoted within the city;



   (E)   To prepare and recommend procedures and methods for the
administration of a cultural facility;



   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to
cultural activities and for the general purposes of promoting the arts; and



   (G)   To cooperate with cultural organizations or regional
organizations and other agencies or groups to further promote the arts and to
assure harmonious and integrated planning of cultural activities.



(1994 Code, § 32.084)  (Ord. 361, passed 12-8-1986)



§ 32.075  EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL; EXPENDITURES.



   The Cultural Arts Planning Commission may, at the discretion of the
City Council, employ a secretary or staff or both, whose salary, wages and
other necessary expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made
by the City Council from the public funds. If the Commission shall deem it
advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon
authority from the City Council and appropriations by the City Council
therefor.



(1994 Code, § 32.085)  (Ord. 361, passed 12-8-1986)



BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE MUNICIPAL, CIVIC AND CULTURAL FUND



§ 32.090  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Composition; appointment; qualifications. The Board of
Directors of the Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund shall consist of seven
members. The Mayor of the city shall serve on the Board coterminous with his
or her tenure as Mayor. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, shall appoint six Directors to the Board. None of the appointed six
Directors shall hold any other office with the city and all of them shall be
residents of the city and be chosen with reference to their special fitness
for office.



   (B)   Terms.



      (1)   The six appointed Directors shall hold office, one for
one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and two
for five years from and after May 1 following their appointment. At the first
regular meeting after their appointment, the six appointed Board members
shall cast lots for the respective terms.



      (2)   Annually thereafter, before the May 1 of each year, the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council shall appoint one or
more Directors to take the place of the retiring Director or Directors. The
subsequent appointee or appointees shall hold office for a period of five
years.



      (3)   All Directors shall hold office until their respective
successors are appointed.



   (C)   Removal; filling of vacancies. The Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council may remove any Director for misconduct in office
or neglect of duty. Vacancies in the Board of Directors, however occasioned,
shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in like manner as
original appointments.



   (D)   Conflict of interest. No Director at any time, either directly
or indirectly, shall be interested in any contract with the Board or directly
or indirectly involved in any investment made by the Board or benefit in any
manner while serving as a member of the Board.



   (E)   Compensation; reimbursement. No Director shall receive
compensation for his or her services as Director, but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his or
her duties.



   (F)   Election of officers. The Board of Directors shall immediately
meet after its appointment and organize by the election of one of its members
as Chairperson and one as Secretary. The Chairperson and Secretary shall have
the duties usually performed by the officers of similar boards.



   (G)   Adoption of rules. After the organization the Board of
Directors shall make and adopt the by-laws, rules and regulations for its own
guidance for the transaction of the business of the Board to carry out the
purposes as herein recited as it may deem expedient. These by-laws, rules and
regulations shall not be inconsistent with any provisions of this subchapter
or §§ 36.15 through 36.19 of this code of ordinances and shall be subject
to the approval of the City Council.



   (H)   Meetings. The Board of Directors shall meet annually at a time
and place to be designated by them. Regular meetings shall be established by
the Board of Directors in the by-laws as well as methods for calling special
meetings.



   (I)   Voting. A majority of the Board of Directors shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of the business thereof. The concurring vote of
a majority of all the Directors shall be required for the exercise of any of
the powers granted by this subchapter.



   (J)   Records. All records of the Board of Directors shall be open
to public inspection at all reasonable hours. The Board of Directors shall
provide for the proper safekeeping of its records subject to the provisions
of the Local Records Act (i.e., 50 ILCS 205/1 et seq.) as now provided or as
hereinafter amended or superseded by applicable law. The Secretary shall keep
a minute book for the recording of the action of the Board. A complete record
of the meetings and proceedings of the Board shall be kept in a minute book
and the minutes shall be signed by the Secretary and approved by the
Chairperson of the Board of Directors.



(1994 Code, § 32.110)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 32.091  EXONERATION AND INDEMNIFICATION.



   Every Director of the Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund shall be held
harmless, exonerated and shall be indemnified by the city against all
expenses, losses and liabilities including attorney fees reasonably incurred
by or imposed upon him or her in connection with any legal proceeding to
which he or she may be made a party or in which he or she may become involved
by reason of his or her being or having been a Director of the Fund or in
connection with any settlement of any legal proceeding made with court
approval, whether or not he or she is a Director at the time the expenses or
losses are incurred, except in such cases wherein the Director is adjudged to
be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of his or her
duties; provided that, in the settlement of any legal proceeding, the
indemnification herein shall apply only when the City Council as well as the
court approves the settlement and reimbursement as being in the best interest
of the Fund and the city. The foregoing right of indemnification shall be in
addition to and not exclusive of all other rights to which the Director may
be entitled.



(1994 Code, § 32.111)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 32.092  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Board of Directors shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:



   (A)   To immediately invest all moneys received by the Municipal,
Civic and Cultural Fund in the investments as are permitted under the laws of
the state;



   (B)   To pay all income earned by the Fund, except as hereinafter
provided, to the city on frequent intervals, but at least annually;



   (C)   To hold public hearings and to solicit ideas, suggestions and
to consider requests from various organizations, agencies, persons or
residents of the city concerning the expenditure of the income received from
the Fund;



   (D)   To recommend to the City Council expenditures or suggested
expenditures and the priority of the expenditures, the recommendation to be
advisory only;



   (E)   To provide financial advice and guidance to the City Council
in the expenditure of the income earned by the Fund;



   (F)   To establish accounts and to cause an audit to be made on an
annual basis of all accounts established;



   (G)   To furnish an annual report to the city and at any time to
furnish information relating to the Fund as may be requested by the City
Council; and



   (H)   To designate and approve a depository or depositories of all
moneys on behalf of the Fund.



(1994 Code, § 32.112)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 32.093  DUTY AND RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE INVESTMENTS.



   The Board of Directors shall cause all money received by them from the
City Clerk pursuant to the annexation agreement, as herein provided, to be
immediately invested in the obligations or investments as are now authorized
or may be hereinafter authorized pursuant to An Act Relating to Certain
Investments of Public Funds by Public Agencies, approved 7-23-1943, as is now
in force or may hereinafter be amended, or any other applicable laws of the
state that may be hereinafter enacted (Public Funds Investment Act, 30 ILCS
235/1 et seq.); provided, however, that nothing contained in this section
shall preclude or limit the Board from lending monies held in the Fund to the
city for uses consistent with the purpose of the Fund, subject to the
following limitations:



   (A)   The Board shall set forth all terms and conditions of the loan
transaction, which shall be approved by affirmative vote of at least
three-fourths of the corporate authorities then holding office prior thereto;



   (B)   Prior to the consummation of any loan transaction, the city
shall submit adequate proof of a credit quality rating of A- or better;



   (C)   Not more 25% of the principal held in the Fund in the
aggregate may be loaned by the Board to the city; and



   (D)   The Board shall be authorized, in its sole discretion, to
apply any and all income derived from the Fund for repayment of any
indebtedness of the city.



(1994 Code, § 32.113)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979; Ord. 2018-01, passed
1-8-2018)



§ 32.094  DUTY AND RESPONSIBILITY AS TO ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Directors shall keep a true and accurate account
of its receipts and disbursements and shall cause an annual audit to be made
of its books, records and accounts. The Board shall operate on a fiscal year
commencing May 1 and concluding on April 30 of each year. All moneys
belonging to the Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund and administered by the
Board shall be kept in the places of deposit as may be designated by
resolution of the Board. However, that only a regular organized state or
national bank or federal savings and loan association may be designated as a
depository.



   (B)   The Board of Directors shall maintain two accounts: one
account to be designated an investment account and a second account to be
designated an income account. All moneys received from the City Clerk and the
City Treasurer pursuant to the annexation agreement shall be deposited in the
investment account from which investments shall be purchased. All income
received from investments of the Fund shall be deposited into the income
account. The Board of Directors may establish and maintain other accounts as
may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter and §§ 36.15
through 36.19 of this code of ordinances.



   (C)   The Board of Directors shall maintain a record of all
investments of moneys received by the Fund and of the income received
therefrom and other records as shall be necessary for a full and complete
disclosure of a true and accurate account of its receipts and disbursements.



   (D)   The Board of Directors shall cause an audit of the Fund and
accounts to be made by an accountant employed by the city or retained
independently by the Board. The accounts shall be audited annually. The
audits shall begin as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year and
shall be completed and the report thereof submitted within 60 days after the
close of the fiscal year to the City Council. The audit shall be made in
accordance with generally accepted auditing procedures and without
limitations on the scope of the audit to the extent that the effects of the
limitations will result in the qualification of the opinion of the accountant
or accountants. The audit report shall consist of the professional opinion of
the accountant or accountants with respect to the financial statements or, if
an opinion cannot be expressed, a declaration that the accountant is unable
to express the opinion and an explanation of the reasons he or she cannot do
so.



   (E)   In addition to the audit, the Board of Directors shall cause a
report to be prepared of all investments with sufficient descriptions to
identify the same and containing the income receipts from each investment and
other information as to provide a full disclosure of all investments then
currently held by the Board. The report shall contain additional information
as may be requested from time to time hereafter by the City Council.



   (F)   The Board of Directors is hereby authorized to expend that
portion of the income receipts from investments of the Fund as may be
necessary to defray the expenses of audits of the Fund, reports of the Fund,
investment expenses and necessary expenses incurred by members of the Board
of Directors in the performance of their duties as hereinbefore provided. The
Board of Directors may pay from the income receipts as aforesaid other
expenses as may be from time to time hereinafter authorized by the City
Council.



(1994 Code, § 32.114)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 32.095  EXECUTION OF INSTRUMENTS.



   All instruments in writing executed by the Board of Directors shall be
executed in the name of the Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund by the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Board of Directors or by other persons as
the Board of Directors by resolution may direct.



(1994 Code, § 32.115)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 32.096  DISSOLUTION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   The Board of Directors may be dissolved upon the adoption of a
resolution providing for dissolution passed by a favorable vote of
three-fourths of the members of the Board of Directors then holding office.
Upon dissolution of the Board of Directors all records, audits and funds held
by the Board shall be delivered to the City Clerk and City Treasurer.



(1994 Code, § 32.116)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE MISSELHORN ART FOUNDATION



§ 32.110  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Misselhorn
Art Foundation Ordinance”.



(1994 Code, § 32.125)  (Ord. 385, passed 9-11-1989)



§ 32.111  ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   There is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Misselhorn Art
Foundation, which will have control, supervision, preservation, collection
and exhibition of the artistic works of Roscoe Misselhorn and related
activities hereinafter set forth subject to the direction or approval of the
City Council as may be in this subchapter limited or as may hereinafter by
ordinance of the city be limited.



(1994 Code, § 32.126)  (Ord. 385, passed 9-11-1989)



§ 32.112  PURPOSE OF FOUNDATION.



   The Misselhorn Art Foundation shall have the responsibility to
inventory, catalog, insure, preserve and maintain the artistic works, books,
records and materials of the Roscoe Misselhorn art collection; to provide for
public viewing of the Misselhorn art collection in a building or place
designated as a gallery or art facility; to maintain the private collection
of art books; to promote the fine arts and artistic activities in the city;
and to administer the “Roscoe Misselhorn Art Scholarship”.



(1994 Code, § 32.127)  (Ord. 385, passed 9-11-1989)



§ 32.113  ORGANIZATION; COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATION; TERM; CHAIRPERSON.



   (A)   The Misselhorn Art Foundation shall be governed by a Board of
Trustees consisting of eight members, one of whom shall be the Commissioner
of Accounts and Finance. A majority of the remaining members shall be
residents of the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. Each member of the Board so appointed shall be
selected because of his or her particular interest and knowledge of the arts
and humanities and interest in the promotion of the arts.



   (B)   The term of the Commissioner of Accounts and Finance shall be
coexistent with his or her term as Commissioner. For appointment to the
initial Board, two members of the Board of Trustees shall be appointed for a
term of one year; two shall be appointed for a term of two years; and three
shall be appointed for a term of three years. Those so appointed shall file a
written acceptance of the appointment with the City Clerk. All members
appointed after the initial appointments are made and approved shall be
appointed for terms of three years, except where an appointment is made to
fill a vacancy, in which case the appointment shall be for the unexpired term
of the position so vacated. A Trustee shall continue to serve after the
expiration of his or her term until his or her successor has been appointed
and qualified. One of the persons appointed for the term of three years in
the initial appointment of the Board of Trustees shall be designated the
Chairperson by the appointment to serve for a term of one year. Thereafter
the Chairperson shall be elected annually by the Board of Trustees.



(1994 Code, § 32.128)  (Ord. 385, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 431, passed
2-8-1993)



§ 32.114  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:



      (1)   To collect, preserve catalog, inventory, insure and
maintain the works of art, records, art books and other materials of Roscoe
Misselhorn;



      (2)   To operate, maintain and manage a gallery or art
facility, to house the works of art of the Misselhorn collection and to enter
into contracts for the use, operation and management of and expend funds
therefor, and to adopt rules and regulations concerning the operation,
management and use of the art facility, and the hours and days that the
facility shall be open to the public; to recommend and advise the City
Council as to land and/or buildings suitable for the gallery and art facility
and to expend funds therefor as herein provided only upon prior approval of
the City Council;



      (3)   To determine, in its judgment, if necessary, charges for
admission and collect reasonable fees from the public for the privilege of
admission into the art facility;



      (4)   To employ or enter into contracts for the employment of
any person, firm or corporation, and for professional services necessary or
desirable for the accomplishment of the objects of the art facility or to
further promote the arts and art activities in the city;



      (5)   To maintain the gallery or art facility to promote the
fine arts for the benefit of the inhabitants of the city and the public
generally;



      (6)   To administer a scholarship program to be known and
designated as the “Roscoe Misselhorn Art Scholarship”; and



      (7)   To elect annually the officers of the Board, including a
Secretary and Treasurer who need not be members of the Board.



   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall annually on or before May 1 of
each year hereafter submit to the City Council a budget, which the budget
shall be in the usual and customary form of budgets, and City Council shall
reserve the right to approve or accept the budget and the items as the City
Council approves or may add thereto, shall be incorporated into the annual
appropriation ordinance of the city.



   (C)   The Board of Trustees is further empowered to receive in trust
from any person, firm or corporation gifts of art objects or loans of art
objects or items for display in the gallery or art facility and shall have
full power and authority to regulate the display of art objects or other
works of art with the person so loaning or donating the items to the
foundation.



   (D)   The Board of Trustees is further authorized and empowered to
receive in trust, gifts, devises or bequests of money or property, either
real, personal or mixed, as may be donated to the foundation. The Board of
Trustees shall further establish a trust fund to be designated the
“Misselhorn Foundation Trust Fund”. The city shall hold the principal of
the trust fund in trust and shall expend the income only, which income shall
be assigned and transferred to the Board of Trustees.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees is further authorized or required to
perform the following duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   To expend other funds as may be from time to time
received by the Board of Trustees by gift or otherwise; provided, any gift
which is limited shall only be expended by them in accordance with the
provisions of the gift so made; and



      (2) To annually submit to the City Council a report of gifts or
donations made to them and all other income received by the Board of Trustees
and for what purposes expended, which said report shall be submitted along
with the Board’s budget as herein provided.



   (F)   The Board of Trustees shall, as soon as possible after its
organization, adopt by-laws in keeping with its duties and responsibilities
as a Board of Trustees of the foundation, and as trustees of the funds to be
placed under their control. The by-laws shall be submitted to the City
Council for prior approval.



   (G)   The Board of Trustees shall hold an organizational meeting
within 30 days after their appointment, upon the call of the Chairperson, the
time and place to be set by the Chairperson and included in the call of the
first meeting of the Board of Trustees.



(1994 Code, § 32.129)  (Ord. 385, passed 9-11-1989)



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   33.01   Creation of Police Department



   33.02   Chief of Police



   33.03   Appointment, compensation of subordinate police officers



   33.04   Disposition of fees and costs



§ 33.01  CREATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   There is hereby established a City Police Department, which shall
consist of the Chief of Police and other subordinate police officers as the
City Council may establish. The Chief of Police shall adopt, with the
approval and consent of the Mayor and City Council, rules and regulations
defining the responsibilities, duties and conduct of members of the city’s
Police Department and providing for methods and grounds for suspension and
dismissal of the members.



(1994 Code, § 33.01)  (Ord. 249, passed 8-20-1973)



§ 33.02  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Chief of Police, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council and who
shall reside within the corporate limits of the city. The Chief of Police
shall receive compensation as the City Council may establish by resolution.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be a conservator of the peace and it
shall be his or her duty to enforce the laws of the state, the provisions of
this code or ordinances and other city ordinances. The Chief of Police shall
perform other duties as the Mayor may direct.



(1994 Code, § 33.02)  (Ord. 249, passed 8-20-1973; Ord. 97-03, passed
6-9-1997)



§ 33.03  APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION OF SUBORDINATE POLICE OFFICERS.



   Police officers subordinate to the Chief of Police shall be appointed
by the Chief of Police with the approval and consent of the Mayor and City
Council and shall receive the compensation as the Mayor and City Council may
establish by resolution. All full-time employees of the Police Department
shall reside within the corporate limits of the city.



(1994 Code, § 33.03)  (Ord. 249, passed 8-20-1973; Ord. 97-03, passed
6-9-1997; Ord. 13-02, passed 1-14-2013)



§ 33.04  DISPOSITION OF FEES AND COSTS.



   All fees and costs that may hereafter accrue, or to which a member of
the Police Department may hereafter become entitled to as a witness or for
the making of arrests, shall be turned over by the Clerk of the Circuit
Court, or Magistrate, as the case may be, to the City Treasurer and be
deposited to the General Fund of the city.



(1994 Code, § 33.04)  (Ord. 76, passed 9-8-1954)



CHAPTER 34:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   34.01   Creation; composition



   34.02   Fire Chief



   34.03   Personnel; appointment; compensation



   34.04   Organization of Department; obedience to orders



   34.05   Duties of Department and members



   34.06   Custody of property at fire scene



   34.07   Investigation of fire; reports



   34.08   Arrest authority



   34.09   Fire occurring outside the city; services provided to
non-residents within the city; fees



   34.10   Foreign Fire Insurance Board



§ 34.01  CREATION; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created the Fire Department. The Fire Department shall
consist of the Fire Chief and other members as may be provided for from time
to time by City Council.



(1994 Code, § 34.01)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991)



§ 34.02  FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Fire Chief. The Fire
Chief shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety,
with the advice and consent of City Council and shall reside within the
corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the care of the
apparatus belonging thereto and the performance of the members of the Fire
Department. The Fire Chief shall keep records and make reports regarding the
activities of his or her Department as may be required by the Mayor.



(1994 Code, § 34.02)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 97-03, passed
6-9-1997)



§ 34.03  PERSONNEL; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   All members of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, with the advice and consent of City
Council, and they shall receive compensation as may be determined by City
Council. All members of the Fire Department shall reside within the corporate
limits of the city.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall appoint any officers deemed necessary to
the operation of the Fire Department at his or her sole discretion, with the
advice and consent of City Council.



(1994 Code, § 34.03)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 97-03, passed
6-9-1997)



§ 34.04  ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT; OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS.



   The Fire Chief and, in his or her absence, such person as he or she may
designate by departmental rule, shall have charge of the activities of the
Department; all members of the Department shall obey the orders and
directions of the Fire Chief and their superiors in the Department.



(1994 Code, § 34.04)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991)



§ 34.05  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT AND MEMBERS.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department and the members thereof, to
prevent and extinguish fires occurring in the city and to enforce all
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city relating to fire
hazards.



(1994 Code, § 34.05)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991)



§ 34.06  CUSTODY OF PROPERTY AT FIRE SCENE.



   The members of the Fire Department shall have charge and custody of
property removed from the scene of a fire by them to avoid loss or damage,
unless the property is turned over to the owner or agent for the owner.



(1994 Code, § 34.06)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991)



§ 34.07  INVESTIGATION OF FIRE; REPORTS.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to investigate into the cause of
any accidental or destructive fire occurring in the city. In case there is
reason to suspect that there was any criminal act or violation of a provision
of this code or other ordinance of the city in connection with the fire, the
Fire Chief shall report the same to the City Attorney.



(1994 Code, § 34.07)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991)



§ 34.08  ARREST AUTHORITY.



   The Fire Chief and members of the Fire Department shall have the power
to arrest any person at or near the scene of the accidental or destructive
fire for interference with the Fire Department in the performance of its
duties, or for the commission of any crime or violation of any provision of
this code or other ordinance of the city in connection therewith.



(1994 Code, § 34.08)  (Ord. 403, passed 6-10-1991)



§ 34.09  FIRE OCCURRING OUTSIDE THE CITY; SERVICES PROVIDED TO
NON-RESIDENTS WITHIN THE CITY; FEES.



   (A)   The Fire Department, Fire Chief and members of the Fire
Department shall have the authority to prevent and extinguish the fires
occurring outside the corporate limits of the city, the authority to respond
to the request for assistance in the prevention and extinguishment of fires
from the fire departments of neighboring communities and the authority to
engage in rescue operations occurring outside the corporate limits of the
city.



   (B)   (1)   The Fire Chief and Commissioner of Public Health and
Safety shall be authorized to assess and collect subscription fees for fire
protection by written agreement with any and all property owners of lands
outside the city with the advice and consent of the City Council.



      (2)   The amount of the fees and terms of such agreements
shall be reviewed and revised, if necessary, from time to time by resolution
of the City Council.



   (C)   If no subscription agreement exists pursuant to the terms of
division (B) above, and the Fire Department provides services to prevent or
extinguish fires to premises outside the corporate limits of the city, the
owner of the premises shall pay to the city an initial call-out fee of $2,000
and additional fees in the sum of $250 per quarter-hour, or portion thereof,
for which services are required.



   (D)   Whenever the Fire Department provides services necessary to
prevent or extinguish fires or engages in rescue operations within the
corporate limits of the city to a non-resident owner of a motor vehicle the
party receiving benefit of the services shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the payment to the city in the initial call out fee for
$2,000 and additional fees of $250 per quarter-hour, or portion thereof, for
which services are required; provided that, no subscription agreement exists
with said owner.



   (E)   Whenever the Fire Department engages in rescue operations
outside the corporate limits of the city, the owner of the motor vehicle and
the party receiving the benefit of the services shall be jointly and
severally responsible for payment to the city in the initial call-out fee of
$2,000 and additional fees in the sum of $250 per quarter-hour, or portion
thereof, for which services are required; provided that, no subscription
agreement exists with said owner.



(1994 Code, § 34.09)  (Ord. 371, passed 4-25-1988; Ord. 403, passed
6-10-1991; Ord. 441, passed 12-27-1993; Ord. 95-13, passed 7-10-1995; Ord.
07-08, passed 11-26-2007; Ord. 11-03, passed 7-11-2011)



§ 34.10  FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD.



   (A)   All members of the Department shall elect not less than three
members of the Department  to serve as a Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The
members of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall be solely responsible for
determining the expenditures from moneys received by the City Treasurer from
foreign fire insurance company fees.



   (B)   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board, upon its election, may
either appoint a treasurer or authorize the City Treasurer to manage the
money to be appropriated to the Board.



   (C)   The officers of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall develop
and maintain a listing of those items that the Board feels are appropriate
expenditures pursuant to law. All moneys paid to the City Treasurer shall be
set apart and be appropriated annually by the corporate authorities to the
Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board. Should a Treasurer of the Board be
appointed, said Board shall give a sufficient bond to the municipality in
which the Fire Department is organized. Said bond shall be approved by the
Mayor conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or
her duties under this section. The Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Board shall receive the appropriated money and shall pay out the money upon
the order of the Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board for the maintenance,
use and benefit of the Department.



   (D)   As a part of the annual municipal audit, all funds of the Fire
Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall be audited to verify that all
purchases are for the maintenance, use and benefit of said Fire Department.



(1994 Code, § 34.10)  (Ord. 03-03, passed 4-28-2003)



CHAPTER 35:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY



Section



   35.01   Establishment; composition



   35.02   Coordinator



   35.03   Functions



   35.04   Service as mobile support team



   35.05   Mutual aid agreements



   35.06   Emergency action



   35.07   Compensation



   35.08   Reimbursement by state



   35.09   Purchases and expenditures



   35.10   Oath



   35.11   Office space



   35.12   Appropriation; levy of taxes



   35.13   Local disaster emergencies



§ 35.01  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is hereby created the City Emergency Management Agency
(Agency) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
action or from natural or human-made disaster, in accordance with the
state’s Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975 (i.e., as amended, 20
ILCS 3305/1 et seq.).



   (B)   The city’s Agency shall consist of the Coordinator and any
additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator.



(1994 Code, § 35.01)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.02  COORDINATOR.



   (A)   The Coordinator of the city’s Agency shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and shall serve until removed
by same. The Coordinator shall reside within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the city’s AGency,
subject to the direction and control of the Mayor as principal executive of
the city pursuant to 20 ILCS 3305/10, as amended.



   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as the Coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by him or
her, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as
provided by this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 35.02)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976; Ord. 97-03, passed
6-9-1997; Ord. 2002-09, passed 6-24-2002; Ord. 2004-10, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 35.03  FUNCTIONS.



   The city’s Agency shall perform Agency functions within the city as
shall be prescribed in and by the state’s Agency plan and program prepared
by the Governor, and the orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated
by the Governor and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the city
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with
any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered
into as provided in the state’s Act of 1975 (i.e., as amended, 20 ILCS
3305/1 et seq.).



(1994 Code, § 35.03)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.04  SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.



   (A)   All or any members of the city’s Agency organization may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the state’s
Director of ESDA as provided by law.



   (B)   The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by
the Coordinator of the city’s Agency organization.



   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the state’s
Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights
and immunities incident to the employment or office. Any member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from
the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(1994 Code, § 35.04)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.05  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Coordinator of the Agency may negotiate mutual aid agreements with
other cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no agreement shall
be effective until it has been approved by the City Council and by the
state’s Director of ESDA.



(1994 Code, § 35.05)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.06  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from human-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
city’s Agency to cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the Governor
in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(1994 Code, § 35.06)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.07  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the city’s Agency who are paid employees or officers of
the city, if called for training by  state’s Director of ESDA, shall
receive for the time spent in the training the same rate of pay as is
attached to the position held; members who are not city employees or officers
shall receive for the training time such compensation as may be established
by the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 35.07)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.08  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.



   The state’s Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate
fund, any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to
training members of the city’s Agency as prescribed by the state’s
Director of ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a
mobile support team while serving outside the city in response to a call by
the Governor or state’s Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other
reimbursement made by the state incident to Agency activities as provided by
law.



(1994 Code, § 35.08)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.09  PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The City Council may, on recommendation of the City
Coordinator of the Agency, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to
place the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting
from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect
the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of any disaster or from human-made or
natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the City
Coordinator of the Agency is authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the state’s Act of 1975 (i.e., as amended, 20
ILCS 3305/1 et seq.); provided that, if the City Council meets at such time,
he or she shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by
that body.



(1994 Code, § 35.09)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.10  OATH.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city’s Agency
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:



“I,                                       , do solemnly
swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of
the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities
thereof, both public and private, against all enemies foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose
of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon
which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I
am affiliated with the City of Sparta Emergency Management Agency
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party
or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or this state by force or violence.”



(1994 Code, § 35.10)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.11  OFFICE SPACE.



   The City Council is authorized to designate space in a city building or
elsewhere, as may be provided for by the City Council for the city’s Agency
as its office.



(1994 Code, § 35.11)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.12  APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.



   The City Council may make an appropriation for Agency purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for Agency purposes only, a
tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of all taxable
property in addition to all other taxes as provided by the state’s Act of
1975 (i.e., as amended, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.]; however, that amount
collectable under the levy shall in no event exceed $0.25 per capita.



(1994 Code, § 35.12)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



§ 35.13  LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.



   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor. It shall
not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days, except by
or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing or terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 35.13)  (Ord. 270, passed 10-12-1976)



CHAPTER 36:  FUNDS



Section



Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund



   36.01   Election to participate; Clerk to file notice with Board of
Trustees



Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund



   36.15   Short title



   36.16   Definitions



   36.17   Creation of Fund



   36.18   Purpose



   36.19   Amendment or repeal of provisions



Community Development Loan Fund



   36.30   Short title



   36.31   Definitions



   36.32   Creation of Fund



   36.33   Purpose



   36.34   Community Development Loan Fund Review Board



   36.35   Council review of Board action



   36.36   Expenses



   36.37   Execution of instruments



   36.38   Dissolution of the Review Board



Misselhorn Art Foundation Trust Fund



   36.50   Establishment of Fund



   36.51   Purpose



   36.52   Board of Directors



   36.53   Maintenance of accounts



   36.54   Record of investments



   36.55   Amendments; repeal



ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND



§ 36.01  ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE; CLERK TO FILE NOTICE WITH BOARD OF
TRUSTEES.



   (A)   The city does hereby elect to participate in the state’s
Municipal Retirement Fund, effective 1-1-1973.



   (B)   The City Clerk is directed to promptly file a certified copy
of this section with the Board of Trustees of the state’s Municipal
Retirement Fund.



(1994 Code, § 36.01)  (Ord. 240, passed 12-11-1972)



MUNICIPAL, CIVIC AND CULTURAL FUND



§ 36.15  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sparta
Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund Ordinance”.



(1994 Code, § 36.10)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 36.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANNEXATION AGREEMENT. The annexation agreement entered into by and
between the city and Peabody Coal Company on 2-22-1978.



   BOARD. The Board of Directors of the Sparta Municipal, Civic and
Cultural Fund.



   FUND. The Sparta Municipal, Civic and Cultural Fund as created by this
subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 36.11)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 36.17  CREATION OF FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Sparta Municipal, Civic and
Cultural Fund into which shall be paid all proceeds received by virtue of the
annexation agreement entered into by and between the city and Peabody Coal
Company on the 2-22-1978.



   (B)   An appropriation shall be made annually to the Fund in the
annual appropriation ordinance of the city of all moneys expected to be
received during the current fiscal year of the city pursuant to the
provisions of the aforesaid annexation agreement.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk and the City Treasurer
to deposit that portion of the sales tax received by the city resulting from
the sale of coal mined by the surface mining method from the annexed area
pursuant to the annexation agreement into the above designated fund. The
portion of the sales tax receipts received by the city from the state’s
Department of Revenue shall be determined to be 1% of the gross sales price
of all coal sold within the state as set forth in the Peabody Coal Company
monthly report less the percentage as is charged for collection of the same
by the state’s Department of  Revenue. All  moneys received directly from
Peabody Coal Company resulting from the  sale  of  coal outside the state
(or all moneys paid by Peabody Coal Company to the city pursuant to the
provisions of the annexation agreement in the event of the repeal or
modification of the state’s Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act
[i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, 8-11-1.3]) shall be deposited in the above
designated fund. Upon the deposit of the moneys in the above designated fund,
the moneys shall be invested and expended only in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 36.12)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 36.18  PURPOSE.



   The Fund is hereby created for the purpose of investing all moneys
received by the city pursuant to the Peabody Coal Company annexation
agreement in income producing obligations permitted under the laws of the
state, as hereinafter provided, and to use the income only received therefrom
for financing municipal services, facilities or activities as is now or may
hereafter be authorized by the municipal code of the state, including, but
not limited to, the following:



   (A)   To provide, improve, maintain and construct fire and police
facilities and services, health, safety and welfare services; streets and
public thoroughfares, water and sewer lines, systems and plants;



   (B)   To acquire, purchase, own, construct, lease, repair,
reconstruct, equip and maintain municipal and community buildings;



   (C)   To promote, operate and maintain expositions, conventions,
theatrical, sports and cultural activities;



   (D)   To develop off-street parking and other improvements for the
business district of the city;



   (E)   To provide funds for industrial development;



   (F)   To arrange, finance and maintain industrial, cultural,
educational, trade and scientific exhibits;



   (G)   To provide funds for the engineering, architectural, planning
and development of plans and programs for the growth of the city;



   (H)   To provide funds for the acquisition of sites for municipal
activities;



   (I)   To promote, arrange, acquire and maintain sites, artifacts,
exhibits, books and materials for museum and library buildings and facilities;



   (J)   To promote, arrange, acquire and maintain projects, sites,
buildings and facilities for the younger residents of the city;



   (K)   To promote, arrange, acquire and maintain projects, sites,
buildings and facilities for the elderly residents of the city;



   (L)   To promote, arrange, acquire and maintain sites, buildings and
facilities for recreational and park purposes, health care centers, day care
centers, hospital and medical centers; and



   (M)   To promote, arrange, maintain and finance activities and
facilities in general, which will engender the health, prosperity, moral and
well-being of the residents of the city.



(1994 Code, § 36.13)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



§ 36.19  AMENDMENT OR REPEAL OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter or any provisions thereof may be amended or
repealed upon the favorable vote of four of the five members of the City
Council; provided that, the City Council shall first cause a public hearing
to be held in regard to any amendment or repeal of this subchapter.



   (B)   The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council and notice
of the hearing shall be given by publication thereof in the Sparta News
Plaindealer or its successor or, if no newspaper is published in the city,
any newspaper having a general circulation among the residents of the city.



   (C)   The notice shall state the time, place and date of the hearing
and shall also state with particularity the nature of the amendment to this
subchapter. The notice shall be published three times for three consecutive
weeks, the first publication thereof being not less than 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing.



   (D)   In addition thereto, notice of the hearing shall be posted in
the City Hall and three other prominent places within the city.



(1994 Code, § 36.14)  (Ord. 292, passed 4-10-1979)



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LOAN FUND



§ 36.30  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sparta
Community Development Loan Fund Ordinance”.



(1994 Code, § 36.25)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD or REVIEW BOARD. The City Community Development Loan Fund Review
Board as created by this subchapter.



   FUND. The Sparta Community Development Loan Fund as created by this
subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 36.26)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.32  CREATION OF FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Sparta Community Development Loan
Fund into which shall be paid moneys appropriate for community development as
deemed necessary and available by the City Council.



   (B)    An appropriation shall be made annually to the Fund in the
annual appropriation ordinance of the city of all moneys expected to be
received during the current fiscal year of the city pursuant to the
provisions herein contained.



   (C)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk and the City
Treasurer to deposit all proceeds hereinabove set forth into the above
designated Fund.



      (2)   Upon deposit of the moneys in the above designated Fund,
the moneys shall be invested and expended only in accordance with the
provision of this subchapter.



      (3)   The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall receive any and
all repayments of funds loaned under this subchapter and shall reinvest into
the Fund for future loan or grant use.



(1994 Code, § 36.27)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.33  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Community Development Loan Fund is created for the
following purposes:



      (1)   To promote and stimulate development and advance
business prosperity and economic welfare of the city and its citizens;



      (2)   To stimulate and assist, when usual customary credit is
unavailable or unfeasible, through low or no interest loans, the location of
new retail, industrial or commercial business to the city;



      (3)   To encourage and assist the rehabilitation of existing
businesses and property within the corporate limits of the city through
administration of low or no interest loans or grants;



      (4)   To stimulate and assist in the expansion of existing
businesses which would tend to promote commercial business development and
creation of new jobs through administration of low or no interest loans; and



      (5)   To cooperate and act in conjunction with other
organizations, public and private, in the promotion and advancement of
commercial business activity within the city.



   (B)   The above purposes may be achieved by creation of the
Community Development Loan Fund Review Board, its development of program
guidelines and forms, its recommendation to the City Council that the
appropriated moneys to the Community Development Loan Fund to be expended in
the form of loans to qualified applicants at interest rates below market
levels, or that the Board recommend the expenditures of moneys to qualified
applicants without repayment pursuant to the Board’s guidelines; that the
Board maintain a pool of funds for use by qualified applicants pursuant to
the guidelines; that it maintain a schedule of repayment of all loans which
are expected to be repaid pursuant to the agreement with qualified
applicants; that it report to the City Council amounts expended and principal
amounts, interest and earnings retrieved pursuant to the loan and grant
activity; and to do all other things necessary and proper for the achievement
of the specified goals and purposes of the Fund.



(1994 Code, § 36.28)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.34  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LOAN FUND REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   Appointment.



      (1)   The Community Development Loan and Review Board shall
consist of five members, three of which shall be appointed by the Mayor of
the city with the advice and consent of the City Council and one each
nominated and appointed by the city’s Business Association and the city’s
Area Chamber of Commerce, respectively. None of the appointed five Review
Board members shall hold any other offices within the city and all shall be
residents within the city and be chosen with reference to their special
fitness for office. The five appointed Loan Review Board members shall hold
office, one for one year, two for two years, and two for three years, from
and after the first day of the month following their appointment. At the
first regular meeting of their appointment, the five Review Board members
shall cast lots for their representative terms. Annually thereafter, before
August 1 each year, the Mayor, with the advise and consent of the City
Council, or the respective organizations, shall appoint the member or members
to take the place of the retiring member. The subsequent appointees shall
hold office for a period of three years. All members of the Loan Review Board
shall hold office until their respective successors are appointed. The Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the City Council, may remove any member for
misconduct in office or neglect of duty. Vacancies in the Loan Review Board,
however occasioned, shall be filled for the remainder of the expired term in
like manner as original appointments.



      (2)   No Review Board member, at any time, either directly or
indirectly, shall be interested in any contract with the Board or directly or
indirectly be involved in any investment made by the Board, or benefit in any
manner while serving as a member of the Review Board. No member shall receive
compensation for his or her services as a member of the Board, but shall be
entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of his or her duties.



   (B)   Organization and rules.



      (1)   The Loan Review Board shall immediately meet after its
appointment and organize by election one of its members as Chairperson and
one as Secretary. The Chairperson and Secretary shall have duties usually
performed by such officers on similar boards. After the organization, the
Review Board shall make and adopt by-laws, rules and regulations for its own
guidance for the transaction of business of the Board to carry out the
purposes as herein recited as it may deem expedient. These by-laws, rules and
regulations shall not be inconsistent with any provisions of this subchapter
and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The Review Board
shall meet no less than annually at a time and place to be designated by it.
Regular meetings shall be established by the Board in the by-laws as well as
methods for calling special meetings.



      (2)   A majority of Review Board members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of the business thereof. A concurring vote of a
majority of all members shall be required for the exercise of any of the
powers granted by this subchapter. All records of the Board shall be open to
public inspection at all reasonable hours. The Review Board shall provide for
the proper safekeeping of its records subject to the provisions of the Local
Records Act, as now provided or as hereinafter amended or superseded by
applicable law. The Secretary shall keep a minute book for the recording of
the action of the Board. A complete record of the minutes and proceedings of
the Board shall be kept in a minute book and the minutes shall be signed by
the Secretary and approved by the Chairperson of the Board.



   (C)   Powers, duties and responsibilities. The Board shall have the
following powers, duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   To direct investment of all moneys received by the Loan
Fund in such investments as permitted by the laws of the state;



      (2)   To immediately provide and develop loan guidelines,
terms and conditions, consistent with state and federal law by which the
administration of the Community Development Loan Fund may be administered;



      (3)   To provide for loan and grant application forms
necessary for the administration of the Community Development Loan Fund;



      (4)   To hold public hearing and solicit ideas, suggestions,
to consider requests for various organizations, agencies, persons or
residents of the city concerning the expenditure of funds;



      (5)   To act on and determine the viability of loan and grant
applications requesting expenditures of the Community Development Loan Fund;



      (6)   To accept, reject, modify, defer, table or consolidate
loan or grant applications; all acts with respect to loan and grant
applications shall be made without respect to race, sex, age, national
origin, religion or disability and all equal opportunity requirements of
state and federal law shall be strictly adhered to;



      (7)   To recommend to the City Council expenditures or
suggested expenditures and the priority of the expenditures, including
schedules of loan repayment and interest rates;



      (8)   To maintain records of all loan applications made
pursuant to this subchapter and all records of loan agreements and loan
disbursements and repayments;



      (9)   To establish accounts therefrom and to cause an audit to
be made on an annual basis on all accounts established, of all moneys
received and disbursements made pursuant to this subchapter;



      (10)   To furnish an annual report to the city at any time to
furnish other information relating to the Fund as may be requested by the
City Council;



      (11)   To designate and approve a depository or depositories
of all moneys received on behalf of the Fund;



      (12)   To enter into participation agreements or companion
loans with financial institutions, other commercial lenders or agencies and
instrumentalities of the federal or state government;



      (13)   To set loan maturity dates, terms of repayment, loan
modification and restructuring pursuant to the guidelines adopted by the
Review Board;



      (14)   To set reasonable fees for the administration of the
Fund program and servicing of outstanding loans;



      (15)   To enter into agreements with financial institutions
for the administration of the Community Development Loan Fund program;



      (16)   To work in conjunction with the City Attorney on loans
in default or delinquencies and to recommend that the city institute any and
all necessary legal action;



      (17)   To work in conjunction with any and all local
self-employment trading programs, licensed professionals, private management
consulting firms, local educational institutions, and public and private
economic development organizations, including, but not limited to, the
city’s Business Association and the city’s Area Chamber of Commerce,
federal, state or local economic development groups, or management assistance
services; and



      (18)   To do all other things necessary aid proper for the
achievement of the specified goals and purposes of the Community Development
Loan Fund program.



(1994 Code, § 36.29)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.35  COUNCIL REVIEW OF BOARD ACTION.



   Any final action of the Community Development Loan Review Board shall
be brought before the City Council at the next regularly scheduled Council
meeting and placed upon that meeting’s agenda. All  recommendations of the
Board as to approval or denial of loan or grant applications shall be
considered by the Council and deemed to be approved as final Council action,
unless, within 30 days of the meeting, the Council by a vote of two-thirds
majority of all Council members then holding office rejects the
recommendation. The Council may seek additional information or request
modifications from the Board of any application or recommendation, but the
request shall not alter or extend the 30-day time period prescribed herein.



(1994 Code, § 36.30)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.36  EXPENSES.



   The Review Beard is hereby authorized to expend portions of funds
received as appropriated by the City Council or received from loan repayments
or otherwise as may be necessary to defray the expenses of audits of the
Fund, reports of the Fund, investment expenses or other necessary expenses
incurred by members of the Review Board in the performance of their duties as
hereinabove provided.



(1994 Code, § 36.31)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.37  EXECUTION OF INSTRUMENTS.



   All instruments in writing executed by the Review Board shall be
executed in the name of the Fund by the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Review Board or by other persons as the Review Board by resolution may direct.



(1994 Code, § 36.32)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



§ 36.38  DISSOLUTION OF THE REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   The Community Development Loan Fund Review Board may be
dissolved upon the adoption of a resolution providing for dissolution passed
by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the members of the Review Board then
holding office and by a similar favorable vote of two-thirds of the City
Council then holding office.



   (B)   Upon dissolution of the Review Board, all records, audits and
funds held by the Board shall be delivered to the City Clerk and City
Treasurer.



(1994 Code, § 36.33)  (Ord. 423, passed 8-11-1992)



MISSELHORN ART FOUNDATION TRUST FUND



§ 36.50  ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Misselhorn Art Foundation Trust
Fund into which shall be paid all proceeds received by virtue of the bequest
of Roscoe Misselhorn, Deceased, to the city’s Misselhorn Art Foundation
pursuant to Article Sixth, subparagraph A, of the Last Will and Testament of
Roscoe Misselhorn, Deceased, dated 11-20-1992.



   (B)   An appropriation shall be made annually to the Fund in the
annual Appropriation Ordinance of the city of all moneys expected to be
received during the current fiscal year of the city pursuant to the
provisions of said last will and testament.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk and the City Treasurer
to deposit all sums received from the Co-Executors of the Estate of Roscoe
Misselhorn, Deceased, into the above designated fund. Upon deposit of said
moneys into the above designated Fund, said moneys shall be invested and
expended only in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 36.45)  (Ord. 97-10, passed 12-23-1997)



§ 36.51  PURPOSE.



   The Misselhorn Art Foundation Trust Fund is hereby created for the
purpose of investing all moneys received by the city pursuant to said last
will and testament of Roscoe Misselhorn, deceased, in income producing
obligations permitted under the laws of the state, as hereinafter provided,
and to use the income only received therefrom for financing expenditures as
authorized by the Board of Trustees of the Misselhorn Art Foundation for the
control, supervision, preservation, collection and exhibition of artistic
works of Roscoe Misselhorn and related activities.



(1994 Code, § 36.46)  (Ord. 97-10, passed 12-23-1997)



§ 36.52  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   The Board of Directors of the Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund as
designated by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Ord. 292 passed by the
City Council on 4-10-1979, shall serve simultaneously as the Board of
Directors of the Misselhorn Art Foundation Trust Fund. Said Board of
Directors shall maintain the same organization and rules, duties and
responsibilities, as provided for in said Ord. 292 with respect to the
Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund as heretofore has been specified and
provided.



(1994 Code, § 36.47)  (Ord. 97-10, passed 12-23-1997)



§ 36.53  MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The Board of Directors of the Municipal Civic and Cultural
Fund, upon receiving interest from the proceeds as invested hereby pursuant
to the last will and testament of Roscoe Misselhorn, deceased, shall pay over
to the Misselhorn Art Foundation all income received thereby as requested,
subject to the provisions stated herein. The Board of Directors of said
Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund shall maintain two accounts with respect to
the Misselhorn Art Foundation Trust Fund. One account shall be designated the
“investment account” and the second account to be designated an “income
account”. All moneys received by the City Clerk and City Treasurer from the
estate of Roscoe Misselhorn, deceased, shall be deposited in the investment
account from which investments shall be purchased. Not less than 10% of the
income received annually shall be deposited into the investment account and
not withdrawn therefrom. The balance of the income received from investments
shall be deposited into the income fund as directed by the Misselhorn Art
Foundation Board of Directors. The Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund Board of
Directors may establish and maintain other accounts as may be necessary to
carry out the purposes of this subchapter.



   (B)   It is further acknowledged and agreed by the City Council that
said trust fund income proceeds shall not be utilized for the maintenance or
repair of the Misselhorn Art Foundation depot building or grounds located on
West Second Street in the city; unless, however:



      (1)   The Misselhorn Art Foundation Board of Trustees adopts a
resolution calling for such an expenditure; or



      (2)   The balance of the income account of the Foundation
Trust Fund exceeds the sum of $25,000 after deducting the expenditure of all
budgeted items of the Foundation for the current fiscal year.



(1994 Code, § 36.48)  (Ord. 97-10, passed 12-23-1997)



§ 36.54  RECORD OF INVESTMENTS.



   The Board of Directors of the Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund shall
maintain a record of all investments of said Misselhorn Art Foundation Trust
Fund and shall cause an audit of such Fund and accounts to be made by an
accountant employed by the city and retained independently by the Board on an
annual basis. In addition to the audit, the Board shall cause a report to be
prepared of all investments with sufficient description to identify the same
containing the income receipts from each investment and other such
information to provide a full disclosure of all investments then currently
held by the Board. Said report shall contain additional information as may be
requested from time to time hereafter by the City Council and the Misselhorn
Art Foundation and such report shall be distributed on a regular basis to the
Board of Trustees of the Misselhorn Art Foundation and Mayor and City Council.



(1994 Code, § 36.49)  (Ord. 97-10, passed 12-23-1997)



§ 36.55   AMENDMENTS; REPEAL.



   This subchapter and any provisions thereof may be amended or repealed
upon the favorable vote of four of the five members of the City Council
provided that the City Council shall first cause a public hearing to be held
in regard to any amendment or repeal of this chapter. The hearing shall be
conducted by the City Council and notice of said hearing shall be given by
publication thereof in the Sparta News-Plaindealer, its successor or any
other newspaper having general circulation within the city. Said notice shall
state the time, place and date of the hearing and shall also state with
particularity the nature of the amendment to said chapter. Such notice shall
be published three times for three consecutive weeks, the first publication
thereof being not less than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. In
addition thereto, notice of said hearing shall be posted in City Hall and
three other prominent places within the city.



(1994 Code, § 36.50)  (Ord. 97-10, passed 12-23-1997)



CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION



Section



Industrial Property Tax



   37.001   Definition



   37.002   Tax abatement program established



   37.003   Length of abatement



   37.004   Amount of abatement



   37.005   Eligible applicants



   37.006   Eligible area



   37.007   Guidelines for consideration of request for property tax
abatement



   37.008   Applications for property tax abatement



Retailer’s Occupation Tax



   37.020   Imposition of tax; rate



   37.021   Report required; remittance of tax



Service Occupation Tax



   37.035   Imposition of tax; rate



   37.036   Report required; remittance of taxes



Renting Automobiles



   37.050   Imposition of tax



   37.051   Required report to State Department of Revenue



   37.052   Payment of tax



Foreign Fire Insurance Companies



   37.065   Conformance with provisions required



   37.066   Fee; basis of fee



   37.067   Required reports



Municipal Use Tax



   37.080   Imposition of tax; rate



   37.081   Collection of tax



Automobiles Rented Out of State



   37.095   Imposition of tax



   37.096   Collection of tax



   37.097   Payment of tax



Hotel and Motel Tax



   37.110   Countywide Lodging Tax Intergovernmental Cooperation
Agreement



Tax Upon Motion Picture Theaters



   37.125   Definitions



   37.126   Tax



   37.127   Registration



   37.128   Computation of tax



   37.129   Fee deadline



   37.130   Late penalties



   37.131   Remittance of the fee



Home Rule Retailers’ Occupation Tax



   37.145   Imposition of tax



   37.146   Collection by state



Home Rule Service Occupation Tax



   37.160   Imposition of tax



   37.161   Collection by state



Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax



   37.175   Definitions



   37.176   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed



   37.177   Collection of tax by retailers



   37.178   Returns to Department



   37.179   Resellers



   37.180   Severability



   37.181   Effective date



Cross-reference:



   Funds, see Ch. 36



   Investment Policy, see Ch. 40



   Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibilities, see
Ch. 41



INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX



§ 37.001  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INDUSTRIAL FIRM. A business plant or enterprise for the production or
processing of goods, merchandise, machines, motor vehicles and the like for
sale, such as, a manufacturing plant employing people and requiring the
support of capital.



(1994 Code, § 37.01)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.002  TAX ABATEMENT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a property tax abatement program
for new industrial firms locating in the city or for existing industrial
firms that are expanding resulting in an increase in assessed valuation.



   (B)   The City Council shall be authorized, by resolution, to
hereinafter abate the city property taxes for the industrial firms; provided
that, such abatement be in accordance with provisions set forth in this
subchapter; and, provided further that, the abatement of city taxes shall not
exceed a period of ten years and the total aggregate amount of abated taxes
shall not exceed $1,000,000.



(1994 Code, § 37.02)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.003  LENGTH OF ABATEMENT.



   The length of abatement may range from no abatement to a maximum of ten
years, to be considered by the City Council on a firm-by-firm basis using the
following criteria as perimeters:



   (A)   New industrial firms locating in the city or existing
industrial firms expansion in the city resulting in an increase in the
assessed value and an increase in the work of the firm: maximum of ten-year
abatement, minimum of five-year abatement;



   (B)   Existing industrial firm expansion resulting in an increase of
assessed valuation of taxable property in the city with no increase or
decrease in the work force (retains existing number of employees): maximum of
five-year abatement, minimum of one-year abatement; and



   (C)   Existing industrial firm expansion resulting in an increase in
the assessed valuation of taxable property in the city and a reduction of the
work force (reduction of existing number of employees), maximum of one year
abatement.



(1994 Code, § 37.03)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.004  AMOUNT OF ABATEMENT.



   (A)   The amount of abatement may range from no abatement or to a
maximum of 100% abatement on the increased assessed valuation of the taxable
property of an industrial firm to be considered on a firm-by-firm basis using
the following criteria as perimeters:



      (1)   New industrial firm locating in the city resulting in an
increase in the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the city:
maximum of 100% abatement on an increase of assessed value, minimum of 50%
abatement of the increase in the assessed valuation of the taxable property
of the industrial firm;



      (2)   Existing industrial firm expansion resulting in an
increase in the assessed valuation of the taxable property of the industrial
firm and an increase in the work force: maximum of 100% abatement on all
taxable property of the firm, minimum of 50% abatement of the increase in the
assessed valuation of a taxable property of the firm;



      (3)   Existing industrial firm expansion resulting in an
increase in the assessed valuation of taxable property of the firm in the
city, but no increase or decrease in the work force: maximum of 75% abatement
on all taxable property of the industrial firm in the city, minimum of 50%
abatement of the increase in the assessed valuation of taxable property of
the industrial firm in the city; and



      (4)   Existing industrial firm expansion resulting in an
increasing the assessed valuation of taxable property of the industrial firm
in the city, but a reduction in the work force: maximum of 50% abatement of
the increase in the assessed valuation of all taxable property of the firm in
the city, minimum of no abatement of the license in the assessed valuation of
the taxable property of the firm in the city.



   (B)   The actual percentage of abatement granted will be on a
firm-by-firm basis. While the number of employees affected is a major factor
in the determination of the abatement, all other relevant factors will be
considered. The Mayor and City Council, in their sole discretion, shall
determine what constitutes an increase or decrease in the work force of the
firm applying for tax abatement.



(1994 Code, § 37.04)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.005  ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.



   Eligible applicants shall be considered by any industrial firm locating
in the city, any industrial firm newly created within the state and locating
in the city or any existing industrial firm situated in the city expanding a
previously existing facility.



(1994 Code, § 37.05)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.006  ELIGIBLE AREA.



   Any area within the corporate limits of the city will be considered an
“eligible area”.



(1994 Code, § 37.06)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.007  GUIDELINES FOR CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR PROPERTY TAX
ABATEMENT.



   The City Council shall, in considering a request for property tax
abatement, observe the following guidelines.



   (A)   Abatement may apply to all or any portion of its taxes on the
property of any one qualified industrial firm providing the total aggregate
amount of all abated taxes of all qualified industrial firms shall not exceed
$1,000,000 at any one time.



   (B)   The abatement of taxes on the property of any qualified
industrial firm shall not exceed a period of ten years.



   (C)   The abatement may apply to the assessment of taxes on all
taxable property of a qualified industrial firm or only to an increase in the
assessed valuation of taxable property of a qualified industrial firm.



   (D)   The amount of abatement of taxes may range from zero to 100%.



   (E)   Requests made to the City Council for property tax abatements
will be considered on a priority of first come, first served basis.
Abatements shall be made in accordance with the criteria established by this
subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 37.07)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



§ 37.008  APPLICATIONS FOR PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   All requests to the City Council for property tax abatement shall be
made in writing and shall include the following information:



   (A)   Name of firm;



   (B)   Location of firm;



   (C)   Phone number;



   (D)   Name and title of person requesting abatement;



   (E)   Brief explanation of firm’s operations where abatement is
being requested;



   (F)   If new industry, number of full-time and part-time employees
expected to be employed in first year of full operation, including their
combined estimated payroll;



   (G)   The total number of full-time and part-time employees hired,
added or retained as a result of the expansion of an existing industry,
including their combined estimated annual payroll;



   (H)   If firm is requesting maximum abatement allowable by the city,
a brief narrative on its willingness to sign a First Source Agreement with
the county’s JTPA Division;



   (I)   Two-digit SIC Code number;



   (J)   Copy of firm’s annual report, where the firm does have an
annual report, unless waived by state or federal law. Where subsidiary,
annual report of parent corporation;



   (K)   If a corporation, the corporation registration number,
employer identification number and copy of firm’s annual report, or where
applicable, a subsidiary annual report of parent corporation or holding
corporation. If other than a corporation, photocopy of registration
certificate, if any, received from the County Clerk;



   (L)   Total cost of the expansion/location;



   (M)   Market area for products manufactured;



   (N)   Estimated amount of abatement being requested annually;



   (O)   Length of abatement being requested;



   (P)   Projected impact on city businesses producing a similar or
same product or service; and



   (Q)   Additional information as may be requested by the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 37.08)  (Ord. 353, passed 10-28-1985)



RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX



§ 37.020  IMPOSITION OF TAX; RATE.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this city at the rate of 1%
of the gross receipts from the sales made in the course of the business while
this subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-1
of the Illinois Municipal Code (i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1).



(1994 Code, § 37.20)  (Ord. 202, passed 8-11-1969)



§ 37.021  REPORT REQUIRED; REMITTANCE OF TAX.



   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail in the city shall file all reports as required by
35 ILCS 120/3 to the state’s Department of Revenue.



   (B)   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the
state’s Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month.



(1994 Code, § 37.21)  (Ord. 202, passed 8-11-1969)



SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 37.035  IMPOSITION OF TAX; RATE.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the city in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by the servicepersons either in
the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-5
of the Illinois Municipal Code (i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5).



(1994 Code, § 37.30)  (Ord. 202, passed 8-11-1969)



§ 37.036  REPORT REQUIRED; REMITTANCE OF TAXES.



   Every supplier or serviceperson required to account for municipal
service occupation tax for the benefit of the city shall file the report to
the state’s Department of Revenue required by the Service Occupation Tax
Act, approved 7-10-1961, as amended (i.e., 35 ILCS 115/9). At the time the
report is filed, there shall be paid to the state’s Department of Revenue
the amount of tax hereby imposed.



(1994 Code, § 37.31)  (Ord. 202, passed 8-11-1969)



RENTING AUTOMOBILES



§ 37.050  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in the city at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from
the rentals made in the course of business while this subchapter is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-7 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7).



(1994 Code, § 37.40)  (Ord. 314, passed 1-25-1982)



§ 37.051  REQUIRED REPORT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.



   Every person engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the city
shall file all reports as required by 35 ILCS 120/3 to the state’s
Department of Revenue.



(1994 Code, § 37.41)  (Ord. 314, passed 1-25-1982)



§ 37.052  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the state’s
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(1994 Code, § 37.42)  (Ord. 314, passed 1-25-1982)



FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES



§ 37.065  CONFORMANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association not
incorporated under the laws of the state to engage in effecting fire
insurance in the city, or to transact any business of fire insurance in the
city, without fully complying with the provisions of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 37.55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 37.066  FEE; BASIS OF FEE.



   Any corporation or association subject to this subchapter shall pay to
the Treasurer for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department, a
sum of money equal in amount to 2% of the gross receipts each year received
for premiums by any and all agents of any corporation or association, or
received as premiums in any way for fire insurance policies on any property
in the city. Payments shall be made for the year ending July 1 of each year.



(1994 Code, § 37.56)



§ 37.067  REQUIRED REPORTS.



   Every person acting as representative for or on behalf of any company
or association subject to this subchapter shall, on or before July 15 of each
year, render to the Treasurer a full, true and just account, verified by his
or her oath, of all premiums which shall have been received by him or her on
behalf of the company during the year ending the preceding July 1 on the fire
insurance policies.



(1994 Code, § 37.57)



MUNICIPAL USE TAX



§ 37.080  IMPOSITION OF TAX; RATE.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code of 1961, as amended (i.e., 65 ILCS
5/8-11-6), upon the privilege of using in the municipality, any item of
tangible personal property which is purchased outside the state at retail
from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of state
government.



   (B)   The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of the
tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the
Use Tax Act, approved 7-14-1955, as amended (i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6).



(1994 Code, § 37.70)  (Ord. 306, passed 7-14-1980)



§ 37.081  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The tax shall be collected by the state’s Department of Revenue for
and on behalf of the city, as imposed herein and in accordance with the
provisions of § 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code of 1961, as amended
(i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6), and shall be paid before the title or certificate
of registration for the personal property is issued.



(1994 Code, § 37.71)  (Ord. 306, passed 7-14-1980)



AUTOMOBILES RENTED OUT OF STATE



§ 37.095  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the city an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of the state’s government in the city at the
rate of 1% of the rental price of the automobile while this subchapter is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-8 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (i.e., 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8).



(1994 Code, § 37.80)  (Ord. 313, passed 1-25-1982)



§ 37.096  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The tax provided for in this subchapter shall be collected from the
persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the city.



(1994 Code, § 37.81)  (Ord. 306, passed 7-14-1980)



§ 37.097  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid to the state’s
Department of Revenue.



(1994 Code, § 37.82)  (Ord. 306, passed 7-14-1980)



HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX



§ 37.110  COUNTYWIDE LODGING TAX INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute the Countywide Lodging Tax
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement on behalf of the city and the City
Clerk is hereby directed to forward the executed original agreement to the
county and further directed to file a copy of said agreement in the office of
the City Clerk at City Hall.



(1994 Code, § 37.90)  (Ord. 2002-16, passed 11-25-2002)



TAX UPON MOTION PICTURE THEATERS



§ 37.125  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Sparta, Randolph County,
Illinois.



   OPERATOR. The owners or operators of each business within the City of
Sparta, Randolph County, Illinois, operating a motion picture theater.



   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Sparta, Randolph County,
Illinois.



(1994 Code, § 37.105)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 37.126  TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all operators within the city in the
operation of a motion picture theater. Effective 8-1-2015, the rate of such
tax shall be imposed at the rate of $1.50 on each motion picture theater
ticket sold by the operator.



(1994 Code, § 37.106)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000; Ord. 15-05, passed
6-22-2015)



§ 37.127  REGISTRATION.



   Each operator within the boundaries of the city shall file a
certificate of registration with the office of the City Treasurer whose
office is located at City Hall, 114 W. Jackson Street, Sparta, Illinois
62286. Registration forms will be available to each operator through the
office of the City Clerk. It is the duty of each operator to update the
“certificate of registration” form on an annual basis. The final date for
filing and updating the certificate of registration shall be December 1 each
year given hereafter the following effective date of this subchapter. Any new
business coming under license to do business as an operator as defined herein
within the city shall file a certificate of registration no later than 30
days upon the first day of operation as a new business.



(1994 Code, § 37.107)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 37.128  COMPUTATION OF TAX.



   Each operator shall file monthly motion picture amusement tax return
each and every month following the effective date of this subchapter. Returns
shall contain the total dollar gross receipts received from the sale of
motion picture tickets sold along with the total amount due and payable to
the city heretofore required by the adoption of this subchapter. Motion
picture amusement tax returns shall be available to each operator through the
office of the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 37.108)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 37.129  FEE DEADLINE.



   All tax fees due the city as implemented by this subchapter shall be
due and payable to the city on the twentieth of the month immediately
following the month of collection. The tax shall begin on 7-1-2000, with tax
fees due and payable on 8-20-2000, and all succeeding months thereafter in
like manner.



(1994 Code, § 37.109)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 37.130  LATE PENALTIES.



   A 1% late penalty will be due and payable to the city should any
operator fail to file a motion picture amusement tax return by the end of
each month as stated above (an additional 1% for each month thereafter). The
City Attorney shall be authorized to enforce the penalties at the request of
the City Treasurer according to law. The tax herein levied shall be paid in
addition to all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the operator
to pay the amount of the tax to the Treasurer provided by the Treasurer
and/or as otherwise provided. Every operator shall keep record of motion
picture ticket sales and such records shall be made available upon demand by
the Treasurer or duly authorized agent or employee of the city and shall be
preserved for a period of three years. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with the Treasurer or duly authorized deputy of the Treasurer in
apportionment of this subchapter. The City Attorney must bring an action of
law to enforce the payment of the tax in addition to the penalties herein and
the operator shall be liable for the costs of such collection including
reasonable attorney fees, the fees accruing to the city.



(1994 Code, § 37.110)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 37.131  REMITTANCE OF THE FEE.



   Pursuant to this tax, all fees due and owing to the city and collected
by the City Treasurer shall be made payable to the “Treasurer of Sparta”.
Upon collection of the funds, the Treasurer shall transfer the funds into a
separate account designated the city’s Motion Picture Amusement Tax
Account. Five percent of the funds shall be retained by the city to reimburse
the City Treasurer and other city offices for administrative expenses in
implementation of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 37.111)  (Ord. 00-11, passed 3-27-2000)



HOME RULE RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION ACT



§ 37.145  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of the state, at retail in the
city at the rate of 1% on the gross receipts from these sales made in the
course of such business. Such Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption that is to
be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical
appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by
diabetics. The imposition of this home rule tax is pursuant to the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, as amended.



(1994 Code, § 37.125)  (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-24-2014; Ord. 2014-02,
passed 4-14-2014)



§ 37.146  COLLECTION BY STATE.



   The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the state.



(1994 Code, § 37.126)  (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-24-2014; Ord. 2014-02,
passed 4-14-2014)



HOME RULE SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 37.160  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the city in the
business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1% of the selling price
of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceperson, either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate, as
an incident to a sale of service. Such Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation
Tax shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which
is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical
appliances and insulin, urine testing materials and syringes and needles used
by diabetics. The imposition of this home rule tax is pursuant to the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5, as amended.



(1994 Code, § 37.135)  (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-24-2014; Ord. 2014-02,
passed 4-14-2014)



§ 37.161  COLLECTION BY STATE.



   The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the state.



(1994 Code, § 37.136)  (Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-24-2014; Ord. 2014-02,
passed 4-14-2014)



SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



§ 37.175  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in
the city regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.



   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.



   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel termination point within the city and charges for the
portion of the inter-office channels provided within the city. Charges for
that portion of the inter-office channel connecting two or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional
boundary of the city, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an
amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by a fraction,
the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are
located within the jurisdictional boundary of the municipality and the
denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points
connected by the inter-office channel. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not
include any of the following:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made pursuant to:



         (a)   The tax imposed by this subchapter;



         (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise
Tax Act, 35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.;



         (c)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue
Code, being 26 U.S.C. § 4251;



         (d)   911 surcharges; or



         (e)   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to
the provisions of the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 9-222 as
amended, or any similar charges added to customers’ bills by retailers who
are not subject to rate regulation by the state’s Commerce Commission for
the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts
specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS
5/1-101 et seq.



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside of such municipality;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt
under the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1 to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of
Commerce and Economic Opportunity;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the
tax imposed under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer and
only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the
corporation rendering such service;



      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices; or



      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.;
and



      (10)   Charges for non-taxable services or telecommunications
if:



         (a)   Those charges are aggregated with other charges
for telecommunications that are taxable;



         (b)   Those charges are not separately stated on the
customer bill or invoice; and



         (c)   The retailer can reasonably identify the
non-taxable charges on the retailer’s books and records kept in the regular
course of business. If the non-taxable charges cannot reasonably identified,
the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and non-taxable services of
telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the
taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving non-taxable
charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.



   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside the state.



   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate
and terminate within the state.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited
liability company or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including
state universities created by stature, or any city, town, county or other
political subdivision of the state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.



   RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
at retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion,
upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within the state, who, to the
satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the
duty of such RETAILER to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in the state in the same manner and subject to same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the state.
The permit may be revoked by the Department, at its discretion.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. This or any
like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in the state.



   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between
a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly
owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may
not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems
and maritime systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary
use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act, 35
ILCS 638/1 et seq. For air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS
shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization
code or location in the state where bills are sent.



   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability
as authorized by this subchapter.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities. As used in this subchapter, PRIVATE
LINE means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer,
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or
more other specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall
not include value added services in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information
for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the
ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end
communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for
use of inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into,
end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for
resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered
TELECOMMUNICATIONS subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. For
purposes of this section, PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that
term as defined in the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/2-27.



(1994 Code, § 37.200)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



§ 37.176  SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or
privileges:



      (1)   The act or privilege or originating in the municipality
or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at
a rate of 5% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this division (A) any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality
on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to
or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly
due and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other municipal tax; and



      (2)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality
or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at
a rate of 5% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal
taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this
division (B), any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in
another state or municipality in this state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to
the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other
state or such tax properly due and paid in another municipality in the state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in the state.



   (B)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act
or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by the city.



(1994 Code, § 37.201)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



§ 37.177  COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.



   (A)   (1)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be
collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in
the state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department.



      (2)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as
authorized by this subchapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and
required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by
adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by
the Department. The tax authorized by this subchapter shall constitute a debt
of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at
law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail.



      (3)   If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.



   (B)    Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter
shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from
the gross charge for telecommunications.



(1994 Code, § 37.202)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



§ 37.178  RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.



   On or before 4-30-2014, and on or before the last day of every month
thereafter, the tax imposed under this subchapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as
required by the Department pursuant to the state’s Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq., and any accompanying
rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the Act.



(1994 Code, § 37.203)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



§ 37.179  RESELLERS.



   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications
claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply
to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which
will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax
authorized by this subchapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such
additional information as the Department may reasonably require.



   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign
a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the
applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication
tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer
applies because of the person’s having discontinued the making of resales.



   (C)   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the state shall
not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the
person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any
sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.



(1994 Code, § 37.204)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



§ 37.180  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this subchapter, or the application of any
provision of this subchapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this subchapter, or its
application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid
provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or
application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by
this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 37.205)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



§ 37.181  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval and publication as required by law; provided, however,
that, the tax provided for herein shall take effect for all bills issued on
or after 3-1-2014. Copies of this subchapter shall be certified and sent to
the state’s Department of Revenue prior to 11-30-2013.



(1994 Code, § 37.206)  (Ord. 13-07, passed 10-28-2013)



CHAPTER 38:  ELECTIONS



Section



   38.01   Manner in which election to be held



§ 38.01  MANNER IN WHICH ELECTION TO BE HELD.



   The city shall elect a Mayor and four Commissioners at a general
municipal election held in an odd-numbered year upon the expiration of the
term of office of the Mayor and every four years thereafter. The day when an
election shall be held, polling places and terms of the election shall be
determined by the provisions of the General Election Law (10 ILCS 5/1-1 et
seq. and 65 ILCS 5/4-3-1).



(1994 Code, § 38.01)  (Ord. 439, passed 12-27-1993)



CHAPTER 39:  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY



Section



   39.01   City’s commitment



   39.02   Non-discriminatory employment



   39.03   Contract with other agencies, banks, businesses and the like



   39.04   Assurance of city



   39.05   Hiring practices



   39.06   Accommodations



   39.07   Adherence to policy



   39.08   Designation of Mayor and City Council



§ 39.01  CITY’S COMMITMENT.



   The city hereby reconfirms its commitment to uphold, defend, enforce,
and advocate for all laws related equal employment opportunity including, but
not limited to, the following:



   (A)   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, being 42 U.S.C. §§
2000d et seq., which prohibits discrimination in the participation in or
benefits of programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance on
the basis of race, color or national origin;



   (B)   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 2000e et seq., which prohibits discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex or national origin in all employment practices including
hiring, firing, promotions, compensation and other terms, privileges and
conditions of employment;



   (C)   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, being 20 U.S.C.
§§ 1681 et seq.,  which prohibits discrimination in federally assisted
education programs;



   (D)   The Equal Pay Act of 1963, being 29 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq.,
which covers all employees who are covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act,
being 29 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq.. The Act forbids pay differentials on the
basis of sex;



   (E)   The Age Discrimination Act of 1967, being 29 U.S.C. §§ 621
et seq., which prohibits discrimination because of age against anyone between
the ages of 40 and 65;



   (F)   Federal Executive Order 11246, dealing with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Act, which requires every contract with federal
financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination because of
race, color, religion, sex or national origin;



   (G)   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, being 29 U.S.C.
§§ 794, and DOL Implementing Regulations at 29 C.F.R. part 32 which
prohibits any discrimination based on disability;



   (H)   Section 167 of JTPA, being the Job Training Partnership Act
codified at 29 U.S.C. §§ 1501 et seq., and the U.S. DOL Regulations at 29
C.F.R. parts 31 and 32 which provides that no person in the United States
shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be
subjected to discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin,
under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance from the
Department of Labor;



   (I)   Art. I, § 17—19 of the Illinois Constitution which
prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer; and



   (J)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 12101 et seq., which prohibits any discrimination against qualified
individuals with disabilities on the basis of their disability.



(1994 Code, § 39.01)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.02  NON-DISCRIMINATORY EMPLOYMENT.



   The city will strive to assure non-discriminatory employment practices
in recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or
termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of
compensation and use of facilities.



(1994 Code, § 39.02)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.03  CONTRACT WITH OTHER AGENCIES, BANKS, BUSINESSES AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The city will not knowingly contract with other agencies,
banks, businesses, vendors and the like who practice or establish a pattern
of discrimination based on sex, color, race, religion, age, national origin,
political affiliation or belief.



   (B)   The city will incorporate into any contract for construction
work, or modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules, regulations and
orders of the Secretary of Labor or of any prior authority that remain in
effect, which is paid for in whole or in part with the aid of such financial
assistance, the following “equal opportunity clause”.



      (1)   The contractor will not discriminate against any
employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability or national origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to
ensure that applicants are employed, and the employees are treated during
employment, without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, national
origin or disability. Such action shall include, but not limited, to the
following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or
recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms
of compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The
contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this
non-discrimination clause.



      (2)   The contractor will, in all solicitations or
advertisements for employees places by or on behalf of the contractor, state
that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin or disability.



      (3)   In the event of the contractor’s non-compliance with
the equal opportunity clause or with any  of the said rules, regulations and
orders, this contract may be canceled, terminated or suspended in whole or in
part and the contractor may be canceled, terminated or suspended in whole or
in part and the contractor may be declared ineligible for further government
contracts or federally assisted construction contracts.



      (4)   The contractor will include the provisions of this equal
opportunity clause in every subcontract or purchase order, unless exempted by
the rules, regulations or orders of the Secretary of Labor so that such
provisions will be binding upon each such subcontractor or vendor.



(1994 Code, § 39.03)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.04  ASSURANCE OF CITY.



   The city assures that it will actively provide non-discriminatory
outreach, selection and service to all individuals.



(1994 Code, § 39.04)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.05  HIRING PRACTICES.



   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job
categories so that minority employment in all categories of the work force
will represent a proportionate share of minority populations in the city as
well as surrounding areas.



(1994 Code, § 39.05)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.06  ACCOMMODATIONS.



   The city will provide accommodations to the best of its abilities for
employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural limitations.



(1994 Code, § 39.06)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.07  ADHERENCE TO POLICY.



   All city employees are expected to adhere to the above policy and to
work actively for its implementation both internally and in carrying out city
program activities.



(1994 Code, § 39.07)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



§ 39.08  DESIGNATION OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.



   The city designates the Mayor and City Council to carry out the EEO/AA
plan.



(1994 Code, § 39.08)  (Ord. 98-03, passed 3-23-1998)



CHAPTER 40:  INVESTMENT POLICY



Section



   40.01   Definitions



   40.02   Policy



   40.03   Scope



   40.04   Prudence



   40.05   Objective



   40.06   Delegation of authority



   40.07   Ethics and conflicts of interest



   40.08   Authorized financial dealers and institutions



   40.09   Authorized and suitable investments



   40.10   Collateralization



   40.11   Safekeeping and custody



   40.12   Diversification



   40.13   Maximum maturities



   40.14   Internal control



   40.15   Performance standards



   40.16   Reporting



   40.17   Investment policy adoption



§ 40.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply.



   ACCRUED INTEREST. Interest earned but not yet paid on a security since
the later of the security’s issue date or last record date.



   AGENCIES. An informal name that refers to securities issued by the
United States government and U.S. government-sponsored instrumentalities.



   ASKED. The trading price proposed by the prospective seller of
securities. Also called the OFFEROR OFFERED PRICE.



   BANKER’S ACCEPTANCE (BA). A short-term financial instrument that is
the unconditional obligation of the accepting bank.



   BASIS POINT (BP). A unit of measurement for interest rates or yield
that are expressed in percentages. (One hundred basis points equal 1%.)



   BENCHMARK. A comparative base for measuring the performance or risk
tolerance of the investment portfolio. A BENCHMARK should represent a close
correlation to the level of risk and the average duration of the
portfolio’s investments.



   BID. The trading price acceptable to a prospective buyer of securities.



   BOND EQUIVALENT YIELD (BEY). An annual yield, expressed as a
percentage, describing the return provided to bond holders. The BEY is a way
to compare yields available from discount securities, such as treasury bills
and banker’s acceptances, with yields available from coupon securities.



   BROKER. A party that brings buyers and sellers together. BROKERS do not
take ownership of the property being traded. They are compensated by
commission. They are not the same as dealers; however, the same individuals
and firms that act as brokers in some transactions may act as dealers in
other transactions.



   BROKERED AND NEGOTIABLE CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT. Short-term (two to 52
weeks), large denominations ($100,000 minimum). Certificates of deposit
issued at a discount on their par value, or at a fixed interest rate payable
at maturity, and are freely traded in secondary markets.



   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD). A deposit of funds, in a bank or savings
and loan association, for a specific term that earns interest at a specified
rate or rate formula. CDs may be secured or unsecured, may be in negotiable
or non-negotiable form, and may be issued in either physical or book-entry
form.



   COLLATERAL. Securities, evidence of deposit or other property that a
borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. Also refers to securities
pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.



   COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR). The official annual
report for the city. It includes five combined statements and basic financial
statements for each individual fund account group prepared in conformity with
GAAP. It also includes supporting schedules necessary to demonstrate
compliance with finance-related legal and contractual provisions, extensive
introductory material, and a detailed statistical section.



   CONFIRMATION. A document used to state and supplement, in writing, the
terms of a transaction  that has previously been agreed to verbally.



   COUPON.



      (1)   The annual rate of interest that a bond’s issuer
promises to pay the bondholder on the bond’s face value; and



      (2)   A certificate attached to a bond, evidencing interest
due on a payment date.



   DEALER. A firm or individual that buys and sells for their own account.
DEALERS have ownership between a purchase from one party and a sale to
another party. DEALERS are compensated by the spread between the price they
pay and the price they receive.



   DEBENTURE. A bond secured only by the general credit of the issuer.



   DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT (DVP). The simultaneous exchange of securities
and cash. The safest method of settling either the purchase or sale of a
security. In a DVP settlement, the funds are wired from the buyer’s account
and the security is delivered from the seller’s account in simultaneous
independent wires.



   DISCOUNT. The amount by which the price for a security is less than its
par.



   DISCOUNT SECURITIES. Securities that do not pay periodic interest.
Investors earn the difference between the discount issue price and the full
face value paid at maturity. Treasury bills, banker’s acceptances and zero
coupon bonds are discount securities.



   DIVERSIFICATION. Dividing investment funds among a variety of
securities offering independent returns.



   FEDERAL CREDIT AGENCIES. Agencies of the federal government set up to
supply credit to various classes of institutions and individuals (e.g., S&Ls,
small business firms, students, farmers, farm cooperatives, and exporters).



   FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC). A federal agency that
insures bank deposits, currently up to $250,000 per deposit.



   FEDERAL FUNDS RATE. The rate of interest at which federal funds are
traded.



   FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS (FHLBs). The institutions that regulate and
lend to savings and loan associations. The FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS play a
role analogous to that played by the Federal Reserve Bank vis-a-vis member
commercial banks.



   FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FNMA or FANNIE MAE).FNMA, like
GNMA, is a federal corporation working under the auspices of the Department
of Housing and Urban Development, HUD. It is the largest single provider of
residential mortgage funds in the United States. FANNIE MAE, as the
corporation is called, is a private stockholder-owned corporation. The
corporation’s purchases include a variety of adjustable mortgages and
second loans, in addition to fixed-rate mortgages. FNMA assumes and
guarantees that all security holders will receive timely payment of principal
and interest.



   FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE (FOMC). Consists of seven members of the
Federal Reserve Board and five of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents. The
president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank is a permanent member, while
the other presidents serve on a rotating basis. The COMMITTEE periodically
meets to set Federal Reserve guidelines regarding purchases and sales of
government securities in the open market as a means of influencing the volume
of bank credit and money.



   FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM. The central bank of the United States created
by Congress and consisting of a seven-member Board of Governors in
Washington, D.C., 12 regional banks, and about 5,700 commercial banks that
are members of the system.



   GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (GNMA or GINNIE MAE).GNMA,
like FNMA, was chartered under the Federal National Mortgage Association Act
of 1938. Securities guaranteed by GNMA are issued by mortgage bankers,
commercial banks, savings and loan associations and other institutions. 
Security holder is protected by full faith and credit of the U.S. Government.
GINNIE MAE securities are backed by the FHA, VA or FMHM mortgages. The term
“passthroughs” is often used to describe GINNIE MAES.



   GOVERNMENT SECURITIES. Any debt obligations issued by the U.S.
Government, its agencies or instrumentalities. Certain securities (such as
treasury bonds and Ginnie Maes) are backed by the government as to both
principal and interest payments. Other securities, (such as those issued by
the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation or Freddie Mac) are backed by the
issuing agency.



   INTEREST. Compensation paid or to be paid for the use of money.
INTEREST is generally expressed as an annual percentage rate.



   INTEREST RATE. The face coupon rate of a security.



   ISSUE DATE. The date on which a security is issued or originated.



   ISSUER. An entity that issues and is obligated to pay amounts due on
securities.



   INTERNAL CONTROLS.INTERNAL CONTROLS must be designed to ensure the
assets of the city are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal
control structure should be designed to provide reasonable assurance that
these objectives are met. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that
the cost of a control should not exceed the benefits likely to be derived,
and the valuation of cost and benefits requires estimates and judgements by
management. INTERNAL CONTROLS should address the following points:



      (1)   Control of collusion.COLLUSION is a situation where two
or more employees are working in conjunction to defraud their employer;



      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting and
record keeping. By separating the person who authorizes or performs the
transaction from the people who record or otherwise account for the
transaction, a separation of duties is achieved;



      (3)   Custodial safekeeping. Securities purchased from any
bank or dealer, including appropriate collateral (as defined by state law),
shall be placed with an independent third party for custodial safekeeping,
when available;



      (4)   Avoidance of physical delivery securities. Book-entry
securities are much easier to transfer and account for since actual delivery
of a document never takes place. Delivered securities must be properly
safeguarded against loss or destruction. The potential for fraud and loss
increases with physically delivered securities;



      (5)   Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff
members. Subordinate staff members must have a clear understanding of their
authority and responsibilities to avoid improper actions. Clear delegation of
authority also preserves the internal control structure that is contingent on
various staff positions and their respective responsibilities;



      (6)   Written confirmations or telephone transactions for
investments and wire transactions. Due to the potential for error and
improprieties arising from telephone transactions, all telephone transactions
should be supported by written communications and approved by the appropriate
person. Written communications may be via fax if on letterhead and if the
safekeeping institution has a list of authorized signatures.



      (7)   Development of a wire transfer agreement with the lead
bank or third-party custodian. The designated official should ensure that an
agreement will be entered into and will address the following points:
controls, security provisions, and responsibilities of each party making and
receiving wire transfers.



   LIQUIDITY. A LIQUID ASSET is one that can be converted to cash through
sale in an active secondary market.



   LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT POOLS (LGIPs). Pools through which
governmental entities may invest short-term cash. Examples of LGIPs are the
Illinois Funds, administered by the Illinois State Treasurer, and the
Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund.



   MARK TO MARKET. The process of restating the carrying value of an asset
or liability to equal its current market value.



   MARKET VALUE. The price at which a security is trading and could
presumably be purchased or sold.



   MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT. A written contract covering all future
transactions between the parties. The agreement establishes each party’s
right in the transaction. REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS (REPOs) are a form of
short-term borrowing for dealers in government securities. The dealer sells
the government securities to investors, usually on an overnight basis, and
then buys them back the following day. For the party selling the security
(and agreeing to repurchase it in the future), it is a REPO; for the party on
the other end of the transaction (buying the security and agreeing to sell in
the future), it is a REVERSE REPURCHASE AGREEMENT. A MASTER AGREEMENT will
often specify, among other things, the right of the buyer-lender to liquidate
the underlying securities in the event of default by the seller-borrower.



   MATURITY. The date upon which the principal or stated value of an
investment becomes due and payable.



   MC&CF. The city’s Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund, a reserve fund
as created by the City Council in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



   MONEY MARKET. The aggregation of buyers and sellers actively trading
money market instruments.



   OFFEROROFFERED PRICE. The trading price proposed by the prospective
seller of securities (also called the ASKED OR ASKING PRICE).



   OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS. Purchases and sales of government and certain
other securities in the open market by the New York Federal Reserve Bank, as
directed by the FOMC, in order to influence the volume of money and credit in
the economy. Purchases inject reserves into the bank system and stimulate
growth of money and credit; sales have the opposite effect. OPEN MARKET
OPERATIONS are the Federal Reserve’s most important and most flexible
monetary policy tool.



   PAR. The face amount of a security.



   PORTFOLIO. A collection of financial assets belonging to a single owner.



   PREMIUM. The amount by which the price for a security is greater than
its par amount.



   PRIMARY DEALER. A group of government securities dealers who submit
daily reports of market activity and positions and monthly financial
statements to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and are subject to its
informal oversight. PRIMARY DEALERS include Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC)-registered securities broker-dealers, banks and a few
unregulated firms.



   PRINCIPAL. The face amount of a bond, exclusive of the accrued interest
and payment at security.



   PRUDENT PERSON RULE. An investment standard. In some states, the law
requires that a fiduciary, such as a trustee, may invest money only in a list
of securities selected by the custody state, the so-called legal list. In
other states, the trustee may invest in a security if it is one that would be
bought by a prudent person of discretion and intelligence, who is seeking a
reasonable income and preservation of capital.



   QUALIFIED PUBLIC DEPOSITORY. A financial institution that does not
claim exemption from the payment of any sales or compensating use or ad
valorem taxes under the laws of the state, which has segregated for the
benefit of the commission eligible collateral having a value of not less than
its maximum liability, and which has been approved by the Public Deposit
Protection Commission to hold public deposits.



   RATE OF RETURN. The yield obtainable on a security, based on its
purchase price or its current market price. This may be the amortized yield
to maturity on a bond, the current income return.



   REINVESTMENT RISK. The risk that all or part of the principal may be
received when interest rates are lower than when the security was originally
purchased, so that the principal must be reinvested at a lower rate than the
rate originally received by the investor.



   REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP or REPO). See MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT.



   RESERVE FUND. The depositing of funds on a regular basis to accrue
interest and increase the fund value. These funds are not part of the general
operation funds



   SAFEKEEPING. A service to customers rendered by banks, whereby
securities and valuables of all types and descriptions are held by the bank.



   SEC RULE 15C3-1. See UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE.



   SECONDARY MARKET. A market made for the purchase and sale of any
previously issued financial instrument.



   SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION. The federal agency with
responsibility for regulating financial exchanges for cash instruments.



   SPREAD OVER TREASURIES. The difference between the bond equivalent
yield for any investment and the bond equivalent yield for a treasury
investment with the same maturity.



   STRUCTURED NOTES. Notes issued by the government-sponsored enterprises
(FHLB, FNMA, SLMA and the like) and corporations, which have imbedded options
(e.g., call features, step-up coupons, floating rate coupons,
derivative-based returns) into their debt structure. Their market performance
is impacted by the fluctuation of interest rates, the volatility of the
imbedded options, and shifts in the shape of the yield curve.



   TREASURY BILLS. A short-term obligation issued by the U. S. Treasury
for maturities of one year or less. They do not pay interest, but are issued
on a discount basis instead.



   TREASURY BONDS (T-BONDS).Long-term obligations issued by the U.S.
Treasury with initial maturities of more than ten years.



   TREASURY NOTES (T-NOES). Medium-term obligations issued by the U.S.
Treasury with initial maturities of from one to ten years.



   UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE. A Securities and Exchange Commission
requirement that member firms, as well as nonmember broker-dealers in
securities, maintain a maximum ratio of indebtedness to liquid capital of 15
to 1; also called NET CAPITAL RULE and NET CAPITAL RATIO. Indebtedness covers
all money owed to a firm, including margin loans and commitments to purchase
securities, one reason new public issues are spread among members of
underwriting syndicates. LIQUID CAPITAL includes cash and assets easily
converted into cash.



   YIELD. The rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed as
a percentage on an annual  basis. For interest-bearing securities, the YIELD
is a function of the rate, the purchase price, the income that can be earned
from the reinvestment of income received prior to maturity, call or sale.
Different formulas or methods are used to calculate yields.



(1994 Code, § 40.01)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.02  POLICY.



   It is the policy of the city to prudently invest public funds in a
manner that will provide the highest investment return with the maximum
security, while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the city and
conforming to all federal, state and local statutes governing the investment
of public funds.



(1994 Code, § 40.02)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.03  SCOPE.



   This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the city. The
financial assets of the Sparta Public Library are subject to the direction of
its respective Board of Trustees. The financial assets of the Municipal Civic
and Cultural Fund are subject to the direction of its respective Board of
Directors. The following funds are accounted for in the city’s annual
financial report and include:



 


Number

 

Name





2.1.1
 
General Fund


2.1.2
 
Special Revenue Funds


2.1.3
 
Capital Project Funds


2.1.4
 
Enterprise Funds


2.1.5
 
Trust and Agency Funds


2.1.6
 
Any new fund created by the City Council, unless specifically exempt


2.1.7
 
Sparta Public Library Funds


2.1.8
 
Municipal Civic and Cultural Fund




 



(1994 Code, § 40.03)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.04  PRUDENCE.



   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital, as well as the probable income to be derived.



   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials
shall be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. Investment officials acting in
accordance with the written procedures and the investment policy, and
exercising due diligence, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an
individual security’s credit risk or market price changes, provided
deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate
action is taken to control adverse developments.



(1994 Code, § 40.04)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.05  OBJECTIVE.



   The primary objectives, in order of priority, of the investment
activities of the city shall be as follows.



   (A)   Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a manner
that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To
attain this objective, diversification is required in order that potential
losses on individual securities do not exceed the income generated from the
remainder of the portfolio.



      (1)   Credit risk.CREDIT RISK is the risk of loss due to the
failure of the security issuer or backer. Credit risk may be mitigated by:



         (a)   Limiting investments to the safest types of
securities or other allowable investments;



         (b)   Pre-qualifying the financial institutions,
broker-dealers, intermediaries, and advisers with which the city will do
business; and



         (c)   Diversifying the investment portfolio so that
potential losses on individual securities or other allowable investments will
be minimized.



      (2)   Interest rate risk.INTEREST RATE RISK is the risk that
the market value of securities or other allowable investments in the
portfolio will fall due to changes in general interest rates. Interest rate
risk may be mitigated by:



         (a)   Structuring the investment portfolio so that
securities or other allowable investments mature to meet cash requirements
for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities or other
allowable investments on the open market prior to maturity; and



         (b)   By investing operating funds primarily in
shorter-term securities or other allowable investments.



   (B)   Liquidity. The investment portfolio of the city should
establish adequate liquidity to meet all reasonably anticipated as well as
unforeseen expenditures. This is accomplished by structuring the portfolio so
that securities or other allowable investments mature concurrent with cash
needs to meet anticipated demands. Furthermore, since all possible cash
demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should provide adequate
liquidity to meet unexpected cash needs. Liquidity can be achieved utilizing
securities with active secondary markets, money market accounts and/or
savings deposit accounts offering daily liquidity, or other liquid options
acceptable under 30 ILCS 235.



   (C)   Return on investments. Return on investment is of tertiary
concern, when compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described
above. The investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of
attaining a market rate of return throughout economic cycles, taking into
account the investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Investments are
limited to very low risk securities or other allowable investments in
anticipation of earning a fair return relative to the risk being assumed.
Securities shall not be sold prior to maturity with the following exceptions:



      (1)   A declining credit security could be sold early to
minimize loss of principal;



      (2)   A security swap would improve the quality yield, or
target duration in the portfolio; or



      (3)   Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that the
security be sold.



   (D)   Legality. The investment activities of the city will conform
to federal, state and local legal requirements.



(1994 Code, § 40.05)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.06  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   Authority to manage the city’s investment program is derived from the
following.



   (A)   The establishment of investment policies is the responsibility
of the City Council.



   (B)   Management and administrative responsibility for the
investment program is delegated to the Commissioner of Accounts and Finances
(“Finance Commissioner”), or his or her investment designee, who shall
establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program
consistent with this investment policy.



      (1)   Procedures should include references to: safekeeping,
delivery vs. payment, investment accounting, repurchase agreements, wire
transfer agreements, collateral/depository agreements and banking service
contracts.



      (2)   Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of
authority to persons responsible for investment transactions. No person may
engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of
this policy and the procedures established by the Finance Commissioner.



      (3)   The Finance Commissioner shall be responsible for all
transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate
the activities of subordinate officials.



      (4)   The Finance Commissioner may amend the written
procedures in a manner not inconsistent with this policy or with state
statutes.



(1994 Code, § 40.06)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.07  ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   Individuals involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions. Individuals involved in the investment process
shall disclose any interests in financial institutions with which they
conduct business. In addition, such individuals shall disclose any personal
financial or investment positions that could be related to the performance of
the investment portfolio.



(1994 Code, § 40.07)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.08  AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall maintain a list of financial
institutions authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list
shall also be maintained of approved security broker-dealers. These may
include “primary” dealers or regional dealers that qualify under
Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15C3-1 (uniform net capital rule). No
public deposit shall be made except in a qualified public depository as
established by the laws of the state or the United States of America.



   (B)   All financial institutions and broker-dealers who desire to
become qualified bidders for investment transactions in excess of $250,000
must supply the city with the following;



      (1)   Audited financial statements;



      (2)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers (NASD)
certification;



      (3)   Proof of state registration; and



      (4)   Certification of having read the city’s investment
policy (Attachment #1 to Ordinance 2017-07), unless collateralization is
utilized pursuant to § 40.10.



   (C)   An annual review of the financial condition and registrations
of qualified bidders shall be conducted by the city.



   (D)   A current, audited financial statement is required to be on
file for each financial institution and broker/dealer through which the city
invests.



(1994 Code, § 40.08)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.09  AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.



   The city may invest in any type of security allowed for in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Current approved
investments include:



   (A)   Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills,
treasury strips or other securities or other allowable investments now or
hereafter issued, which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the
government of the United States of America as to principal and interest;



   (B)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other similar obligations of the
government of the United States of America or its agencies;



   (C)   Interest-bearing savings accounts, interest-bearing
certificates of deposit, interest-bearing time deposits, or any other
investment constituting direct obligations of any institution, as defined by
the Illinois Banking Act, 205 ILCS 5, that are insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation;



   (D)   State funds, including the Illinois Public Treasurer’s
Investment Pool (IPTIP) and the Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund (IMET);



   (E)   Short-term obligations of corporations (banker’s acceptances
and commercial paper), organized in the United States with assets exceeding
$500 million, and rated at the time of purchase at the highest classification
established by at least two standard rating services. Such investments must
mature within 270 days from the date of purchase and may not exceed 10% of
the corporation’s outstanding obligations. No more than a combined 33% of
the city’s funds may be invested in banker’s acceptances or commercial
paper at any given time;



   (F)   Short-term discount obligations of the Federal National
Mortgage Association (FNMA) or in shares of other forms of securities or
other allowable investments legally issued by savings and loan associations
incorporated under the laws of this state or any other state or under the
laws of the United States. Investments may be made only in those savings and
loan associations of which the shares or investment certificates are insured
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC);



   (G)   Investment options suitable under 30 ILCS 235, including fixed
rate general obligation municipal bonds whose credit quality is restricted to
AA or better.



(1994 Code, § 40.09)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.10  COLLATERALIZATION.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city, and in accordance with the
GFOA’s recommended practices on the collateralization of public deposits
(Attachments #2 and #3 to Ordinance 2017-07), that the city requires that
funds on deposit in excess of FDIC limits be secured by some form of
collateral, including surety bonds or letters of credit.



   (B)   The city will accept any of the following assets as collateral:



      (1)   Government securities;



      (2)   Obligations of federal agencies;



      (3)   Obligations of federal instrumentalities;



      (4)   Fixed rate general obligation municipal bonds rated AA
or better;



      (5)   Obligations of the State of Illinois;



   (C)   The city reserves the right to accept or reject any form of
the above-named securities.



   (D)   The city also requires that all depositories that hold city
deposits in excess of the FDIC limit must agree to utilize the GFOA’s
recommended practices of collateralization of public deposits as outlined in
Attachments #2 and #3 to Ordinance 2017-07.



   (E)   The amount of collateral provided will not be less than 110%
of the fair market value of the net amount of public funds secured. The ratio
of fair market value of collateral to the amount of funds secured will be
reviewed monthly by the city, and additional collateral will be required when
the ratio declines below the level required, and collateral will be released
if the fair market value exceeds the required level. Pledged collateral will
be held in safekeeping or the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, designated by
the city and evidenced by a safekeeping agreement. The city shall approve, in
writing, the process for the release of substitution of pledged assets. The
city realizes that there is a cost factor involved with collateralization,
and the city will pay any reasonable and customary fees related to
collateralization.



(1994 Code, § 40.10)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.11  SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.



   (A)   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase
agreements, entered into by the city, shall be conducted on a
delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis.



   (B)   City officials, the Commissioner of Accounts and Finances and
the City Treasurer, shall be bonded to protect the city against loss due to
possible embezzlement and malfeasance.



(1994 Code, § 40.11)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.12  DIVERSIFICATION.



   In order to reduce the risk of default, the investment portfolio of the
city shall not exceed the following diversification limits unless
specifically authorized by the City Council:



   (A)   Monies deposited at a financial institution shall not exceed
75% of the capital stock and surplus of that institution;



   (B)   Commercial paper shall not exceed 33% of the city’s
investment portfolio;



   (C)   Deposits in the Illinois Public Treasurer’s Investment Pool
shall not exceed 50% of the city’s investment portfolio;



   (D)   Brokered and negotiable certificates of deposit shall not
exceed 25% of the city’s investment portfolio.



(1994 Code, § 40.12)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.13  MAXIMUM MATURITIES.



   (A)   To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the city shall not directly invest in securities maturing
more than five years from the date of purchase.



   (B)   Reserve funds (MC&CF or trusts) may be invested in securities
exceeding the maximum years.



(1994 Code, § 40.13)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.14  INTERNAL CONTROL.



   (A)   The Commissioner of Accounts and Finance and the City
Treasurer are responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal
control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the city are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be
designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objections are met. The
concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that:



      (1)   The cost of the control should not exceed the benefits
likely to be derived; and



      (2)   The valuation of costs and benefits require estimates
and judgements by management.



   (B)   The internal controls shall address the following points:



      (1)   Control of collusion;



      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting and
record keeping;



      (3)   Custodial safekeeping;



      (4)   Avoidance of physical delivery of securities or other
allowable investments;



      (5)   Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff
members;



      (6)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for
investments and wire transfers; and



      (7)   Development of a procedure for making wire transfers.



(1994 Code, § 40.14)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.15  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the
parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a
comparable rate of return during a market/economic environment of stable
interest rates. Portfolio performance should be compared to appropriate
benchmarks on a minimum quarterly basis.



(1994 Code, § 40.15)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.16  REPORTING.



   (A)   Investment report. The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances
or the City Treasurer shall prepare and provide an investment report at least
quarterly, including a succinct management summary that provides a clear
picture of the status of the current investment portfolio, to the City
Council. This management summary will be prepared in a manner that will allow
the entity to ascertain whether investment activities during the reporting
period have conformed to the investment policy. The report may include the
following:



      (1)   A listing of individual securities or other allowable
investments held at the end of the reporting period;



      (2)   Average weighted yield to maturity of portfolio on city
investments, as compared to applicable benchmarks;



      (3)   A listing of investments by maturity dates;



      (4)   The percentage of the total portfolio that each
institution is holding;



      (5)    The principal and type of investment by fund.



   (B)   Marking to market. A statement of the market value of the
portfolio shall be issued at least quarterly, and a management summary shall
be provided to the governing body. This will ensure that the minimal amount
of review has been performed on the investment portfolio in terms of value
and subsequent price volatility. Review should be consistent with the
GFOA-recommended practice on mark-to-market practices for state and local
government investment portfolios and investment pools (Attachment #3 to
Ordinance 2017-07).



(1994 Code, § 40.16)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



§ 40.17  INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION.



   This investment policy shall be adopted by the City Council. The policy
shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Commissioner of Accounts and
Finance, the City Treasurer and the  City Attorney to monitor such matters
as conformance to accepted practices, conformance with standards such as
GFOA, and changes to the suitability of investments. Any modifications made
thereto shall be effective only upon approval by the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 40.17)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 3-22-1999; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-26-2017)



CHAPTER 41:  LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES



Section



   41.01   Title



   41.02   Scope



   41.03   Definitions



   41.04   Notices



   41.05   Late payment



   41.06   Payment



   41.07   Certain credits and refunds



   41.08   Audit procedure



   41.09   Appeal



   41.10   Hearing



   41.11   Interest and penalties



   41.12   Abatement



   41.13   Installment contracts



   41.14   Statute of limitations



   41.15   Voluntary disclosure



   41.16   Publication of tax ordinances



   41.17   Internal review procedure



   41.18   Application



§ 41.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally
Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibilities Ordinance”.



(1994 Code, § 41.01)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.02  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city’s procedures
in connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and administered taxes.



(1994 Code, § 41.02)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, being 50
ILCS 45/1 et seq..



   CITY. The City of Sparta, Illinois.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The City Council of the City of Sparta.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Commissioner of Finance is charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized
by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR to act in the local tax administrator’s
stead. The LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority to implement the
terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of
such authority by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall not be inconsistent with
this chapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the
city that is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code, being 35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq., or fees
collected by the city other than infra-structure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city.



(1994 Code, § 41.03)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.04  NOTICES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(1994 Code, § 41.04)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.05  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is
physically received by the city on or before the due date, or received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate
postage prepaid.



(1994 Code, § 41.05)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.06  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:



   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;



   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and



   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.



(1994 Code, § 41.06)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.07  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who
has not paid the amounts directly to the city.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that, there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any moneys to the city.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax
administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



   (D)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or
in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 5% per annum, based on a year of
365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to
the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(1994 Code, § 41.07)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.08  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.



   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and
if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days, nor more
than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days after the originally
designated audit and during normal business hours.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the city.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer
or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within
the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer’s tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of
the city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local government entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
government entity imposing such tax.



(1994 Code, § 41.08)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.09  APPEAL.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable
notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax
administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.



(1994 Code, § 41.09)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.10  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 41.09 of this chapter, the
local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted, except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(1994 Code, § 41.10)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.11  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest. The city hereby provides for the amount of interest
to be assessed on all late payment, underpayment or non-payment of the tax,
to be 9% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not
filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a
late filing penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on
a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due
shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall
be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting
period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or
payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by
the controlling ordinance.



(1994 Code, § 41.11)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.12  ABATEMENT.



   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(1994 Code, § 41.12)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.13  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local 
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer.



(1994 Code, § 41.13)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.14  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.



   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return
for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the city, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(1994 Code, § 41.14)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.15  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of any audit, investigation or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more then four years before the date
of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.



(1994 Code, § 41.15)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.16  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request to the City
Clerk’s office.



(1994 Code, § 41.16)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.17  INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.



   (B)   Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect.



   (C)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax
administrator shall:



      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;



      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed
lien.



(1994 Code, § 41.17)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



§ 41.18  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the city’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter
shall be controlling.



(1994 Code, § 41.18)  (Ord. 2000-18, passed 12-11-2000)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



      51.   WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM; RATES



      52.   SEWERS



      53.   WATER



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Application of provisions



   50.02   Definitions



Collection and Disposal of Rubbish



   50.15   Rubbish system to collect garbage from city residents only



   50.16   Storage of garbage awaiting collection



   50.17   Tampering with receptacles prohibited



   50.18   Prevention of scattering of garbage



   50.19   Collection; frequency; hours; placement for



   50.20   Collection truck; specifications



   50.21   Overloading collection vehicle prohibited



   50.22   Unemptied containers



   50.23   Prohibition against burning garbage and certain rubbish



Contractors



   50.35   License required; application; compliance with provisions



   50.36   License fee



   50.37   Inspection of vehicles



   50.38   Emergency operation



   50.39   Insurance required



   50.40   Suspension; revocation



   50.41   Neglect of containers by contractor



   50.42   Deposit of rubbish in landfill/solid waste disposal facility



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   General Offenses, see Title XIII



   Health, Safety and Sanitation, see Ch. 96



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 100



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   This chapter shall apply to all garbage, rubbish and ashes to be
collected and picked up by any collection system, private or public,
conducted within the city.



(1994 Code, § 50.01)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



§ 50.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES. Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.



   CITY. All territory located within the city limits of Sparta, Illinois.



   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   PREMISES. Any residence, commercial business, industry, hospital,
nursing home, hotel, restaurant and/or other business establishment within
the city dealing in food or perishable items.



   REFUSE. Tree branches, logs, brush cuttings and yard trimmings.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible trash, including but not limited to paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture and bedding; non-combustible trash, including but not limited to
metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces
of concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral waste; street rubbish,
including but not limited to street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt
and contents of litter receptacles; provided, however, that RUBBISH shall not
include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid
wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such
as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.



(1994 Code, § 50.02)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH



§ 50.15  RUBBISH SYSTEM TO COLLECT GARBAGE FROM CITY RESIDENTS ONLY.



   (A)   No garbage, rubbish or ashes shall be collected by any rubbish
system or placed outside of any premises for collection by any rubbish
system, except garbage, rubbish and ashes generated by a resident of the city
or from an activity conducted within the city.



   (B)   No person shall move or transport any garbage, rubbish or
ashes from one location to another to evade the provisions of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 50.15)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.16  STORAGE OF GARBAGE AWAITING COLLECTION.



   (A)   Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any
premises shall provide adequate receptacles of sizes, numbers and types
required to contain all garbage, rubbish and ashes generated by those persons
or entity occupying the premises. All garbage, rubbish or ashes shall be
stored in metal or plastic receptacles with a tight-fitting lid and in
compliance with all public health ordinances of the city, county and state.



   (B)   All commercial, industrial and multi-dwelling units utilizing
receptacles not intended for individual residential use shall place said
receptacles on a concrete or asphalt pad enclosed with a fence or other
screening suitable to conceal such from public view as far as practicable.
Said enclosure shall be not less than six feet in height and accessible by
gate.



(1994 Code, § 50.16)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987; Ord. 16-03, passed
3-28-2016)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  TAMPERING WITH RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause the removal, upsetting, mutilation, defacing or
tampering with receptacles for garbage, rubbish or ashes or cause the
contents thereof to be spilled or be strewn in or upon any public place or
private premises.



(1994 Code, § 50.17)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.18  PREVENTION OF SCATTERING OF GARBAGE.



   No person shall place garbage, rubbish or ashes in receptacles,
residential, commercial, industrial or otherwise, in such a manner so as to
allow the garbage, rubbish or ashes to be carried or otherwise scattered or
removed from the garbage, rubbish and ashes receptacle by the elements or by
animals.



(1994 Code, § 50.18)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.19  COLLECTION; FREQUENCY; HOURS; PLACEMENT FOR.



   (A)   In residential areas, garbage, rubbish and ashes collection
shall be made once each week. In commercial business and industrial areas and
at all hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, restaurants and other business
establishments within the city dealing in foods or perishable items,
collection shall be made at least once each week or more frequently in order
to prevent a nuisance.



   (B)   (1)   All collection of garbage, rubbish or ashes within
the city shall occur between the hours of 6:00  a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday
through Saturday. However, the collection of garbage, rubbish and ashes shall
be permitted from 4:30 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, at:



         (a)   Any residence having frontage upon and located
adjacent to S.R. 4 or S.R. 154;



         (b)   Any commercial or industrial site having frontage
upon and located adjacent to S.R. 4 and S.R. 154 in which the garbage
receptacle is placed at or near the curb of said state highway; and



         (c)   Any other commercial or industrial site located
not less than 200 feet from a residence.



      (2)   No collection of garbage, rubbish or ashes on Sunday
shall be permitted.



   (C)   On the date of collection of any garbage, rubbish or ashes the
containers for any premises within the city shall be placed at the curb not
earlier than 4:00 p.m. the preceding night. All garbage, rubbish and ashes
shall be placed at the street in front of the premises or at the alley where
there is an alley accessible. The garbage, rubbish or ashes shall be in
containers as required under other provisions of this chapter. After the
garbage, trash or ashes have been collected and no later than 5:00 p.m. the
same day of collection, the containers shall be removed from public view. All
receptacles or containers for the disposition of garbage, rubbish or ashes to
be picked up by any private collector from any premises in the city shall be
maintained out of public view as herein provided.



(1994 Code, § 50.19)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987; Ord. 05-10, passed
8-8-2005; Ord. 11-02, passed 7-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.20  COLLECTION TRUCK; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in
person or by his, her or its agent, employee or servant, to use any vehicle
to haul any kind of garbage, rubbish or ashes, whether liquid or solid,
except in a truck specifically equipped with a self-compactor used
exclusively for garbage or rubbish operations. However, the requirements for
using the trucks equipped with self-compactors shall not apply to vehicles
carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste
material if such matter is securely lashed to the vehicle to prevent spilling
or dropping at all times while the vehicle is in motion on any street or
alley in the city.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation licensed to collect garbage,
rubbish or ashes within the city shall utilize a collection truck having
three or more axles in residential districts without the expressed written
consent of the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements.



(1994 Code, § 50.20)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987; Ord. 09-10, passed
12-14-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.21  OVERLOADING COLLECTION VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle for the
collection of garbage, rubbish or ashes in the city to be overloaded or to
allow the contents thereof to be blown or scattered upon any public street,
alley or other public way or place in the city. The person in charge of the
vehicle shall immediately gather up or cause to be gathered up any blown or
scattered material.



(1994 Code, § 50.21)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.22  UNEMPTIED CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is in control of any premises
upon which there is located, or on whose behalf there is maintained, any
receptacle or container of garbage, rubbish or ash (which has been
containerized in accordance with a contract for its removal) to allow the
garbage, rubbish or ashes to remain uncollected beyond the date provided by
the contract for its collection and removal, or after the garbage, rubbish or
ashes creates a condition which is offensive due to odor, attraction of
vermin or danger to health or, in any open case, to allow the container or
receptacle to remain unemptied for longer than 14 days.



(1994 Code, § 50.22)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.23  PROHIBITION AGAINST BURNING GARBAGE AND CERTAIN RUBBISH.



   No person shall cause or allow the open burning of garbage, as defined
in this chapter, or rubbish including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood furniture, bedding and any other waste from building
construction, demolition or any domestic use. This section shall not limit
the burning of certain firewood or landscape waste or burning for the purpose
of firefighting training subject to the provisions of Ch. 95 of this code of
ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 50.23)  (Ord. 95-21, passed 12-11-1995)  Penalty, see §
50.99



CONTRACTORS



§ 50.35  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
collect or transport garbage, rubbish or ashes in the city until a license
therefor has been obtained upon approval by the City Council. The license
shall only be issued to qualified applicants. Applications for the license
shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be issued only upon a showing by
the applicant that:



      (1)   The applicant has a truck meeting the requirements of
§§ 50.20 and 50.21 of this chapter;



      (2)   The truck has been inspected within six months by the
state’s Department of Transportation, as required by state law;



      (3)   The truck has an audible back-up alarm system designed
to alert bystanders when vehicle is in backward motion (automatic type);



      (4)   Written evidence of agreement between applicant and
operator of licensed landfill approved by the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency for the disposal of all garbage, rubbish and ashes to be
collected by the applicant;



      (5)   The applicant shall state the make, model and year and
license number for each motor vehicle or truck to be used by the applicant
hereunder; and



      (6)   The applicant shall furnish a certificate or policy of
liability insurance as hereafter required to the City Clerk.



   (B)   No license shall be granted until the applicant shall have
satisfied the City Council of the ability to strictly comply with all the
requirements and conditions of this chapter in the operations to be conducted
under the license. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
transferable.



   (C)   If the applicant complies with this chapter, all required fees
have been paid and it does not appear that any city ordinance or state law
will be violated by the operation, the City Clerk shall thereupon issue a
license for the collection of garbage, rubbish and ashes to the applicant;
provided, however, that, there shall be not more than four licenses in effect
under this chapter at any one time.



(1994 Code, § 50.35)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987; Ord. 94-002, passed
4-25-1994; Ord. 09-09, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 50.36  LICENSE FEE.



   Every person, firm or corporation who shall be issued a license
hereunder shall pay a license fee of $50 per year or any fractional part
thereof for the first truck operated in the business and a further fee of $25
per year or fractional part thereof for each additional truck so operated.
The license year shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each
year. No permit fee payable under this chapter shall be refundable.



(1994 Code, § 50.36)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



§ 50.37  INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.



   Any truck or motor vehicle for which a license is issued under this
chapter shall be used exclusively for the collection of garbage, rubbish and
ashes. It shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Police Chief or his
or her appointee to secure compliance with all rules and regulations of the
state’s Department of Transportation and this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 50.37)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



§ 50.38  EMERGENCY OPERATION.



   (A)   Any applicant to whom a license is issued under this chapter
for the collection of garbage, rubbish and ashes shall be allowed to use a
truck or motor vehicle, not specially equipped with a self-compactor, for a
period not exceeding 72 hours during which applicants regular motor vehicle
or truck so specially equipped is inoperable.



   (B)   Any substitute motor vehicle or truck operated during the
mechanical break-down period shall be covered by a tarpaulin so as to prevent
garbage, rubbish and ashes from blowing, spilling or dropping on any street,
alley or public way in the city.



(1994 Code, § 50.38)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



§ 50.39  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle hereunder or permit the same
to be operated unless the permit holder shall first deposit with the City
Clerk a policy or certificate of liability insurance covering all vehicles of
all kinds used hereunder, the policy to be issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state indemnifying the applicant in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000.



(1994 Code, § 50.39)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.40  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   Licenses granted under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked at any time by the City Council for any substantial violation of this
chapter. No license shall be revoked without an opportunity for a hearing.



   (B)   (1)   Written warning will be issued by the Chief of Police
showing non-compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The applicant will be given not less than 24 hours, nor
more than 72 hours, to comply with the provisions then being violated by
applicant.



   (C)   Any applicant receiving written warning of three violations
within a 12-month period shall appear before the City Council and show cause
why his or her license shall not be revoked or suspended.



(1994 Code, § 50.40)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



§ 50.41  NEGLECT OF CONTAINERS BY CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who has been licensed by
the city and who has contracted to collect and remove garbage, rubbish and
ashes to allow the garbage, rubbish and ashes to remain uncollected beyond
the date provided by the contract with the customer for the collection and
removal, or in any case to allow receptacle or container to remain unemptied
for longer than 14 days, or until the garbage, rubbish and ashes creates any
condition which is offensive due to odor, attraction of vermin or danger to
health.



   (B)   If any contractor fails to comply with this section, the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety may proceed at the contractor’s
expense, after notice, to abate the condition and to revoke the
contractor’s license.



(1994 Code, § 50.41)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.42  DEPOSIT OF RUBBISH IN LANDFILL/SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who has been licensed by the city
and who is contracted to collect and remove garbage and trash to deposit the
garbage and trash at any location other than a landfill/solid waste disposal
facility licensed by the state.



(1994 Code, § 50.42)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second
offense and not more than $750 for any subsequent offense.



(1994 Code, § 50.99)  (Ord. 364, passed 7-13-1987)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM; RATES



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Deposit required for services



Extensions



   51.15   Extension of water and sewer system



   51.16   Standards and specifications for extensions



   51.17   Payment of certain connection charges to person paying cost
of extension



   51.18   Maintenance, sewer main and water main extensions



Rates, Charges and Collection



   51.30   Revenue to be placed in Waterworks and Sewerage Fund;
disbursements



   51.31   Persons liable for joint and single service charge



   51.32   Establishment of rates for use and services of system



   51.33   Special contracts not affected



   51.34   Persons liable for payment of services



   51.35   Preparation of bills; due date; place for payment



   51.36   Penalty for late payment



   51.37   Water service disconnection authorized; procedure; notice;
reinstatement of service



   51.38   Charges to be a lien upon premises



   51.39   Abandoned connection



   51.40   Annual review



   51.41   EPA access to records



   51.42   Appeals



Backflow and Cross-Connection Control



   51.55   Requirements for plumbing installed within the city



   51.56   Approval required for connection between public and private
water supply



   51.57   Surveys of properties served by public water supply



   51.58   Right of entry



   51.59   Liability for cleanup costs



   51.60   Violations



   51.61   Use of ground water as a potable water supply prohibited
within the corporate limits of the city



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Commissioner of the Department of Public Works.



   CHARGES.



      (1)   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all
users of the public water system.



      (2)   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to
improve, extend or reconstruct the water works.



      (3)   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing
period for payment of interest, principal and coverage (of loan, bond and the
like) outstanding.



      (4)   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than
the operation, maintenance and replacement costs (i.e., debt service and
capital improvement costs).



      (5)   REPLACEMENT COSTS.



         (a)   Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed.



         (b)   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes REPLACEMENT.



      (6)   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the water
works will be operated.



      (7)   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of water works for
the costs of operation, maintenance and replacement.



      (8)   WATER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the water system.



      (9)   WATER SERVICE CHARGE.



         (a)   The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of water facilities.



         (b)   The SERVICE CHARGE shall be computed as outlined
in this chapter and shall consist of the basic user charge and the local
capital cost if applicable.



   CITY. The City of Sparta, Illinois.



   CURB COCK.



      (1)   A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a
water main to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a
valve key to start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building.



      (2)   Also called a CURB STOP.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.



   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.



   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. §§
300f et seq.) amendments.



   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER.



      (1)   A unit of the concentration of water constituent. It is
0.001 g of the constituent in 1.000 ml of water.



      (2)   It has replaced the unit formerly-used commonly “parts
per million”, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water analysis.



   ORDINANCE. Ord. 03-01, passed 2-24-2003.



   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA
Divisions of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   PPM. Parts per million by weight.



   SERVICE BOX. A valve box used with corporation of curb cock.



   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



   STATE ACT. The state’s Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being 30 ILCS
405/1 et seq.



   STATE LOAN. The state’s participation in the financing of the
construction of water works as provided for by 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq. and for
making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of
Illinois.



(1994 Code, § 51.01)  (Ord. 2003-01, passed 2-24-2003)



§ 51.02  DEPOSIT REQUIRED FOR SERVICES.



   (A)   Whenever any premises shall, after 10-1-2015, become connected
to the combined system for water service and sewerage service, or to the
water service system only, a deposit of $200 shall be made for each
commercial or dwelling structure so connected.



   (B)   The deposit shall be held by the city and shall be applied to
the thirtieth day of the month in which it is due.



   (C)   When the water service shall be disconnected, the amount of
deposit, less any amount applied to the payment of charges, shall be refunded
to the depositor without interest.



(1994 Code, § 51.02)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951; Ord. 179, passed
3-25-1968; Ord. 298, passed 10-22-1979; Ord. 94-011, passed 10-11-1994; Ord.
2003-01, passed 2-24-2003; Ord. 04-11, passed 9-27-2004; Ord. 15-09, passed
8-24-2015)



EXTENSIONS



§ 51.15  EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Permission of Council required. No extension of a water or a
sewer main of the water and sewerage system of the city shall be made by a
person other than the city, except and unless the approval of City Council
shall first have been obtained.



   (B)   Application. An application in writing shall be made to City
Council, which application shall be accompanied by a plat showing in detail
the location and extent of the extension, the size and type of pipe to be
used and the placement of valves and fire hydrants.



   (C)   No extension outside city limits. No extension of a water or
sewer main of the water and sewerage system of the city, shall be made to any
premises located outside of the corporate limits of the city.



   (D)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds and determines that
certain expenditures of city funds have heretofore been made and will be made
in the future for the construction and installation of sewer extension mains
to the sewer collection system and the construction and installation of water
extension mains to the water distribution system established, operated and
maintained by the city; that the extension of the sewer mains were
constructed and completed and in the future will be constructed and completed
at certain depths enabling further extensions of the sewer collection system
of the city to territories within the corporate limits and to unincorporated
territories contiguous and adjacent to the corporate limits of the city; that
the extension of the water mains where constructed and completed and in the
future will be constructed and completed with additional capacities enabling
further extension of the water distribution system of the city to territories
within the corporate limits and unincorporated territories contiguous and
adjacent to the corporate limits of the city.



   (E)   Determination of policy. The City Council finds and determines
and hereby declares that, as a matter of policy, the expenditures made for
the extension of sewer mains at the depths and water mains with the capacity
sufficient to enable future extensions to service territories within the
corporate limits and unincorporated territories contiguous and adjacent to
the corporate limits of the city should be allocated among and assessed
against the territories and that the assessments shall be due and payable
when connections with the sewer collection system and/or water distribution
system of the city shall be made to extensions servicing the territories.



   (F)   Assessment procedure.



      (1)   The City Council shall review all past expenditures and
all future expenditures or sewer main extensions or water main extensions to
determine that portion of the expenditures incurred and reasonably allocable
to providing the availability of sewer and water services to territories
within the corporate limits and contiguous and adjacent to unincorporated
territories outside of the corporate limits of the city, specifically
identifying the territories benefitted and allocating specific amounts to be
assessed against the territories.



      (2)   An estimate of proper allocation of expenditures to the
benefitted territories shall be prepared over the signature of the engineer
preparing the plans and specifications for the project involved or the
city’s Director of Public Works, and over the signature of the Mayor who
shall certify that, in his or her opinion, the allocation of expenditures is
proper and includes all lawful expenses incurred in the project which
directly benefitted the territories identified.



      (3)   Upon determination and allocation of specific amounts of
expenditures for sewer main extensions and water main extensions and the
identification of the territories benefitted thereby, the City Council, by
resolution or ordinance, shall make a true and impartial assessment against
the territory benefitted by the sewer main extension and/or water main
extension and shall cause to be filed a notice of the assessment in the
manner and form as provided in division (G) below.



      (4)   No connection with the sewer collection system or water
distribution system of the city to extensions of sewer mains and/or water
mains to the territories so benefitted shall be permitted until the
assessment is paid in full.



   (G)   Notice of assessment.



      (1)   A notice of assessment shall be recorded in the County
Recorder’s office, which notice shall be in substantially the following
form:



 

   NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT

   IN RE:

   (Legal Description of Territory)

 

Public notice is hereby given that the City Council of the City of Sparta,
pursuant to § 51.15, Extension of water and sewer system, of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Sparta, Illinois, by proper ordinance duly adopted and
passed, has hereby determined that expenditures incurred by the City of
Sparta for the extension of sewer mains and/or water mains connected to the
sewer collection system and/or the water distribution system of the City of
Sparta for providing sewer service and water service to the above described
territory have been assessed against said territory in the following amounts:

 

For sewer main extension: ($   ).

For water main extension: ($      ).

 

Notice is further given that prior to connection with the sewer collection
system and/or the water distribution system of the city to serve the above
described territory, or any portion thereof, the amounts specified above, or
a ratable portion thereof, shall be due and payable to the City of Sparta.

 

By order of the City Council of the City of Sparta this           day of
                        ,                 .

 

   CITY OF SPARTA

 

   BY:                                            
                         

   Mayor

 

   ATTEST:

                                                  
                                   

City Clerk

 



 



      (2)   A copy of the notice of assessment shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owner of the
unincorporated territory at the last known address of the owner or if the
address cannot be reasonably ascertained to the address as it appears on the
authentic tax books of the county.



   (H)   Objections to assessment. The record owner of any territory
determined by the City Council to have been benefitted by sewer main and/or
water main extensions shall file in writing any objections to the assessment
against the territory with the City Clerk within 30 days of the mailing of
the notice as assessment. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the
objection after due notice to the record owner and within 60 days of the
filing of the objections. At the hearing, the record owner shall be afforded
the opportunity to examine the basis of the Council’s determination of the
assessment in question and to present testimony and other evidence in regard
thereto. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may affirm or
modify the assessment as the City Council may determine. If no objection to
the assessment is filed within 30 days of the mailing of the notice thereof,
the assessment shall be binding on the record owner and all successors in
title.



(1994 Code, § 51.10)  (Ord. 105, passed 3-28-1960; Ord. 287, passed
9-11-1978; Ord. 377, passed 7-25-1988)



§ 51.16  STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   No extension shall be made to a water or sewer main of the
water and sewerage system of the city unless the extension meets all
requirements and standards fixed by the City Council and by the provisions of
this code and other ordinances of the city.



   (B)   No extension to a water main shall be made using a pipe of
less than six inches in diameter, properly valved to control the flow of
water if, in the opinion of the City Council the same is desirable, and
providing adequate fire protection by the installation of fire hydrants at
intervals along the extension not exceeding 450 feet in length.



   (C)   No extension to a sewer main shall be made using a pipe of
less than eight inches in diameter and unless adequate provisions are made
for manholes at intervals along the extension.



   (D)   Excavations made in streets and alleys for the installation of
water and sewer main extensions shall be made in compliance with the
provisions of this code relating to the making of excavations in streets.



(1994 Code, § 51.11)  (Ord. 105, passed 3-28-1960)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.17  PAYMENT OF CERTAIN CONNECTION CHARGES TO PERSON PAYING COST OF
EXTENSION.



   To encourage and promote the construction of extensions to the water
and sewer mains of the city at private cost, all connection charges in excess
of the connection fees established by § 53.05(A) of this code of ordinances
for connection to a water main shall, in instances where the main abutting on
the property to be served shall have been constructed by a person other than
the city at his or her own cost, be paid over when collected to the person
having paid the cost of the construction of the main; and, where the sewer
main abutting on the property has been so constructed at private cost, all
connection charges in excess of $25 made for a connection servicing that
property shall be paid over when collected to the person having paid the cost.



(1994 Code, § 51.12)  (Ord. 105, passed 3-28-1960; Ord. 373, passed
4-25-1988)



§ 51.18  MAINTENANCE, SEWER MAIN AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   The owner of the premises connected to a city sewer main and water main
shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair or replacement of any
lateral serving the premises to the point of juncture with the sewer main
maintained and operated by the city and shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair and replacement of any water line serving the premises to
the point of juncture with the water meter provided by the city. All costs
for the maintenance, repair or replacement of the sewer lateral extension or
water line shall be borne by the owner of the premises served by the main or
line.



(1994 Code, § 51.13)  (Ord. 374, passed 5-23-1988)



RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTION



§ 51.30  REVENUE TO BE PLACED IN WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND;
DISBURSEMENTS.



   All revenues derived from the operation of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system shall be set aside as collected and deposited in the
Waterworks and Sewerage Fund and shall be held and disbursed in accordance
with law and the revenues shall be kept in a bank account separate and
distinct from all other funds or bank accounts of the city, and proper
records and accounts, separate and apart from all other records and accounts,
shall be maintained as provided by law.



(1994 Code, § 51.25)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951)



§ 51.31  PERSONS LIABLE FOR JOINT AND SINGLE SERVICE CHARGE.



   (A)   Charges for the use and services of the combined system shall
be made and collected against each lot, parcel of land or premises to which
water is supplied by the city waterworks system and which may have any active
sewer connection with the sewerage system of the city, or which may actively
discharge sewage or industrial waste either directly or indirectly into the
system or any part thereof.



   (B)   Charges for sewerage services only shall be made and collected
against each lot, parcel of land or premises, which shall not in addition
receive water from the city. Charges for waterworks services only shall be
made and collected against each lot, parcel of land or premises receiving
water from the city which shall not be connected with the sewerage system of
the city and which shall not be required under this chapter to be so
connected.



(1994 Code, § 51.26)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951)



§ 51.32  ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES FOR USE AND SERVICES OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   Rates for inside city. The rates and charges for the use and
services of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city are
outlined in this section.



      (1)   Types of properties. The rates shall include the
following types of properties.



         (a)   Premises with individual meters. Rates and charges
shall be based on the amount of water furnished to and consumed at the
premises.



         (b)   Mobile home parks without individual meters. Where
one water meter services a mobile home park, the number of gallons per month
furnished to and consumed at the park shall be divided by the number of
mobile home units situated thereon, and the number of gallons consumed per
mobile home thereby determined. The rates established herein shall then be
multiplied by the number of mobile home units located in the mobile home park
on the day the meter is read.



         (c)   Multiple dwelling units without individual meters.
Where one water meter services a multiple dwelling unit, the number of
gallons per month furnished to and consumed at the multiple dwelling shall be
divided by the number of individual dwelling units or apartments located
therein, and the number of gallons consumed per dwelling unit or apartment
determined. The rates established herein shall then be multiplied by the
number of individual dwelling units or apartments located in the multiple
dwelling on the day the meter is read.



         (d)   Commercial users. Includes transient lodging,
retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise
for personal, household or industrial consumption and/or rendering services
to others.



         (e)   Industrial users. Includes manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials
of substance into new products. These activities occur in establishments
usually described as plants, factories or mills, and characteristically use
power driven machines and material handling equipment. The term INDUSTRIAL
USER shall mean any non-governmental user of publicly-owned treatment works
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following
divisions:



            1.   Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;



            2.   Division B, Mining;



            3.   Division D, Manufacturing;



            4.   Division E, Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services; and



            5.   Division I, Services.



         A user in the divisions listed above may be excluded if it
is determined by the city that the user will introduce primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.



      (2)   Water service.



         (a)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2017
through 7-14-2018, the following rates shall be in effect:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $30.81;



            2.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $9.09;



            3.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.73;



            4.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.57;



            5.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.12;



            6.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $7.88;



            7.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per 1,000
gallons: $7.62; and



            8.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$30.81; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $38.69.



         (b)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2018
through 7-14-2019, the following rates shall be in effect:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $31.89;



            2.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $9.09;



            3.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.73;



            4.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.57;



            5.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.12;



            6.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $7.88;



            7.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per 1,000
gallons: $7.62; and



            8.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$31.89; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $40.05.



         (c)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2019, and
thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City Council, the
following rates shall apply:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $33.01;



            2.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $9.09;



            3.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.73;



            4.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.57;



            5.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $8.12;



            6.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $7.88;



            7.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per 1,000
gallons: $7.62; and



            8.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$33.01; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $41.46.



      (3)   Sewerage service. Sewerage service for premises with
individual meters, mobile home parks without individual meters, and multiple
dwelling units without individual meters.



         (a)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2017
through 7-14-2018, the following rates shall be in effect:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month of
water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $7.88; and



            2.   All over 1,000 gallons of water consumed per
month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service system,
per 1,000 gallons: $2.77.



         (b)   Commencing with usage beginning, on 7-15-2018
through 7-14-2019, the following, rates shall be in effect:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month of
water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $8.16; and



            2.   All over 1,000 gallons of water consumed per
month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service system,
per 1,000 gallons: $2.77.



         (c)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2019
through 7-14-2020, the following rates shall apply:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month of
water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $8.45; and



            2.   All over 1,000 gallons of water consumed per
month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service system,
per 1,000 gallons: $2.77.



         (d)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2020, and
thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City Council, the
following rates shall apply:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month of
water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $9.95.



            2.   All over 1,000 gallons of water consumed per
month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service system,
per 1,000 gallons: $3.17.



         (e)   Each sewer user shall pay a rate surcharge and
other additional charges as are provided in Chapter 52, Sewers.



         (f)   The minimum charge for combined water and sewerage
service is reflected in divisions (A)(2)(a) through (A)(2)(c) above.



      (4)   Sewerage service for commercial users.



         (a)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2017
through 7-14-2020, the rates outlined in divisions (A)(3)(a) through
(A)(3)(c) above shall be in effect.



         (b)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2020, and
thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City Council, the
following rages shall apply:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month of
water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $11.95;



            2.   All over 1,000 gallons of water consumed per
month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service system,
per 1,000 gallons: $3.77.



         (c)   Each sewer user shall pay a rate surcharge and
other additional charges as are provided in Chapter 52, Sewers.



         (d)   The minimum charge for combined water and sewerage
service through 7-14-2020 is reflected in divisions (A)(2)(a) through
(A)(2)(c) above. The minimum charge from 7-15-2020 until further ordinance is
adopted by the City Council shall be $42.96.



      (5)   Sewerage service for industrial users.



         (a)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2017
through 7-14-2020, the rates outlined in divisions (A)(3)(a) through
(A)(3)(c) above shall be in effect.



         (b)   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2020, and
thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City Council, the
following rages shall apply:



            1.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month of
water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $11.95;



            2.   All over 1,000 gallons of water consumed per
month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service system,
per 1,000 gallons: $3.77.



         (c)   Each sewer user shall pay a rate surcharge and
other additional charges as are provided in Chapter 52, Sewers.



         (d)   The minimum charge for combined water and sewerage
service through 7-14-2020 is reflected in divisions (A)(2)(a) through
(A)(2)(c) above. The minimum charge from 7-15-2020 until further ordinance is
adopted by the City Council shall be $42.96.



   (B)   Rates for outside the city. The rates and charges for the use
and services of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city
furnished to properties outside the corporate limits of the city are outlined
in this section. Said rates shall include the following topers of properties.



      (1)   Premises with individual meters. Rates and charges shall
be based on the amount of water furnished to and consumed at said premises.



      (2)   Mobile home parks without individual meters. Where one
water meter services a mobile home park, the number of gallons per month
furnished to and consumed at the park shall be divided by the number of
mobile home units situated thereon, and the number of gallons consumed per
mobile home determined. The rates established herein shall then be multiplied
by the number of mobile home units located in the mobile home park on the day
the meter is read.



      (3)   Multiple dwelling units without individual meters. Where
one water meter services a multiple dwelling unit, the number of gallons per
month furnished to and consumed at the multiple dwelling shall be divided by
the number of individual dwelling units or apartments situated therein, and
the number of gallons consumed per dwelling determined. The rates established
herein shall then be multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units or
apartments located in the multiple dwelling on the day the meter is read.



         (a)   Water service.



            1.   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2017
through 7-14-2018, the following rates shall be in effect:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $46.12;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.64;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.11;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.86;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.17;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $11.82;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $11.45; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$46.12; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $54.27.



            2.   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2018
through 7-14-2019, the following rates shall be in effect:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $48.54;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.64;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.11;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.86;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.17;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $11.82;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $11.45; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$48.54; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $57.12.



            3.   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2019,
and thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City Council, the
following rates shall apply:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $51.09;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.64;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.11;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.86;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.17;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $11.82;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $11.45; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$51.09; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $60.12.



         (b)   Sewerage service.



            1.   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2017
through 7-14-2018, the following rates shall be in effect:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month
of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $8.15; and



               b.   All over 1,000 gallons of water
consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage
service system, per 1,000 gallons: $3.46.



            2.   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2018
through 7-14-2019, the following rates shall be in effect:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month
of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $8.58; and



               b.   All over 1,000 gallons of water
consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage
service system, per 1,000 gallons: $3.46.



            3.   Commencing with usage beginning on 7-15-2019,
and thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City Council, the
following rates shall apply:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month
of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system: $9.03; and



               b.   All over 1,000 gallons of water
consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage
service system, per 1,000 gallons: $3.46.



            4.   Each sewer user shall pay a rate surcharge
and other additional charges as are provided in Ch. 52 of this code of
ordinances, Sewers.



            5.   The minimum charge for combined water and
sewerage service is reflected in divisions (B)(3)(a)1. through (B)(3)(a)3.
above.



   (C)   Rates for mobile home parks without individual meters. Rates
and charges for the use and services of the waterworks or the combined
waterworks and sewerage systems of the city based on the amount of water
consumed, furnished to mobile home parks where individual meters are not
established for units parked therein, are as follows.



      (1)   Mobile home park within the city. Where one water meter
services a mobile home park within the city, the number of gallons per month
consumed at the park shall be divided by the number of mobile home units
situated thereon, and the number of gallons consumed per mobile home
determined. The rates established herein shall then be multiplied by the
number of mobile home units located in the mobile home park on the day the
meter is read.



         (a)   Water service. Commencing with usage beginning on
12-15-2011, and thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City
Council, the following rates shall apply:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.76;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $9.09;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $8.73;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $8.57;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $8.12;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $7.88;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $7.62; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$13.76; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $21.11.



         (b)   Sewerage service.



            1.   For sewerage service for water furnished
premises, there shall be a charge of $7.35 per month for the first 1,000
gallons of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of
each sewerage service system; for all over 1,000 gallons of water consumed
per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each sewerage service
system, the charge shall be $2.77 per 1,000 gallons per month.



            2.   The minimum charge for combined water and
sewerage service is reflected in divisions (C)(1)(a) above.



            3.   For sewerage services only, a flat charge
shall be made in the amount of $12 per month per mobile home unit located in
the mobile home park.



      (2)   Mobile home parks outside the city. Where one water
meter services a mobile home park outside the city, the number of gallons per
month consumed at the park shall be divided by the number of mobile home
units situated thereon, and the number of gallons consumed per mobile home
determined. The rates established herein shall then be multiplied by the
number of mobile home units located in the mobile home park on the day the
meter is read.



         (a)   Water service. Commencing with usage beginning on
12-15-2011, and thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City
Council, the following rates shall apply:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $20.63;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.64;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.11;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.86;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.17;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $11.82;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $11.45; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$20.63; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $27.98.



         (b)   Sewerage service.



            1.   There shall be a charge of $7.35 per month
for the first 1,000 gallons of water consumed per month as shown by the water
meter or meters of each sewerage service system; for all over 1,000 gallons
of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system, the charge shall be $3.46 per 1,000 gallons per
month.



            2.   The minimum charge for combined water and
sewerage service is reflected in divisions (C)(2)(a) above.



            3.   For sewerage services only, a flat charge
shall be made in the amount of $20 per month.



   (D)   Rates for multiple dwelling units without individual meters.
Rates and charges for the use and services of the waterworks or the combined
waterworks and sewerage systems of the city based on the amount of water
consumed, furnished to a multiple dwelling unit where individual meters are
not established for individual dwelling units or apartments located therein,
are as follows.



      (1)   Multiple dwelling units inside the city. Where one water
meter services a multiple dwelling unit within the city, the number of
gallons per month consumed at the multiple dwelling shall be divided by the
number of individual dwelling units or apartments located therein and the
number of gallons consumed per dwelling unit or apartment determined. The
rates established herein shall then be multiplied by the number of individual
dwelling units or apartments located in the multiple dwelling on the day the
meter is read.



         (a)   Water service. Commencing with usage beginning on
12-15-2011, and thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City
Council, the following rates shall apply:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.76;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $9.09;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $8.73;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $8.57;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $8.12;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $7.88;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $7.62; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$13.76; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $21.11.



         (b)   Sewerage service.



            1.   There shall be a charge of $7.35 per month
for the first 1,000 gallons of water consumed per month as shown by the water
meter or meters of each sewerage service system; for all over 1,000 gallons
of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system, the charge shall be $2.77 per 1,000 gallons per
month.



            2.   The minimum charge for combined water and
sewerage service is reflected in divisions (D)(1)(a) above.



            3.   For sewerage services only, a flat charge
shall be made in the amount of $12 per month per individual dwelling unit
located in the multiple dwelling.



      (2)   Multiple dwelling units outside the city. Where one
water meter services a multiple dwelling unit outside the city, the number of
gallons per month consumed at the multiple dwelling shall be divided by the
number of individual dwelling units or apartments situated therein, and the
number of gallons consumed per dwelling determined. The rates established
herein shall then be multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units or
apartments located in the multiple dwelling on the day the meter is read.



         (a)   Water service. Commencing with usage beginning on
12-15-2011, and thereafter until further ordinance is adopted by the City
Council, the following rates shall apply:



               a.   For the first 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $20.63;



               b.   For the next 1,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.64;



               c.   For the next 3,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $13.11;



               d.   For the next 5,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.86;



               e.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $12.17;



               f.   For the next 10,000 gallons per month,
per 1,000 gallons: $11.82;



               g.   All over 30,000 gallons per month, per
1,000 gallons: $11.45; and



               h.   The minimum for water only, per month:
$20.63; the minimum charge for combined water and sewer service: $27.98.



         (b)   Sewerage service.



            1.   There shall be a charge of $7.35 per month
for the first 1,000 gallons of water consumed per month as shown by the water
meter or meters of each sewerage service system; for all over 1,000 gallons
of water consumed per month as shown by the water meter or meters of each
sewerage service system, the charge shall be $3.46 per 1,000 gallons per
month.



            2.   The minimum charge for combined water and
sewerage service is reflected in divisions (D)(2)(a) above.



            3.   For sewerage services only, a flat charge
shall be made in the amount of $20 per month per individual dwelling unit
located in the multiple dwelling.



(1994 Code, § 51.27)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951; Ord. 163, passed
6-12-1967; Ord. 193, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 360, passed 8-28-1986; Ord. 374,
passed 5-23-1988; Ord. 401, passed 5-28-1991; Ord. 405, passed 6-24-1991;
Ord. 04-03, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 07-03, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 08-01,
passed 1-14-2008; Ord. 09-06, passed 10-12-2009; Ord. 15-02, passed 6-8-2015;
Ord. 18-02, passed 5-29-2018)



§ 51.33  SPECIAL CONTRACTS NOT AFFECTED.



   The rates and charges established in this subchapter shall not affect
any special contracts for the furnishing of water heretofore made by the city
and now in force. The City Council reserves the right to impose special rates
and charges where the rates hereby established are not just or equitable.



(1994 Code, § 51.28)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951)



§ 51.34  PERSONS LIABLE FOR PAYMENT OF SERVICES.



   The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises receiving any of the
services of the combined water and sewerage system of the city, the occupant
of the premises and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally
liable for the payment for the services to the lot, parcel of land or
premises and all services are rendered to the premises by the city only on
the condition that the owner, occupant and user shall be jointly and
severally liable therefor to the city.



(1994 Code, § 51.29)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951)



§ 51.35  PREPARATION OF BILLS; DUE DATE; PLACE FOR PAYMENT.



   (A)   Bills for the rates and charges established in this subchapter
shall be prepared by the City Clerk and shall be mailed monthly. All bills
shall be payable on or before the fifteenth day of the month following in
which the services were rendered.



   (B)   All bills shall be payable at the office of the City Clerk.
All customers shall present their bill or a copy thereof at time of payment.
Failure to present a bill or copy thereof at time of payment shall result in
an administrative charge of $5.



(1994 Code, § 51.30)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951; Ord. 03-08, passed
10-14-2003)



§ 51.36  PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   If any charge for the services of the combined system shall not be paid
within 15 days from the last day of the month in which the services were
rendered, a delayed payment charge of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be
added thereto and collected therewith.



(1994 Code, § 51.31)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951)



§ 51.37  WATER SERVICE DISCONNECTION AUTHORIZED; PROCEDURE; NOTICE;
REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.



   (A)   If any charge for the services of the combined system shall
remain unpaid after 30 days following the last day of the month in which the
services were rendered, the water supply for the premises affected shall be
turned off and shall not be again turned on, except on payment in full of the
delinquent charges therefor and other charges provided for in this code.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall mail or cause to be mailed a written
notice to the user at the address where the bill for the combined services
was mailed by first-class mail. The notice shall state the amount of the
delinquent account; that the water service will be disconnected unless all
amounts due are paid within the next five business days; the name, address,
telephone number and business hours where the amounts due are to be paid; the
name, address, telephone number and business hours of the person to contact
if the user believes there has been an error in the billing or that for some
other reason there is no justification for disconnecting the service; cost
for restoring service and any other charges provided for in this code.



   (C)   (1)   The Commissioner of Public Property or a city
employee designated by the Commissioner shall be named in the delinquent
account notice as the person to contact to rectify any errors in the billing
of any charges for the services of the combined system. If the delinquent
user does not contact the Commissioner or his or her designated employee in
the time prescribed, the water service shall be terminated.



      (2)   (a)   If the delinquent user contacts the person, but
a resolution of the matter is not obtained, the delinquent user shall be
informed of his or her right to meet with the City Council, the date, time
and place of the next regular meeting of the City Council and, if requested
to so meet, his or her name shall be placed upon the agenda of the next
regular meeting of the City Council.



         (b)   If the delinquent user shall fail to appear at the
next regular meeting of the City Council, or if the appearance does not
produce a resolution of the matter and the account remains delinquent, the
water service shall be turned off the following day.



   (D)   The delinquent account notice issued by the City Clerk shall
be substantially in the following form:



 

   CITY OF SPARTA WATER DEPARTMENT

   PAST DUE ACCOUNT

   Charge:

   Account Number:

   Name:

   Address:

 

NOTICE: SERVICE WILL BE DISCONNECTED UNLESS ALL AMOUNTS DUE ARE PAID WITHIN
THE NEXT FIVE (5) BUSINESS DAYS, TO-WIT ON OR BEFORE     (DATE)    .
PAYMENT TO BE MADE TO:

 

      City of Sparta

      City Hall

      Sparta, Illinois

   Telephone: (618) 443-2917

      Business Hours: Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. – 5 p.m.

 

IF YOU BELIEVE THAT THERE HAS BEEN AN ERROR IN YOUR BILLING OR THAT YOU HAVE
ALREADY PAID ALL AMOUNTS DUE OR THAT FOR SOME OTHER REASON THERE IS NO
JUSTIFICATION FOR DISCONNECTING SERVICE, THEN PROMPTLY CONTACT:

 

      Particular Individual:                            
                                         

      Address:                                     
                                                 

      Telephone:                                   
                                                 

      Business Hours:                                
                                             

 

IF YOU FAIL TO PAY THE PAST DUE ACCOUNT OR CONTACT THE ABOVE INDIVIDUAL BY
THE DATE SPECIFIED, YOUR WATER SUPPLY WILL BE SHUT OFF. IF DISCONNECTED, A
RECONNECT CHARGE OF $25 WILL BE ASSESSED.



 



(1994 Code, § 51.32)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951; Ord. 360, passed
8-28-1986)



§ 51.38  CHARGES TO BE A LIEN UPON PREMISES.



   (A)   Charges for the combined water and sewer system shall be a
lien upon the premises as provided by state statute. When a bill for the
services remains unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered, the City Clerk
may file with the County Recorder’s office, a notice of the lien. This
notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:



      (1)   A description of real estate sufficient for the
identification thereof;



      (2)   The amount of money due for the service; and



      (3)   The date when the amount became delinquent.



   (B)   The city shall have the power to foreclose this lien in the
same manner and with the same effect as in the foreclosure of mortgages on
real estate.



   (C)   The city’s Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute the proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over the matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered.



(1994 Code, § 51.33)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951)



§ 51.39  ABANDONED CONNECTION.



   (A)   Whenever any connection to the combined water works and sewer
system is abandoned because the building to which the water and sewer
connections are made has been abandoned, destroyed or removed, the
Commissioner of Public Property or his or her designated employee may remove
the meter and any pipe or connections to the public right-of-way or easement
and cap, plug or otherwise seal the water pipe and sewer main.



   (B)   Before taking any such steps, the Commissioner shall notify or
cause to be notified the owner of the real estate if the owner’s name and
address is known, and shall notify or cause to be notified the person shown
on the real estate tax records as having paid taxes on the property the last
time taxes were paid. The notice shall be made by mail at least 30 days
before any action is taken under this section. If water is leaking, the
Commissioner shall take or cause to be taken immediate action and send the
notices within three working days of the time the action was taken.



(1994 Code, § 51.34)  (Ord. 360, passed 8-28-1986)



§ 51.40  ANNUAL REVIEW.



   (A)   The adequacy of water service charge shall be reviewed not
less than annually by the auditors for the city in the annual audit report.



   (B)   The water service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local costs or operation, maintenance and repair costs.



(1994 Code, § 51.35)  (Ord. 2003-01, passed 2-24-2003)



§ 51.41  EPA ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The state’s Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representatives shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges for the
purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to
ensure compliance with the terms of any state grant or loan.



(1994 Code, § 51.36)  (Ord. 2003-01, passed 2-24-2003)



§ 51.42  APPEALS.



   (A)   The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges in this subchapter shall be made available to a
user within ten days of receipt of a written inquiry for such.



   (B)   Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations
thereof shall be remedied by the city’s Auditor within 30 days after the
notification of a formal written appeal outlining any discrepancies.



(1994 Code, § 51.37)  (Ord. 2003-01, passed 2-24-2003)



BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



§ 51.55  REQUIREMENTS FOR PLUMBING INSTALLED WITHIN THE CITY.



   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Commissioner of
Public Health and Safety or his or her authorized agent, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Commissioner or agent shall give notice to the water customer to
install an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his or
her own expense, install an approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have
inspections and tests made of the approved devices upon installation and as
required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency and local regulations.



(1994 Code, § 51.45)  (Ord. 430, passed 1-25-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.56  APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION BETWEEN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE WATER
SUPPLY.



   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of the
city, unless the private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method
of connection and use of the supply shall have been approved by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety or his or her authorized agent and
the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.



(1994 Code, § 51.46)  (Ord. 430, passed 1-25-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.57  SURVEYS OF PROPERTIES SERVED BY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.



   It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety to
cause surveys and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and
other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether
actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. The surveys
and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be
repeated at least every two years, or as often as the Commissioner shall deem
necessary. Records of the surveys shall be maintained and available for
review for a period of at least five years.



(1994 Code, § 51.47)  (Ord. 430, passed 1-25-1993)



§ 51.58  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Code Enforcement Officer, as agent of the Commissioner of Public
Health and Safety, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the city for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to enter
at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection
control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any
property so served shall furnish to the code enforcement officer any
information which he or she may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on the property. The refusal of the information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 51.48)  (Ord. 430, passed 1-25-1993)



§ 51.59  LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.



   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned or back-pressured material
or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water
supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly
installed, maintained or repaired device or a device which has been bypassed,
must bear the cost of clean up of the potable water supply system.



(1994 Code, § 51.49)  (Ord. 430, passed 1-25-1993)



§ 51.60  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety and the
Code Enforcement Officer, as official designate thereof, of the city are
hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter is known to exist, and to take
the other precautionary measures as they may deem necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains.



      (2)   Water service to the property shall not be restored
until the conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, and until a $150 reconnection fee is paid to
the city.



   (B)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected
when the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety or Code Enforcement Officer
are assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. The action shall be followed written notification of
the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any
party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or
pollution of the public water supply; provided that, in the reasonable
opinion of the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, the Code Enforcement
Officer or the state’s Environmental Protection Agency, the action is
required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the
public water supply.



   (C)   Neither the city or its agents or assigns shall be liable to
any customer for an injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of the customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of
this subchapter, whether or not the termination was with or without notice.



(1994 Code, § 51.50)  (Ord. 430, passed 1-25-1993)



§ 51.61  USE OF GROUND WATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED WITHIN
THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY.



   (A)   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the
effective date of this section and points of withdrawal by the city, the use
or any attempted use as a potable water supply ground water from within the
corporate limits of the city by the installation or drilling of wells or by
any other method is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, political subdivision or any other legal entity or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns.



      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes or preparing foods.



(1994 Code, § 51.51)  (Ord. 2001-05, passed 6-11-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Purpose



   52.002   Definitions



   52.003   Private sewerage disposal



   52.004   Protection from damage



   52.005   Unpolluted drainage



   52.006   Depositing objectionable waste prohibited



   52.007   Discharge of untreated sewage or other polluted waters to
natural outlet



   52.008   Privies, septic tanks and other facilities



   52.009   Owner’s responsible to connect sanitary facilities



   52.010   Sealing of sewer and drains upon removal, demolition of
building



   52.011   Connection charge established



   52.012   Excavations



   52.013   Connections to be made by licensed plumber; specifications
for laterals



Building Sewer and Connections



   52.025   Connection permit required



   52.026   Costs and expenses of installation and connection of
building sewer; indemnification



   52.027   Separate building sewer provided for every building



   52.028   Use of old building sewers with new buildings



   52.029   Size and slope



   52.030   Elevation of drain pipe



   52.031   Sources of surface runoff or ground water



   52.032   Connection to conform to provisions



   52.033   Notification to approving authority for inspection



   52.034   Excavations to be guarded to protect public from hazard



   52.035   Adequate capacity prerequisite to new connections



Use of Public Sewers



   52.050   Discharge of storm water and other unpolluted drainage



   52.051   Prohibited discharges to public sewers



   52.052   Discharge of certain wastes restricted



   52.053   Pretreatment; equalization of waste flows



   52.054   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   52.055   Preliminary treatment facilities



   52.056   Control manhole; measurements, tests and analyses



   52.057   Industrial wastes; special agreements



   52.058   Basis of charges



   52.059   Rate and rate surcharge



Sewerage Treatment Standards



   52.070   Pretreatment of sewerage



   52.071   New sanitary sewerage system construction



   52.072   User charge reviewed annually



   52.073   Rejection or reduction of industrial discharges



   52.074   Annual audit of costs accounting system



   52.075   Maintenance of records



   52.076   Depreciation and replacement



Industrial Cost Recovery



   52.090   Cost recovery formula



   52.091   Letter of intent



   52.092   Basis for user’s costs



   52.093   Annual payments by users



   52.094   Adjustment of payment for change in variables



   52.095   Exclusions from user shares



   52.096   Disposition of collected funds



   52.097   Use of city-retained funds



   52.098   Required types of investment



   52.099   System administration by City Clerk



   52.100   Annual audit



Administration and Enforcement



   52.115   Powers and authority of inspectors



   52.116   NPDES permit; compliance with conditions of permit required



   52.117   Chief Operator to be in charge of operation and maintenance
of system



   52.118   Federal regulations adopted by reference



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to adopt a system of charges to
assure that each recipient of waste treatment services shall pay its
proportionate share of the costs of the operation and maintenance; including
routine parts replacement of the sewerage treatment works, and to distribute
cost of operation and maintenance of the publicly-owned treatment works to
the pollutant source or sources and to promote self-sufficiency of treatment
works with respect to operation and maintenance costs; and to establish
regulations to control the types and strengths of sewerage to be treated by
the sewerage treatment works.



(1994 Code, § 52.001)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Council, or its duly authorized agent,
deputy or representative.



   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CHLORINE REQUIREMENT. The amount of chlorine in milligrams per liter,
which must be added to sewerage to produce a residual chlorine content, or to
meet the requirements of some other objective, in accordance with procedures
set forth in Standard Methods.



   COD. Chemical oxygen demand.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewerage.



   COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transient lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal,
household or industrial consumption and/or rendering services to others.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES permit if the publicly-owned treatment works was designed to treat the
pollutants and, in fact, does remove the pollutants to a substantial degree.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. Cost per unit of sewerage for debt retirement.



   DEPRECIATION. The annual reduction in the fair market value of real
estate during its useful life at a standard percentage per year.



   DOMESTIC USER. Includes all dwelling units such as row houses, mobile
homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings and single-family
dwellings. Transient lodging considered commercial in nature is not included
in this definition.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes legislative, judicial, administrative and
regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments, such as
courthouses, police and fire stations, city halls and similar governmental
users.



   HYDROGEN ION CONCENTRATION. See pH.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a COMPATIBLE
POLLUTANT, as defined in this section.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery by the city from all industrial
users of the city’s sewerage treatment works of the amount of all federal
grant moneys expended on the sewerage treatment works subsequent to 3-1-1973,
allocable to the treatment of sewerage wastes from the industrial users.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD. The period during which the grant
moneys allocable to the treatment of wastes from industrial users is
recovered from the industrial users of the sewage treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   Includes manufacturing activities involving the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into new
products. These activities occur in establishments usually described as
plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines
and material handling equipment.



      (2)   The term INDUSTRIAL USER shall mean any non-governmental
user of publicly-owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented under the following divisions:



         (a)   Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;



         (b)   Division B, Mining;



         (c)   Division D, Manufacturing;



         (d)   Division E, Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services; and



         (e)   Division I, Services.



      (3)   A user in the divisions listed above may be excluded if
it is determined by the city that the user will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid or liquid conveyed waste from industrial
manufacturing processes, trades or businesses, cooling water, discharges from
industrial pretreatment facilities and on a case by case basis, discharges
from business establishments exceeding normal sanitary needs of employees.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Includes social, charitable, religious and
educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes,
penal institutions and similar institutional users.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly-owned
treatment works that:



      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day;



      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste;



      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined under § 307a of the Federal Water Pollution Act Amendments of 1972
(Pub. Law No. 92-500); or



      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection
with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly-owned treatment works
receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or
upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.



   mg/l. Denotes milligrams per liter.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed and used as dwelling units
for occupancy by three or more families, independently of each other.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. The
national system of issuance of permits under § 402 of Federal Water
Pollution Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-500) and includes any state
or interstate program that has been approved by the Administrator in whole or
in part, pursuant to § 402 of the above Act.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NON-INDUSTRIAL USER. All sewerage users, except those defined as
industrial users herein.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



      (1)   All costs, direct or indirect, (other than debt service)
necessary to ensure the adequate waste-water treatment by the sewerage
treatment works on a continuing basis in a manner which conforms with all
related federal, state and local requirements to assure optimal long-term
facility management.



      (2)   The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE shall include
depreciation and routine parts replacement.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH. The logarithm to the base ten of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in
dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is controlled by public authority.



   REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR. The regional administrator of the United States
Federal Environmental Protection Agency, Chicago, Illinois.



   REGULATORY AGENCY. The state’s Environmental Protection Agency and
United States Federal Environmental Protection Agency.



   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the
works were designed and constructed.



   SALVAGE VALUE.



      (1)   Land for treatment works, including land used as part of
the treatment process or for ultimate disposal of residues, shall be assumed
to have a salvage value at the end of the planning period equal to its
prevailing market value at the time of the analysis.



      (2)   Right-of-way easements shall be considered to have a
SALVAGE VALUE not greater than the prevailing market value at the time of the
analysis. Structures will be assumed to have a SALVAGE VALUE if there is a
use for the structures at the end of the planning period. In this case,
SALVAGE VALUE shall be estimated using straight-line depreciation during the
service life of the treatment works.



      (3)   For phased additions of process equipment and auxiliary
equipment, SALVAGE VALUE at the end of the planning period may be estimated
under the same conditions and on the same basis as described above for
structures.



   SANITARY FACILITIES. Consists of all internal plumbing installed for
the sole purpose of discharging water-carried wastes to a disposal source.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewerage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SERVICE CHARGE. The user charge as defined above, plus the debt service
charge, as defined above. Also defined as the cost per unit of sewerage made
up of the user charge rate, plus the debt service rate.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewerage.



   SEWERAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.



   SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewerage.



   SEWERAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewerage.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewerage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.



   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water,
Sewerage and Industrial Wastes, published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewerage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the service or user charge
which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than
the concentration values established as representative of normal sewerage.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewerage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which a treatment works will
be operated.



   USER CHARGE. The charge levied on users of the sewerage treatment works
for the cost of operating and maintaining the works. This charge shall apply
to all users whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal sewerage.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(1994 Code, § 52.002)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.003  PRIVATE SEWERAGE DISPOSAL.



   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 52.009 of this chapter, the sanitary facilities shall be
connected to a private sewerage disposal system complying with the
regulations promulgated by the state’s Environmental Protection Agency
regulating sewerage disposal and construction of private sewerage disposal
systems within the limits of the city.



(1994 Code, § 52.003)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.004  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage works and/or water
works.



(1994 Code, § 52.004)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.005  UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge into the sanitary sewerage system any
surface drainage, storm water or unpolluted cooling water and any other
discharge of waters from any storm drain or storm sewer.



(1994 Code, § 52.005)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.006  DEPOSITING OBJECTIONABLE WASTE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.



(1994 Code, § 52.006)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.007  DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE OR OTHER POLLUTED WATERS TO NATURAL
OUTLET.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
jurisdiction of the city, any sewerage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.007)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.008  PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND OTHER FACILITIES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended
or used for the disposal of sewerage.



(1994 Code, § 52.008)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.009  OWNER’S RESPONSIBLE TO CONNECT SANITARY FACILITIES.



   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer
of the city, is hereby required, at his or her expense, to connect all
sanitary facilities therein, existing or new, directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within
300 feet of the property line or within 1,000 feet of the property line of
any commercial or multi-family dwelling.



(1994 Code, § 52.009)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.010  SEALING OF SEWER AND DRAINS UPON REMOVAL, DEMOLITION OF BUILDING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, level or
otherwise demolish any building or structure which prior thereto was
connected to the sanitary sewer, without having first sealed all service
lines, drains or openings to the city sanitary sewer main. All service sewer
lines, drains or openings to the city sanitary sewer main shall be sealed at
the property line at the nearest point to the city sanitary sewer main. The
service sewer lines, drains or openings shall be sealed under the supervision
of the city’s Plumbing Inspector or any other person as may be designated
by the Commission of Public Property.



(1994 Code, § 52.010)  (Ord. 198, passed 4-28-1969)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.011  CONNECTION CHARGE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Where the property owner or his or her predecessor in title,
by special assessment or otherwise, has paid the cost, or his or her
proportionate share of the cost, of the construction of the sewerage main
extending past the property, and sewerage services are to be rendered to the
premises, the connection charge of the sewerage service shall be $100.



   (B)   Where the property owner or his or her predecessor in title
has not paid the cost, or his or her proportionate share of the cost, of the
construction of the sewerage main, the connection charge for sewerage service
shall be $100, plus a sum equivalent to $5 for each foot of the property
abutting upon the main.



   (C)   No connection shall be made to any sewer main of the city
until after all charges established in the section for the connection shall
have been paid in full.



(1994 Code, § 52.011)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951; Ord. 104, passed
3-28-1960; Ord. 312, passed 8-17-1981; Ord. 384, passed 4-24-1989)



§ 52.012  EXCAVATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter relating to excavations in streets shall
be complied with in making excavations in streets or other public places in
connection with making sewer connections.



(1994 Code, § 52.012)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.013  CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY LICENSED PLUMBER; SPECIFICATIONS FOR
LATERALS.



   (A)   The actual connection of any drain or pipe with the city
sanitary sewer shall be made by a licensed plumber under the supervision of
the Commissioner of Public Property.



   (B)   All materials for connections and pipes for drains from houses
to sewers shall conform to specifications which shall be prepared and
recommended by the Director of Public Works and which shall be approved and
adopted from time to time by the City Council and kept on file by the City
Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 52.013)  (Ord. 244, passed 3-19-1973; Ord. 331, passed
10-24-1983)



BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTIONS



§ 52.025  CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, other than as directed by the approving authority, shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the approving authority and upon payment of all fees and assessments.



(1994 Code, § 52.025)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.026  COSTS AND EXPENSES OF INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION OF BUILDING
SEWER; INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   All cost and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be paid by the owner.



   (B)   The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.



(1994 Code, § 52.026)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.027  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER PROVIDED FOR EVERY BUILDING.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building.



   (B)   However, where one building stands at the rear of another on
the same lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended through a manhole to be
constructed between the buildings to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.



(1994 Code, § 52.027)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.028  USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS WITH NEW BUILDINGS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the approving authority, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.028)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.029  SIZE AND SLOPE.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes (Ch. 150 and 153,
respectively, of this code of ordinances) or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. All private service lines must be extended on
minimum grade from property line to sewer main.



(1994 Code, § 52.029)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.030  ELEVATION OF DRAIN PIPE.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewerage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.



(1994 Code, § 52.030)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.031  SOURCES OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUND WATER.



   No person shall connect roof downspouts, interior or exterior
foundation drains, area-way drains or other sources of surface runoff or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(1994 Code, § 52.031)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.032  CONNECTION TO CONFORM TO PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city.



   (B)   All the connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.



   (C)   Any deviation from prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the approving authority before installation.



(1994 Code, § 52.032)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.033  NOTIFICATION TO APPROVING AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the approving
authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
approving authority.



(1994 Code, § 52.033)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.034  EXCAVATIONS TO BE GUARDED TO PROTECT PUBLIC FROM HAZARD.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



(1994 Code, § 52.034)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.035  ADEQUATE CAPACITY PREREQUISITE TO NEW CONNECTIONS.



   No new connections shall be made to the sewerage system unless adequate
capacity, as determined by the approving authority, is available in all
downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewerage treatment
plant, including capacity for BOD and suspended solids.



(1994 Code, § 52.035)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 52.050  DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to the sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the approving authority, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.



(1994 Code, § 52.045)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.051  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:



   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewerage treatment plant,
including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter
as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;



   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewerage works; and/or



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of the size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewerage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings; entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(1994 Code, § 52.046)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.052  DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WASTES RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely, in the opinion of the approving authority, that the wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewerage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming this opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the approving authority will give
consideration to the factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers; materials of construction of the
sewers; nature of sewerage treatment process; capacity of the sewerage
treatment plant; degree of treatability of wastes in the sewerage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors.



   (B)   The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor
greater than three-fourths horsepower shall be subject to review and approval
of the approving authority;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron,
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to the degree that any such material received
in the composite sewerage at the sewerage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the approving authority for such materials;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-
or odor-producing substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which
may be established by the approving authority, as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewerage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving
waters;



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of long half-life
(over 100 days) without special permit. The radioactive isotopes I131 and p32
used at hospitals are not prohibited if properly diluted at the source;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids
including, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate;



         (b)   Excessive discoloration, including, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewerage treatment works; and/or



         (d)   Unusual volume of load or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs”.



      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewerage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewerage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(1994 Code, § 52.047)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.053  PRETREATMENT; EQUALIZATION OF WASTE FLOWS.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 52.052 of this chapter, and
which, in the judgment of the approving authority, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewerage works, process equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
approving authority may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge;



      (3)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of §§ 52.058 and 52.059 of this chapter.



   (B)   If the approving authority permits the pretreatment of
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving
authority, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.



(1994 Code, § 52.048)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.054  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease traps, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided and
maintained in operating condition when, in the opinion of the approving
authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the approving authority, and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



(1994 Code, § 52.049)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.055  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



(1994 Code, § 52.050)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.056  CONTROL MANHOLE; MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   (A)   When required by the approving authority, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole, together with the necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the approving authority. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (B)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association and “Federal Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants,” (40 C.F.R. part 136), 10-16-1973, Federal
Register, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.



(1994 Code, § 52.051)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.057  INDUSTRIAL WASTES; SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, by the industrial concern.



(1994 Code, § 52.052)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.058  BASIS OF CHARGES.



   In order that the rates and charges may be equitably adjusted to the
service rendered, the city shall have the right to base its charges not only
on volume, but also on the strength and character of the sewerage and wastes
which it is required to treat. The city shall have the right to measure and
determine the strength and content of all sewerage and wastes discharged,
either directly or indirectly, into the city’s sanitary sewerage system, in
such manner and by such method as it may deem practicable in the light of the
constructions and attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine
the proper charge.



(1994 Code, § 52.053)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.059  RATE AND RATE SURCHARGE.



   (A)   Each user of the sewerage service system shall be charged for
the use of the system and for the services supplied thereby, a charge of
$0.67 per 1,000 gallons of water consumed as shown by the water meter or
meters of the user, plus an additional fixed charge of $0.21 per each user
per month.



   (B)   Basic formula for establishing a rate for a surcharge above
normal domestic sewage:



      (1)   (a)   Each sewer user shall pay a rate surcharge
based upon the excess suspended solids (SS) and biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) express in milligrams per liter (mg/l) for each 1,000 gallons of
sewerage discharge, which surcharge shall be based upon the following
formula: 



      BOD — 260 mg/l



      SS  — 275 mg/l



         (b)   These calculations are based on the principal that
25% of the cost of operating is attributable to the removal of BOD and 50% to
the removal of SS; and 25% to flow.



   Bc      =   Surcharge on cost per pound of BOD in excess of
260 mg/l.



   Sc      =   Surcharge on cost per pound of SS in excess of
250.0 mg/l.



   O&M   =   Operational and maintenance cost of sewage treatment
plant.



   Design average daily flow =   650,000 GPD - 0.650 MGD.



   Bc      =   (O&M) 25% =



            BOD



   Bc      =   $0.053/lb.



   Bc      =   $0.053/lb.



   O&M   =   $83,947.84



   BOD   =   200 mg/l = normal domestic sewage



   Sc      =   (O&M) 50%=



            SS



   Sc      =   $0.085/lb.



   Sc      =   $0.085/lb.



      (2)   To determine the strength of the sewerage and wastes,
samplings and analysis may be made when deemed desirable by the city. After
charges have been established, their of composite samples of the sewerage and
wastes certified by a registered engineer or a qualified graduate chemist,
may be submitted in support of the request. The city may then adjust the
charges to the ordinance rates required by the analysis or may recheck the
findings by additional samplings and analysis. Requests for rate adjustments
may be submitted no more often than once every 12 months.



(1994 Code, § 52.054)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976; Ord. 266, passed
4-27-1976; Ord. 269, passed 10-12-1976)



SEWERAGE TREATMENT STANDARDS



§ 52.070  PRETREATMENT OF SEWERAGE.



   (A)   No user shall deposit into the sanitary sewer system of the
city, any material which will clog or substantially impede the flow in
sanitary sewer, or impede the operations of the sewerage treatment plant. The
user shall be subject to the enforcement by the city of all existing city
sewer ordinances in effect, at all times. The user shall further provide,
install and maintain screening facilities if required by the city and
approved by the city’s Engineer for the removal of solids from its wastes
so that the materials going into the sanitary sewer are maintained at a
minimum size level to prevent undue problems in the sewerage treatment plant
of the city. This screening shall be required upon finding of the need for
screening by the city. The user shall install the screens, at its own cost,
upon receipt of written notice by the city to the user.



   (B)   Whenever the waste from any user is found to interfere with
the aerobic processes of the sewerage treatment plant of the city, written
notice shall be given by the city to the user, and the user shall be required
to construct a waste treatment system and to pretreat all waste before it is
discharged into the city sanitary sewer system. Pretreatment shall be
sufficient to reduce the strength or characteristic of the wastes to such a
degree that it will not interfere with the aerobic processes of the sewerage
treatment plant of the city. The notice shall be served upon the user and
shall set a date and time for compliance with this section.



   (C)   It shall be a prima facie case that a waste interference with
the aerobic processes of the sewerage treatment plant exists if the waste
contains acidity below pH 5.5; or the waste contains alkalinity of above pH
9.5; or any grab-sample taken at any time of any day has materials or
constituents immediately noticeable that are detrimental to the aerobic
processes existing in the sewerage treatment plant as determined by the
city’s Engineer.



   (D)   (1)   Plans, specifications and design data for the
pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the city’s
Engineer and by the state’s Environmental Protection Agency before any
construction work on the pretreatment system is begun.



      (2)   Construction, maintenance and operation of said
pretreatment facilities shall be the sole responsibility of the user, and
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating
condition by the user at its expense.



   (E)   The pretreatment standards as published in the Federal
Register on 11-8-1973 and all amendments thereto are incorporated and by
reference made a part of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.065)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.071  NEW SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.



   Any new sewer construction or sanitary sewerage system construction
tributary to and with final discharge into the sewerage treatment plant shall
be limited solely to sanitary sewers constructed under and approved by the
terms and conditions of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.066)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.072  USER CHARGE REVIEWED ANNUALLY.



   The user charges provided herein shall be reviewed annually and revised
periodically to reflect actual treatment works operation and maintenance
costs; and to assure that the user charge system will generate sufficient
revenue to offset the costs of all treatment works operation and maintenance.



(1994 Code, § 52.067)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.073  REJECTION OR REDUCTION OF INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.



   The approving authority is hereby authorized to reject or reduce
industrial discharges in emergencies in order to meet the requirements of the
NPDES permit and is further authorized to reject any new sewerage service
connections when the total capacity of the sewerage system is exceeded and no
longer capable of proper treatment of sewerage which would be placed into the
sewerage treatment system as a result of the connections.



(1994 Code, § 52.068)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.074  ANNUAL AUDIT OF COSTS ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.



   An audit of the sewerage treatment works’ cost accounting system
shall be conducted on an annual basis by a qualified and licensed certified
public accountant.



(1994 Code, § 52.069)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.075  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
accurate and detailed books, records and accounts of said city in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of the cost of operation,
maintenance, depreciation and routine parts replacement relating to the
sewerage treatment works.



(1994 Code, § 52.070)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.076  DEPRECIATION AND REPLACEMENT.



   (A)   The sewerage treatment works will be depreciated upon a
straight line basis with a useful life of 30 years with a salvage value
established under the definition contained in § 52.002 of this chapter.



   (B)   All personal property shall be depreciated upon the basis of a
useful life of 30 years; and a replacement value at the end of the useful
life of 100% of its existing fair market value when purchased and installed
as a part of the total sewerage treatment works.



(1994 Code, § 52.071)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY



§ 52.090  COST RECOVERY FORMULA.



   (A)   Purpose. All industrial users shall pay that portion of all
federal grant amounts expended upon the city’s sewerage treatment works
subsequent to 3-1-1973, allocable to the treatment of their sewerage wastes,
based upon the following formula set forth in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Industrial cost recovery formula. Industrial cost recovery
amounts based on each industrial contributor’s flow, BOD and SS, as
compared to the design load of flow, BOD and SS. Each industrial contributor
would then pay the federal grant amount allocated to each flow, BOD and SS
according to the contributor’s percent of the design land, such as:



   a — percent federal grant — flow      =   $475,303.95



   b — percent federal grant — BOD      =   $136,898.03



   c — percent federal grant — SS      =   $136,898.03



   d — design flow                  =   0.650 MGD



   e — design BOD load               =   1105 lbs. per
day



   f — design SS load                =   1430 lbs. per
day



   g — useful life                  =   30 years



      (1)   Amount contributed for flow:



             a    = cost/year/gallon = $24,374.56/MGD/year



          d × g



      (2)   Amount contributed for BOD:



             b    = cost/year/lb. BOD = $4.13/lbs/day/year



          e × g



      (3)   Amount contributed for SS:



             c    = cost/year/lb. SS = $3.19/lbs/day/year



          f × g



(1994 Code, § 52.080)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.091  LETTER OF INTENT.



   Before industrial waste will be considered for treatment, each
industrial user will execute a signed letter of intent to the city stating
that the industrial user will pay that portion of any federal grant moneys
allocable to the treatment of its wastes. Each letter shall also contain a
statement of the industrial user’s intended period of use of the sewerage
treatment works.



(1994 Code, § 52.081)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.092  BASES FOR USER’S COSTS.



   The industrial user’s cost for treatment of its wastes shall be based
upon all factors which significantly affect the cost of the treatment works,
including strength, volume and flow characteristics of the sewerage as
defined and set forth § 52.002 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.082)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.093  ANNUAL PAYMENTS BY USERS.



   During the industrial cost recovery period defined herein, each
industrial user of the sewerage treatment works shall pay is share of the
total grant moneys expended divided by the recovery period years. The
payments shall be made on an annual basis by each industrial user. The first
payment by an industrial user shall be made no later than one year after the
user begins use of the sewage treatment works.



(1994 Code, § 52.083)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.094  ADJUSTMENT OF PAYMENT FOR CHARGE IN VARIABLES.



   If there is a substantial change in the strength, volume or delivery
flow rate characteristics introduced into the sewerage treatment works by an
industrial user, the user’s share as set forth herein shall be adjusted
accordingly.



(1994 Code, § 52.084)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.095  EXCLUSIONS FROM USER SHARES.



   An industrial user’s share as set forth herein shall not include any
portion of the grant amount allocable to unused or unreserved sewerage
treatment works capacity and an industrial user’s share shall not include
any interest component as a part of the charge.



(1994 Code, § 52.085)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.096  DISPOSITION OF COLLECTED FUNDS.



   The city shall retain 50% of the amounts recovered from industrial
users. The remainder, together with any interest earned thereon, shall be
returned to the United States Treasury through the federal environmental
protection agency on an annual basis.



(1994 Code, § 52.086)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.097  USE OF CITY-RETAINED FUNDS.



   A minimum of 80% of the retained amounts described above, together with
interest earned thereon, shall be used by the city solely for the cost,
determined to be eligible by the Regional Administrator of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, of the expansion or reconstruction of
treatment works. The city shall obtain the written approval of the Regional
Administrator prior to commitment of the retained amounts for any expansion
or reconstruction. The remainder of the retained amounts (20%) may be used by
the city as it sees fit.



(1994 Code, § 52.087)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.098  REQUIRED TYPES OF INVESTMENT.



   Pending use of the retained amounts, the city shall invest the same for
reconstruction and expansion in:



   (A)   Obligations of the United States Government;



   (B)   Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the
United States Government, or any agency thereof; and



   (C)   Accounts fully collateralized by obligations of the United
States Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and
interest by the United States Government or any agency thereof.



(1994 Code, § 52.088)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.099  SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION BY CITY CLERK.



   The industrial cost recovery system provided herein shall be
administered by the City Clerk, with the approval and advice of City Council.



(1994 Code, § 52.090)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.100  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   An audit of the industrial cost recovery system shall be conducted on
an annual basis by a qualified and licensed certified public accountant.



(1994 Code, § 52.091)  (Ord. 263, passed 3-8-1976)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.115  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   Representatives of the approving authority and other duly authorized
employees of the city, bearing proper credentials, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.105)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.116  NPDES PERMIT; COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS OF PERMIT REQUIRED.



   An NPDES permit shall be acquired by the city and the sewerage
treatment works and sanitary sewerage system shall be operated and maintained
in accordance with the conditions and terms of the permit at all times.



(1994 Code, § 52.106)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.117  CHIEF OPERATOR TO BE IN CHARGE OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF
SYSTEM.



   A chief operator shall be employed by the city at all times to be in
charge of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage treatment works and
sanitary sewerage system; and the operator shall at all times be properly
certified under state and federal laws.



(1994 Code, § 52.107)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.118  FEDERAL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The federal regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. part 85, as published in
the Federal Register on 2-11-1974, shall be incorporated into and by
reference be made a part of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 52.108)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already herein provided shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 52.003
through 52.009, §§ 52.025 through 52.035, 52.050 through 52.059 and 52.070
through 52.076 of this chapter shall be served by the city with written
notice, stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.



      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in this chapter, or any person who shall violate any
provision of § 52.059 of this chapter, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding $500 for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
52.003 through 52.009, §§ 52.025 through 52.035, 52.050 through 52.059 and
52.070 through 52.076 of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage caused to the city by reason of the violation.



(1994 Code, § 52.999)  (Ord. 262, passed 3-8-1976)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Superintendent of water to turn on service



   53.02   Application for service; application fee



   53.03   Plumbing to comply with provisions



   53.04   Permit required for connections; application



   53.05   Connection charges and fees established; amounts;
determination



   53.06   Charge for turning service on or off



   53.07   Resale of water prohibited; exception



   53.08   Tampering with system or meter prohibited



Service Pipes



   53.20   Installation of service pipes; costs



   53.21   Service pipe to conform to specifications



   53.22   Duty to repair; cost; emergency repairs



   53.23   Excavations



   53.24   Shut-off boxes; location



   53.25   Limitation of liability of city



Meters



   53.40   Meter required



   53.41   Commissioner of Public Property to install meter



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01  SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER TO TURN ON SERVICE.



   No water from the city water supply shall be turned on for service into
any premises by any person other than the Commissioner of Public Property or
some other person authorized by him or her to perform this service.



(1994 Code, § 53.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.02  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; APPLICATION FEE.



   Application to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the
City Clerk and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and
accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing his or
her use of the municipal water supply. All applications, when properly made,
shall be filed by the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 53.02)



§ 53.03  PLUMBING TO COMPLY WITH PROVISIONS.



   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with the provisions of this code (see Plumbing Code,
Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances). However, water may be turned on for
construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 53.03)



§ 53.04  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTIONS; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No connection with a water main shall be made without a permit
being issued and 24 hours’ notice having been given to the City Clerk.



   (B)   All connections shall be made under the supervision of the
Commissioner of Public Property, and no connection shall be covered until the
work has been inspected by him or her.



   (C)   Application for permits to make the connection must be made to
the City Clerk and a connection fee prescribed in this chapter, paid for each
connection.



(1994 Code, § 53.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.05  CONNECTION CHARGES AND FEES ESTABLISHED; AMOUNTS; DETERMINATION.



   (A)   (1)   Where the property owner or his or her predecessor in
title, by special assessment or otherwise, has paid the cost, or his or her
proportionate share of the cost, of the construction of the water main
extending past the property, and water services are to be rendered to the
premises, the appropriate connection fees shall be charged as follows:



 


Size of Connection

 
Connection Fee


3/4-inch
 
$800


1-inch
 
$1,000


2-inch
 
$1,500



 



      (2)   Connections greater than two inches shall be determined
by the city based upon the cost of  installation thereof.



   (B)   Should a line be modified from an existing line to a line of
larger size, the property owner shall be responsible to pay a connection
charge calculated as the difference between the fee charged for the existing
line and the new line, plus shall be responsible to pay for any and all
damages and costs incurred by virtue of such modification, including for
damage to streets and sidewalks. The city may, in its discretion, require a
bond or deposit to be paid prior to commencement of construction.



   (C)   No connection shall be made to any water main of the city
until after all charges established in this section for the connection shall
have been paid in full.



(1994 Code, § 53.05)  (Ord. 268, passed 10-12-1976; Ord. 312, passed
8-17-1981; Ord. 384, passed 4-24-1989; Ord. 442, passed 12-27-1993; Ord.
05-04, passed 3-28-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.06  CHARGE FOR TURNING SERVICE ON OR OFF.



   A charge shall be levied for shutting off or turning on water services,
except at the time of commencement of service or at its termination as
follows:



   (A)   First shut-off charge: $25;



   (B)   Second shut-off charge within 12 months: $37.50; and



   (C)   Third and subsequent shut-off charges within 12 months:
$50/each.



(1994 Code, § 53.06)  (Ord. 55, passed 1-22-1951; Ord. 297, passed
1-22-1979; Ord. 360, passed 8-28-1986; Ord. 01-13, passed 11-26-2001)



§ 53.07  RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from
the municipal supply, except:



   (A)   In the case of a civil emergency; or



   (B)   Upon express written agreement of the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 53.07)  (Ord. 94-014, passed 12-5-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.08  TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM OR METER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the City Council
to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the city waterworks or supply
system or with any meter.



(1994 Code, § 53.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SERVICE PIPES



§ 53.20  INSTALLATION OF SERVICE PIPES; COSTS.



   (A)   All service pipes from the lot line to the premises to be
served shall be installed by, and at the cost of the owner of the property
involved or the applicant for the service. The installations shall be under
the supervision of the Commissioner of Public Property.



   (B)   The city shall install all service pipes from main to the lot
line of the premises to be served for a distance of 50 feet; all service
pipes exceeding 50 feet in distance from the main shall be installed by and
at the cost of the owner of the property involved or the applicant for the
service.



(1994 Code, § 53.20)  (Ord. 384, passed 4-24-1989)



§ 53.21  SERVICE PIPE TO CONFORM TO SPECIFICATIONS.



   No service pipe shall be installed unless it conforms to specifications
drawn up by the Commissioner of Public Property; a copy of the specifications
shall be kept on file by the City Clerk and shall be open to inspection by
any person interested.



(1994 Code, § 53.21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.22  DUTY TO REPAIR; COST; EMERGENCY REPAIRS.



   (A)   All repairs to service pipes and the plumbing systems of
buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises
served; except that, meters shall be repaired only by the city.



   (B)   The city may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipe
and, if this is done, the cost of the repair work shall be repaid by the
owner of the premises served.



(1994 Code, § 53.22)



§ 53.23  EXCAVATIONS.



   Excavations made for installing service pipes or repairing them shall
be made in compliance with the provisions of this code of ordinances relating
to excavations in streets.



(1994 Code, § 53.23)



§ 53.24  SHUT-OFF BOXES; LOCATION.



   Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe,
and shall be installed at the meter. Shut-off boxes shall be so located that
they are easily accessible and shall be protected from frost.



(1994 Code, § 53.24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.25  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall not be liable for any damage caused by a leak or break
in any service pipe, or for damage caused by the repair or installation of
the pipes or resulting therefrom when the work is not done by the city, nor
shall the city be held liable for any damage caused by a failure to repair
any leak or break in any service pipe.



(1994 Code, § 53.25)



METERS



§ 53.40  METER REQUIRED.



   (A)   All premises using water from the city water supply must be
equipped with an adequate water meter, furnished by the city, for each
separate commercial or dwelling structure situated on the premises.



   (B)   Before any dwelling structure is occupied, a water meter shall
be installed therein as required by this section.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DWELLING STRUCTURE. Any building, including a mobile home
trailer, designed or used as the living quarters for one or more persons.



      MULTI-DWELLING UNITS or APARTMENT BUILDING. A separate water
meter shall be installed for each room or suite of rooms in a multi-dwelling
unit or apartment building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to
be used as a single housekeeping unit and which contains complete kitchen,
bath and toilet facilities permanently installed. In lieu of installing the
separate water meters and at the option of the owner of a multi-dwelling unit
or apartment building, the rates provided in § 51.32 of this code of
ordinances may be charged.



(1994 Code, § 53.35)  (Ord. 179, passed 3-25-1968; Ord. 396, passed
3-11-1991; Ord. 09-04, passed 6-22-2009)



§ 53.41  COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC PROPERTY TO INSTALL METER.



   Meters shall be installed by the Commissioner of Public Property in a
place easy of access and the location must be approved by the Commissioner.



(1994 Code, § 53.36)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      72.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.001   Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code by reference



   70.002   Zones of quiet



   70.003   No turning signs and turning markers



   70.004   Location of city parking control signs



   70.005   Use of roller skates, coasters or similar devices



   70.006   Squealing or screeching tires



   70.007   Driving on closed or barricaded streets prohibited



Golf Carts and Utility-Terrain Vehicles



   70.010   Generally



   70.011   Definitions



   70.012   Requirements



   70.013   Permits



Parades



   70.020   Definitions



   70.021   Permit required



   70.022   Application for permit



   70.023   Standards for issuance of permit



   70.024   Notice of rejection of permit application



   70.025   Appeal procedure when permit denied



   70.026   Alternative permit



   70.027   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued



   70.028   Contents of permit



   70.029   Duties of permittee



   70.030   Public conduct during parades



   70.031   Revocation of permit



Parking Regulations



   70.045   Parking in alleys



   70.046   Parking Second Division motor vehicle in residential area



Snow Emergencies



   70.060   Announcement of snow emergency



   70.061   Termination of emergency



   70.062   Snow emergency routes



Violations



   70.075   Procedure for impounding vehicles



   70.076   Administrative hearing; notice



   70.077   Administrative fee



   70.078   Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this
chapter



Negligent Driving



   70.090   Negligent driving



 



   70.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.001  ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference to be applied
within the corporate limits of the city to the extent permitted by law and to
the extent that its subject matter is not regulated by this Code or
inconsistent with any lawful provisions of this Code.



   (B)   All references in sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code to
“this Code” shall be to sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code. References
to a state employee or official may be to a corresponding city employee or
official where such reference is applicable or necessary.



   (C)   All citations so issued in the name of the city and referred
to in the uniform traffic ticket or complaint as an ordinance violation. Any
provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted herein may be cited by placing
“70.001” before the appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section (e.g.,
“70.001:11-502, City of Sparta Code”).



   (D)   The penalties for violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code as
adopted by this provision shall be set forth in § 70.999 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 70.01)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.002  ZONES OF QUIET.



   (A)   General. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a
zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device, except in an emergency.



   (B)   Hospital zone.



      (1)   Establishment. A hospital quiet zone is hereby
established on and along Broadway from a point located 500 feet west of the
city limits, and extending east to the city limits.



      (2)   Prohibited conduct within zones. Within the limits of
the zones established in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to
make or cause to be made any unnecessary or undue noise, by shouting, yelling
or loud and boisterous language; or by creating any unnecessary loud noise
with a mechanical device, or by unnecessary honking of a horn on any motor
vehicle, or to act in any manner whatsoever so as to disturb the patients in
the hospital located within the limits of the quiet zone.



(1994 Code, § 70.02)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.003  NO TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of the sign. When authorized marks, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.



(1994 Code, § 70.03)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.004  LOCATION OF CITY PARKING CONTROL SIGNS.



   The location of authorized traffic control signs in the city are set
forth in Ch. 71, Traffic Schedules, and Ch. 72, Parking Schedules, of this
code of ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 70.04)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.005  USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS OR SIMILAR DEVICES.



   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as
play streets when authorized by the traffic authority.



(1994 Code, § 70.05)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.006  SQUEALING OR SCREECHING TIRES.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as
to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching or other such noise
from the vehicle’s tires due to rapid acceleration or excessive speed
around corners or other such reason.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to the following conditions:



      (1)   An authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an
emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator;



      (2)   The emergency operation of a motor vehicle when avoiding
imminent danger; nor



      (3)   Any raceway, racing facility or other public event, not
part of a highway, sanctioned by the city.



(1994 Code, § 70.06)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.007  DRIVING ON CLOSED OR BARRICADED STREETS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly made
pavement in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a
barrier, or at, over or near which there is a person or sign warning persons
that the street is closed.



(1994 Code, § 70.07)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES



§ 70.010  GENERALLY.



   Golf carts and utility-terrain vehicles, as defined and qualified
herein, shall be allowed on city streets under the conditions as stated
herein.



(Ord. 17-06, passed 12-11-2017)



§ 70.011  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the City of
Sparta, Illinois.



   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the
purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or
maintenance equipment, while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the
play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course.



   UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A self-propelled, electronically-powered,
four-wheeled motor vehicle, or a self-propelled, gasoline-powered,
four-wheeled motor vehicle, with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic
centimeters, which is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than
20 miles per hour, but not more than 25 miles per hour, and which conforms to
federal regulations under 49 C.F.R. pt. 571.500.



(Ord. 17-06, passed 12-11-2017)



§ 70.012  REQUIREMENTS.



   All persons wishing to operate a golf cart or an utility-terrain
vehicle on city streets must ensure compliance with the following
requirements.



   (A)   Proof of current liability insurance.



   (B)   Must be certified with the city and the vehicle has been
inspected by the Police Chief, or designated representative, as provided in
§ 70.013.



   (C)   Must display a city decal on the rear of the vehicle.



   (D)   Must have a current, valid Illinois driver’s license.



   (E)   Must be 21 years of age.



   (F)   Golf carts must be equipped as follows:



      (1)   A horn;



      (2)   Brakes and brake lights;



      (3)   Turn signals;



      (4)   A steering wheel apparatus;



      (5)   Tires;



      (6)   A rearview mirror;



      (7)   An approved, slow-moving-vehicle emblem on the rear of
the vehicle (625 ILCS 5/12-709);



      (8)   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front, which must illuminate when in operation;



      (9) A tail lamp that emits a red light visible from a distance of
at least 100 feet from the rear, which must be illuminated when in operation;
and



      (10)   Any additional requirements that may be amended to
comply with the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5.



   (G)   Utility-terrain vehicles must be equipped as follows:



      (1)   Brakes and brake lights;



      (2)   Turn signals on the front and rear;



      (3)   A steering apparatus;



      (4)   Tires;



      (5)   A rearview mirror;



      (6)   An approved, slow-moving-vehicle emblem on the rear of
the vehicle (625 ILCS 5/12-709);



      (7)   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front, which must illuminate when in operation;



      (8)   A tail lamp that emits a red light visible from a
distance of at least 100 feet from the rear, which must be illuminated when
in operation; and



      (9)   Any additional requirements that may be amended to
comply with the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5.



   (H)   Must obey all traffic laws of the state and the city.



   (I)   Must be operated only on city streets, except where prohibited.



   (J)   Shall not be operated on rights-of-way (ditches), sidewalks or
in city parks, other than parking areas.



   (K)   May not be operated on streets, highways and roads under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation (Illinois State
Routes 4 and 154) or the County Highway Department, except to cross at
designated streets.



   (L)   Must not be operated in excess of posted speed limit and, with
respect to utility-terrain vehicles, may not exceed 35 miles per hour.



   (M)   A person operating or who is in actual physical control of a
golf cart or utility-terrain vehicle, as described herein, on a roadway while
under the influence is subject to Sections 11-500 through 11-502 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes (625 ILCS 5/11-500—11-502).



(Ord. 17-06, passed 12-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.999



§ 70.013  PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a qualified golf cart or
utility-terrain vehicle without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk
as provided herein. Permits shall be period for a period of one year, from
April 1 through March 31, and must be renewed annually. The fee for a permit
is $50 per year, which shall not be prorated.



   (B)   Application for a new or renewed permit shall be made on a
form provided by the City Clerk, which shall include:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The name of  the liability insurance carrier, along
with a photocopy of the insurance card specifically for the vehicle to be
operated pursuant to the permit;



      (3)   The serial number, make, model and description of golf
cart or utility-terrain vehicle;



      (4)   A waiver of liability signed by applicant, releasing the
city, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all
future claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart or
utility-terrain vehicle on city streets; and



      (5)   Such other information as the city may require.



   (C)   Prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit, the following
conditions must be met:



      (1)   The vehicle must be inspected by the Chief of Police (or
designee) to ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on city streets, and
is in compliance with this subchapter and with the Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5;



      (2)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in
compliance with the provisions of the state statutes regarding minimum
liability insurance for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on state
roads. Insurance coverage is to be verified to be in effect by the Police
Department; and



      (3)   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a letter
signed by their physician certifying that the applicant is able to safely
operate a qualified golf cart or utility-terrain vehicle on city streets.



   (D)   The city may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder,
upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this
subchapter, or there is evidence that permitee cannot safely operate a
qualified golf cart or utility-terrain vehicle on the designated roadways.



(Ord. 17-06, passed 12-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.999



PARADES



§ 70.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a
continuous or nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.



   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park or other public place in the city, or “cruising”, as defined above.



   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.



   PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.



(1994 Code, § 70.20)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.021  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form
or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief
of Police or other authorized city official.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities; provided, the conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(1994 Code, § 70.21)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.022  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms provided
by such officer.



   (A)   The application for a parade permit shall be filed not less
than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.



   (B)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public
place proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; and



      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.



   (C)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee in an amount as established by the City Council from time
to time.



(1994 Code, § 70.22)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.023  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a
permit when, from a consideration of the application and from other
information obtained, he or she finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly
areas;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route;



   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designated to be held
purely for private profit; and



   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval
in writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of
the parking lot which is the site of the parade.



(1994 Code, § 70.23)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.024  NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof. If he or she disapproves the
application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within the three days,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, after the date on which the
application was filed, a notice of his or her action stating the reasons for
his or her denial of the permit.



(1994 Code, § 70.24)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.025  APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
after notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt.



(1994 Code, § 70.25)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.026  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different than that named
by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall
file a written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit
shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade
permit under this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 70.26)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.027  NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be
sent to the following persons:



   (A)   The Mayor; and



   (B)   The Fire Chief.



(1994 Code, § 70.27)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.028  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade;



   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public
place to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions
thereof; and



   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 70.28)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.029  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade
chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the
parade permit on his or her person during the conduct of the parade.



(1994 Code, § 70.29)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.030  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, except a
police car or other emergency vehicle, shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and
are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police or other
authorized city official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other
public thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a
parade. Signs shall be posted to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public thoroughfare
unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.



(1994 Code, § 70.30)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.031  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.



(1994 Code, § 70.31)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



PARKING REGULATIONS



§ 70.045  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver to park a vehicle within an alley
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
eight feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and there shall be no parking in any alley for a time longer than is
necessary to load or unload passengers or materials.



(1994 Code, § 70.50)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.046  PARKING SECOND DIVISION MOTOR VEHICLE IN RESIDENTIAL AREA.



   No operator of a motor vehicle of the Second Division of a gross weight
in pounds, including vehicle and maximum load, in excess of 8,000 pounds, as
defined under the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5, shall stand or
park such vehicle upon any street in the city zoned residential pursuant to
Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning, or where the primary use of the
structures fronting thereon is for residential purposes in the city, except
for the purpose of making a delivery or pick-up of merchandise or material,
in which event such standing or parking shall be permitted for a period not
to exceed one hour. However, trucks engaged in the transporting of the
household possessions of persons moving into or out of a dwelling unit within
the city shall be permitted to park or stand for a period not to exceed four
hours in the street on which such dwelling unit is located.



(1994 Code, § 70.51)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



SNOW EMERGENCIES



§ 70.060  ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Mayor finds that falling snow, sleet or freezing rain will
create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor
vehicles on snow emergency routes be prohibited, or whenever he or she finds
on the basis of a firm forecast of snow, sleet or freezing rain that the
weather conditions so forecasted may create a condition making it necessary
that such parking be prohibited, he or she is authorized to announce such
prohibition, to become effective at a time specified by him or her. After the
effective time of such prohibition, no person shall park any vehicle or
permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a
fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to
6:00 a.m., and the Mayor has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking
on snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a
vehicle parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m.
following such fall. The prohibition of parking announced by the Mayor under
the authority of this section shall remain in effect until he or she
announces the termination of the snow emergency, in part or in whole, after
which the prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no longer
be in effect.



(1994 Code, § 70.60)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.061  TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.



   Whenever the Mayor shall find that some or all of the conditions which
gave rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he or she is
authorized to declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole,
effective immediately on announcement. If such announcement is made other
than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those
hours.



(1994 Code, § 70.61)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



§ 70.062  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the
Mayor. On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route,
special signs shall be posted to this effect.



(1994 Code, § 70.62)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



VIOLATIONS



§ 70.075  PROCEDURE FOR IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Vehicles may be properly impounded by the city under this
section and the city may impose fees therefor for the following violations:



      (1)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be
seized and forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720
ILCS 5/36-1;



      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or
drugs, an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in
violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS
5/11-501;



      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis
Control Act, 720 ILCS 550;



      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the state’s
Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570;



      (5)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of §§ 24-1, 24-1.5
or 24-3.1 of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/24-1, 5/24-1.5, 5/24-3.1;



      (6)   Driving while a driver’s license, permit or privilege
to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to § 6-303 of
the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-303; except that,
vehicles shall not be subject to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is
for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with
emission testing;



      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting,
possessing or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the state’s Controlled
Substance Act;



      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired
driver’s license, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-101, if the period of expiration is greater than one
year;



      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having
been issued a driver’s license or permit, in violation of § 6-101 of the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-101, or operating a motor vehicle
without ever having been issued a driver’s license or permit due to a
person’s age;



      (10)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against
whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303 or 11-501 of the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-101, 5/6-303 or 5/11-501;



      (11)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Art. 16 or 16A of
the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/16-0.1 et seq.; or



      (12)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in
violation of the Criminal Code of 2012, when so provided by this subchapter.



   (B)   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor
vehicle is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing
of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the city.



(1994 Code, § 70.70)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011; Ord. 11-06, passed
12-12-2011)



§ 70.076  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING; NOTICE.



   (A)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the city shall notify or
make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee or person identifying
himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who
is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense,
of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner’s or lessee’s right
to an administrative hearing.



   (B)   The city shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle
shall remain impounded pending completion of an administrative hearing,
unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the city
a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by § 70.077 of this
chapter, and pays all towing and storage charges.



   (C)   The registered owner or lessee, and any lienholder of record,
shall be provided with a notice of hearing. The notice shall:



      (1)   Be served upon the owner or lessee, and any lienholder
of record, either by personal service or first class mail to the interested
party’s address as registered with the Secretary of State;



      (2)   Be served upon interested parties within ten days after
the vehicle is impounded by the city; and



      (3)   Contain the date, time and location of the
administrative hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no
later than 45 days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.



   (D)   (1)   All administrative hearings shall be held in
accordance to the requirements contained in subd. (b)(4) of § 11-208.3 of
the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3. In addition, all
administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who shall be
an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three
years. The Mayor as Police Commissioner may appoint the City Attorney as
hearing officer.



      (2)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the
hearing officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or
overruling the vehicle impoundment. If the basis for the vehicle impoundment
is sustained by the administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee
posted to secure release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the city.



      (3)   All final decisions of the administrative hearing
officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the Administrative
Review Law. Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for
the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid.



   (E)   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage
facility within 35 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of Art. II of Ch. 4 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625
ILCS 5/4-201 et seq..



   (F)   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine,
penalty or administrative fee imposed under this section which remains unpaid
in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial
review under the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101, may be enforced
in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(1994 Code, § 70.71)  (Ord. 11-06, passed 12-12-2011)



§ 70.077  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.



   (A)   The administrative fee related to the administrative and
processing cost associated with the investigation, arrest and detention of an
offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage or release of vehicle by the
city shall be $50 per vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   The administrative fee imposed by the city shall be
in addition to any fees charged for the towing and storage of an impounded
vehicle.



      (2)   The administrative fee shall be waived by the city upon
verified proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time of the impoundment.



(1994 Code, § 70.72)  (Ord. 11-06, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 16-06, passed
9-12-2016)



§ 70.078  DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and
who leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a
violation of this chapter involving such vehicle, shall upon request provide
such police officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having
jurisdiction thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the
lessee at the time of such offense and the identifying number upon the
registration plates and registration sticker or stickers of such vehicle.



(1994 Code, § 70.73)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011; Ord. 11-06, passed
12-12-2011)



NEGLIGENT DRIVING



§ 70.090  NEGLIGENT DRIVING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any
motor vehicle upon a public way in a negligent manner and without due caution
or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property.



(1994 Code, § 70.80)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)  Penalty, see §
70.999



§ 70.999  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this traffic code for which another
penalty is not already otherwise provided by ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750.



(1994 Code, § 70.99)  (Ord. 11-05, passed 11-14-2011)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limit



   II.   Stop intersections



   III.   Through streets



   IV.   Turns restricted



   V.   One-way streets



   VI.   Truck routes



   VII.   Weight limited on certain streets



SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMIT.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds
listed below upon the following streets and areas.



 

Street(s)
 
Description
 
mph
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




Brown Memorial Park
 
Any public thoroughfare through, across or within the park
 
10
 
253
 
5-20-1974


Business district
 
All streets
 
20
 
280
 
6-12-1978


Business district
 
All alleys
 
15
 
280
 
6-12-1978


Country Club Road
 
From the intersection with South Chester Street to the western corporate
limits
 
30
 
08-06
 
8-25-2008


Frontage Road
 
Within the city
 
25
 
96-01
 
1-8-1996


Hillcrest Drive
 
Between the intersections of Broadway Street and University Street
 
35
 
413
 
12-9-1991


Industrial Drive
 
Between the intersections of Hillcrest Drive and Township Road 74 (Plum Creek
Road)
 
35
 
17-02
 
7-24-2017


Industrial Drive
 
From 100 feet west of McMeekin Drive to Plum Creek Road
 
45
 
413
 
12-9-1991


Residential district
 
All alleys
 
15
 
280
 
6-12-1978


Residential district
 
All streets
 
30
 
280
 
6-12-1978


School zone and other streets used by children going to and from school
 
During school days
 
20
 
 
 
 


South Chester Street
 
From the corporate limits to 1,660 feet north of the corporate limits
 
45
 
413
 
12-9-1991




 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. I)  Penalty, see § 70.999



SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   General. The following street intersections are hereby
declared to be one-way stop intersections at which the driver of a vehicle
traversing any street hereafter declared to be a stop street, intersecting
with any street hereafter declared to be a through street, shall stop the
vehicle before entering upon the through street, unless a “go” signal is
given at the intersection by a traffic officer or a traffic sign.



 

Stop Street
 
Direction
 
Through Street




Adams Street
 
Eastbound
 
James Street


Adams Street
 
Westbound
 
St. Louis Street


American Legion Drive
 
Northbound
 
Fox Run Drive


American Legion Drive
 
Southbound
 
Dean Avenue


Athens Drive
 
Northbound
 
Spartan Drive


Baird Street
 
Northbound
 
Main Street


Birch Lane
 
Southbound
 
Cypress Lane


Birch Lane
 
Northbound
 
Sycamore Lane


Border Street
 
Northbound
 
Mound Street


Bradbury Lane
 
Eastbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Burns Avenue
 
Northbound
 
Main Street


Campbell Drive
 
Eastbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Cambridge Drive
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Cherry Lane
 
Southbound
 
Cypress Lane


Cherry Lane
 
Northbound
 
Sycamore Lane


Chestnut Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street


Church Street
 
Eastbound
 
Miller Street


City Lake Road
 
Southbound
 
Sumerville Road


Cleveland Street
 
Southbound
 
Morton Street


Cleveland Street
 
Northbound
 
Mound Street


Cretan Court
 
Southbound
 
Spartan Drive


Cypress Lane
 
Eastbound
 
James Street


Cypress Lane
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Dean Street
 
 
Maple Street Extension


Dean Street
 
Westbound
 
Maple Street


Debra Lane
 
Eastbound
 
Deer Creek Lane


Deer Creek Lane
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street


Deer Creek Lane
 
Southbound
 
Janet Avenue


Delores Avenue
 
Northbound
 
Debra Lane


Delores Avenue
 
Southbound
 
Edna Lane


Dewey Street
 
Southbound
 
McClurken Avenue


Dian Lane
 
Northbound
 
Debra Lane


Dian Lane
 
Southbound
 
Edna Lane


Dickey Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street


Dickey Street
 
Southbound
 
McClurken Avenue


East Border Street
 
Northbound
 
Fourth Street


Fairground Exit
 
Northbound
 
Belmont Street


First Street
 
Northbound
 
Jackson Street


First Street
 
Westbound
 
Chester Street


Fourth Street
 
Eastbound
 
Burns Avenue


Frontage Road
 
Southbound
 
Northtown Drive


Fulton Street
 
Northbound
 
Feifer Street


Fulton Street
 
Southbound
 
Main Street


Gardner Street
 
Northbound
 
Mound Street


Gardner Street
 
Southbound
 
Main Street


Gaslite Drive
 
Eastbound
 
James Street


George Street
 
Westbound
 
Maple Street


Gordon Street
 
Southbound
 
Belmont Street


Gordon Street
 
Northbound
 
Second Street


Grand Avenue
 
Northbound
 
Second Street


Grand Avenue
 
Northbound
 
Main Street


Grand Avenue
 
Southbound
 
Belmont Street


Grand Avenue
 
Southbound
 
First Street


Grigg Street
 
Eastbound
 
Oak Street


Grigg Street
 
Westbound
 
Chester Street


Harrison Street
 
Eastbound
 
Border Street


Harrison Street
 
Westbound
 
Miller Street


Hasle Street
 
Northbound
 
Mound Street


Hasle Street
 
Southbound
 
Main Street


Hood Street
 
Eastbound
 
Pine Street


Hood Street
 
Westbound
 
Pine Street


Industrial Drive
 
Eastbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Industrial Drive
 
Westbound
 
Plum Creek Road


Jackson Street
 
Eastbound
 
Vine Street


Jackson Street
 
Westbound
 
Oak Street


James Street
 
Southbound
 
Jackson Street


James Street
 
Southbound
 
Madison Street


James Street
 
Northbound
 
Madison Street


James Street
 
Southbound
 
Belmont Street


Janet Street
 
Eastbound
 
Deer Creek Lane


Janna Lane
 
Southbound
 
Stevenson Drive


Jenna Lane
 
Southbound
 
Mark Drive


Jefferson Street
 
Eastbound
 
Miller Street


Judy Lane
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Lewis Street
 
Eastbound
 
Park Street


Lewis Street
 
Northbound
 
Osborn Street


Locust Street
 
Northbound
 
Main Street


Madison Street
 
Eastbound
 
St. Louis Street


Main Street
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Maple Street
 
Northbound
 
Church Street


Maple Street
 
Northbound
 
College Street


Maple Street
 
Northbound
 
Dean Street


Maple Street
 
Southbound
 
Church Street


Marilyn Court
 
Westbound
 
Fieldcrest Drive


Mason Lane
 
Eastbound
 
Melmar Drive


McClurken Avenue
 
Westbound
 
Vine Street


McMeekin Drive
 
Northbound
 
Industrial Drive


McMeekin Drive
 
Southbound
 
Bradbury Lane


Meadow Drive
 
Southbound
 
University Avenue


Meadow Lane
 
Southbound
 
University Avenue


Melmar Drive
 
Northbound
 
Stevenson Drive


Melmar Drive
 
Southbound
 
Masonic Avenue


Miller Street
 
Northbound
 
Church Street


Miller Street
 
Southbound
 
Harrison Street


Moffat Mine Road
 
Westbound
 
Burns Avenue


Monroe Street
 
Eastbound
 
St. Louis Street


Morton Street
 
Eastbound
 
Border Street


Morton Street
 
Westbound
 
Miller Street


Mound Street
 
Westbound
 
James Street


Norwood Drive
 
Southbound
 
University Avenue


Olive Street
 
Southbound
 
Main Street


Osborn Street
 
Eastbound
 
Miller Street


Osborn Street
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Page Street
 
Eastbound
 
Washington Street


Page Street
 
Westbound
 
St. Louis Street


Park Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
James Street


Park Avenue
 
Westbound
 
Walnut Street


Patricia Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
Janet Avenue


Peggy Lane
 
Westbound
 
Delores Avenue


Phillip Avenue
 
Northbound
 
Delinda Avenue


Phillip Avenue
 
Southbound
 
Janet Avenue


Pine Street
 
Southbound
 
Madison Street


Railroad Road
 
Northbound
 
Jefferson Street


Railroad Road
 
Southbound
 
Mound Street


Railroad Street
 
Northbound
 
Mound Street


Railroad Street
 
Southbound
 
Church Street


Ridge Road
 
Eastbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Roundhouse Road
 
Eastbound
 
Country Club Road


Sparta Center Drive
 
Northbound
 
Northtown Drive


Spartan Drive
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Sproul Street
 
Eastbound
 
Miller Street


Sproul Street
 
Eastbound
 
Washington Street


State Street
 
Northbound
 
Church Street


Sunset Drive
 
Eastbound
 
Melmar


Swimming Pool Drive
 
Eastbound
 
Bradburry Lane


Swimming Pool Drive
 
Southbound
 
Bradbury Lane


Sycamore Lane
 
Westbound
 
Hillcrest Drive


Sycamore Lane
 
Southbound
 
Cypress Lane


Third Street
 
Eastbound
 
Dickey Street


Third Street
 
Westbound
 
Oak Street


Vine Street
 
Southbound
 
Fourth Street


Walnut Street
 
Northbound
 
Second Street


Walnut Street
 
Southbound
 
Belmont Street


Walnut Street
 
Southbound
 
First Street


Washington Street
 
Northbound
 
Hood Street


Wilson Street
 
Northbound
 
Second Street




 



   (B)   Two-way stop. The following street intersections are hereby
declared to be two-way stop intersections at which the driver of a vehicle
traversing any street hereafter declared to be a stop street, intersecting
with any street hereafter declared to be a through street, shall stop the
vehicle before entering upon the through street, unless a “go” signal is
given at the intersection by a traffic officer or a traffic sign.



 

Stop Street
 
Through Street




Bottom Street
 
Church Street


Bottom Street
 
Main Street


Bottom Street
 
Mound Street


Bottom Street
 
Osborn Street


Chestnut Street
 
Second Street


Chestnut Street
 
Third Street


Church Street
 
Lewis Street


Church Street
 
St. Louis Street


Cleveland Street
 
Harrison Street


College Street
 
Gardner Street


College Street
 
Hasle Street


College Street
 
James Street


College Street
 
Miller Street


College Street
 
Walnut Street


College Street
 
Washington Street


Debra Lane
 
Edna Lane


Deer Creek Lane
 
Janet Avenue


Fieldcrest Drive
 
Sunset Drive


First Street
 
Oak Street


Fulton Street
 
Harrison Street


Gardner Street
 
Harrison Street


Gordon Street
 
Third Street


Grand Street
 
Grigg Street


Grigg Street
 
Walnut Street


Hasle Street
 
Harrison Street


Hasle Street
 
Morton Street


Hood Avenue
 
James Street


James Street
 
Church Street


James Street
 
Second Street


James Street
 
Third Street


Jefferson Street
 
Bottom Street


Jefferson Street
 
Vine Street


Main Street
 
James Street


Maple Street
 
Hood Avenue


Maple Street
 
Main Street


Maple Street
 
Mound Street


Market Street
 
Fourth Street


Miller Street
 
Main Street


Monroe Street
 
James Street


Morton Street
 
Fulton Street


Morton Street
 
Gardner Street


Mound Street
 
St. Louis Street


Oak Street
 
College Street


Oak Street
 
Main Street


Osborn Street
 
James Street


Osborn Street
 
Maple Street


Osborn Street
 
St. Louis Street


Osborn Street
 
Vine Street


Osborn Street
 
Washington Street


Page Street
 
Maple Street


Page Street
 
Vine Street


Park Street
 
Oak Street


Pine Street
 
Adams Street


Pine Street
 
Monroe Street


Railroad Street
 
Osborn Street


Second Street
 
Chester Street


Second Street
 
Market Street


Second Street
 
Oak Street


State Street
 
Bottom Street


Third Street
 
Market Street


Third Street
 
Vine Street


Vine Street
 
Church Street


Vine Street
 
Main Street


Vine Street
 
Mound Street


Walnut Street
 
Main Street


Washington Street
 
Church Street


Washington Street
 
Jefferson Street


Washington Street
 
Main Street


Washington Street
 
Mound Street




 



   (C)   Three-way stop. The following intersections are hereby
declared to be three-way stop intersections at which the driver of a vehicle
traversing the intersection shall stop the vehicle before entering upon the
intersection, unless a “go” signal is given at the intersection by a
traffic officer or a traffic sign.



 

Intersection




Burns Avenue and McClurken Avenue


Dickey Street and Second Street


Henry Jubel Memorial Drive and McClurken Avenue


Hood Street and St. Louis Street


Miller Street and Church Street


Northtown Drive and Melmar Drive


Oak Street and Belmont Street


St. Louis Street and West Main Street


University Avenue and Hillcrest Drive




 



   (D)   Four-way stop. The following intersections are hereby declared
to be four-way stop intersections at which the driver of a vehicle traversing
the intersection shall stop the vehicle before entering upon the
intersection, unless a “go” signal is given at the intersection by a
traffic officer or a traffic sign.



 

Intersection




Belmont Street and Chester Street


College Street and St. Louis Street


College Street and Vine Street


Hood Avenue and Vine Street


James Street and Fox Run


Miller Street and Mound Street


Pine Street and Hood Avenue


Second Street and Vine Street


Sproul Street and Vine Street


University Street and James Street




 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. II)  (Ord. 206, passed 9-15-1969; Ord. 214, passed
10-13-1970; Ord. 224, passed 5-15-1971; Ord. 278, passed 5-22-1978; Ord. 309,
passed 4-13-1981; Ord. 359, passed 9-8-1986; Ord. 391, passed 12-10-1990;
Ord. 95-007, passed 5-8-1995; Ord. 97-05, passed 9-22-1997; Ord. 99-06,
passed 4-12-1999)  Penalty, see § 70.999



SCHEDULE III. THROUGH STREETS.



   Every driver of a vehicle traversing any street intersection with any
through street shall stop such vehicle before entering upon the through
street unless a go signal is given at the intersection by a traffic officer
or a traffic sign. The following streets and portions of streets are hereby
declared to be through streets.



 

Street
 
Description


Broadway
 
From Market Street to the east city limits


Broadway
 
From St. Louis Street to the west city limits


Main Street
 
From Market Street to the east city limits


Market Street
 
From Main Street to the north city limits


St. Louis Street
 
From College Avenue to Hood Avenue


St. Louis Street
 
From Jackson Street to the south city limits



 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. III)  Penalty, see § 70.999



SCHEDULE IV. TURNS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful to make any U-turns at any of the following
designated places.



 

Intersection


Broad Street and Market Street


Broad Street and Vine Street


Broad Street and St. Louis Street


Main Street and Vine Street


Market Street and Main Street


St. Louis Street and Jackson Street



 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. IV)  Penalty, see § 70.999



SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS.



   The following are hereby declared to be one-way streets and alleys, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on the following
streets contrary to the direction designated.



 

Street
 
Direction of Permitted Travel
 
Description


Main Street
 
West
 
From St. Louis Street to James Street


Maple Street
 
North
 
From Broadway Street to Main Street



 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. V)  (Ord. 97-06, passed 9-22-1997; Ord. 00-01,
passed 1-10-2000)  Penalty, see § 70.999



SCHEDULE VI. TRUCK ROUTES.



   It shall be unlawful for through trucks to travel over and on, except
for the purpose of making a local delivery, any street or roadway in the
city, except as specified in this schedule.



 

Street
 
Description




4th Street
 
Entire street


Belmont Street
 
From South St. Louis Street to Chester Street


Burns Avenue
 
Entire length


Chester Street
 
Entire street


Doc Lin Drive
 
Entire street


East Hood Avenue
 
From North Market Street to North Washington Street


Fourth Street
 
Entire length


Hillcrest Drive
 
From Stevenson Drive to Industrial Drive


Industrial Drive
 
Entire street


Jackson Street
 
From South Market Street to South Vine Street


Jubel Drive
 
Entire street


Masonic Avenue
 
Entire street


Masonic Drive
 
From Market Street to Melmar Drive


McClurkin Avenue
 
Entire length open for traffic


McClurken Street
 
Entire street


McMeekin Drive
 
Entire street


Melmar Drive
 
Entire street


South St. Louis Street
 
From Broadway to Jackson Street


Stevenson Drive
 
Entire street


Vine Street
 
From Broadway Street to McClurken Avenue


Vine Street
 
From East Broadway to McClurken Street




 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. VI)  (Ord. 2006-07, passed 6-12-2006)  Penalty,
see § 70.999



SCHEDULE VII. WEIGHT LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle or combination
of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires or equipped with other than
pneumatic tires, unladen or with load, when the gross weight on the road
surface through any single axle thereof exceeds 5,000 pounds, upon the
following roadways of the city.



 

Description


Hillcrest Avenue


That portion of Township Road No. 200, running east and west along the north
line of the east half of Section 36 in Township 4 South, Range 6



 



(1994 Code, Ch. 71 Schd. VII)  (Ord. 348, passed 7-10-1985)  Penalty, see
§ 70.999



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   No parking



   II.   Parking time limited



   III.   Residential parking only



SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to stand or
park, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal, at the
following locations.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Description




Belmont Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Oak Street and Chester Street


Belmont Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with St. Louis Street and South Oak Street


Broadway
 
North
 
Between its intersection with Washington Street and Baird Street


Broadway
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with James Street and west city limits


Broadway
 
North
 
Between its intersections with St. Louis Street and James Street


Broadway
 
South
 
Between its intersection with Washington Street and the east city limits


Broadway
 
North
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and a point 100 feet west of the
intersection


Chester Street
 
East
 
Between its intersection with Belmont Street and Broadway


Church Street
 
South
 
Between its intersection with James Street and St. Louis Street


College Street
 
South
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and St. Louis Street


Dean Avenue
 
Both
 
No parking on either side from North Market to North Maple


Fourth Street
 
Both
 
Between a point 100 feet east of the intersection of Fourth Street and
McClurken Lane, and the intersection of Fourth Street and the east city line


Fourth Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and St. Louis Street


Fox Run
 
North
 
Between a point 400 feet west of the intersection of it with Market Street
and the intersection of Fox Run and Market Street


Fox Run
 
South
 
 


Frontage Road
 
Both
 
Within the city


Hillcrest Drive
 
East
 
Between the intersection of Hillcrest Drive and West Main Street and the
intersection of Hillcrest Drive and West Broadway Street


Hood Avenue
 
North
 
Between its intersection with St. Louis Street and Vine Street


Hood Avenue
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and St. Louis Street


Hood Street
 
Both
 
From Market Street to Pine Street


Industrial Drive
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Hillcrest Drive and Township Road 74 (Plum
Creek Road)


James Street
 
Both
 
From Main Street to College Street


Jackson Street
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Jackson Street and St. Louis Street and the
intersection of Jackson Street and Market Street


Jackson Street
 
South
 
Between its intersection with South James Street and South St. Louis Street


James Street
 
East
 
Between its intersection with Jackson Street and Main Street


James Street
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of James Street and Cypress Street and the
intersection of James Street and Fox Run Street


James Street
 
East
 
Between its intersection with College Street and Osborn Street


Janet Street
 
North and south
 
For a distance of 200 feet east from the intersection of Janet Avenue and St.
Louis Street


Jubel Drive
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Jubel Drive and McClurken Avenue


Jubel Drive
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Jubel Drive and East Broadway Street


Main Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and St. Louis Street


Main Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Vine Street and the east corporate limits


Main Street
 
North
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and Vine Street


Market Street
 
Both
 
Between Broadway Street and Jackson Street


Market Street
 
West
 
For a distance of 120 feet south from the intersection of Broadway and Market
Street


Market Street
 
East
 
Between its intersection with College Street and its intersection with Main
Street


Market Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with College Street and the north city limits


Market Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Jackson Street and Fourth Street


Market Street
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Market Street and Broad Street (Broadway) and the
intersection of Market Street and Jackson Street


Mason Lane
 
South
 
Between the intersection of Mason Lane and Fieldcrest Drive and the
intersection of Mason Lane and Melmar Drive


Masonic Avenue
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Masonic Avenue and North James Street and the
intersection of Masonic Avenue and North Market Street


McClurken Avenue
 
North
 
From Vine Street to Burns Avenue


Mound Street
 
North
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and Vine Street


North James Street
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of North James Street and Masonic Avenue and the
intersection of North James Street and Fox Run Drive


Northtown drive
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Northtown Drive and Illinois State Route 4 and
the intersection of Northtown Drive and Melmar Drive


Pine Street
 
East
 
Between its intersection with Hood Avenue and University Avenue


School Street
 
Both
 
For a distance of 120 feet west from the intersection of School Street and
Market Street


St. Louis Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Hood Avenue on the north and the south
corporate limit line of the city


Stevenson Drive
 
Both
 
Between the intersection of Stevenson Drive and Illinois State Route 4 and
the intersection of Stevenson Drive and Hillcrest Drive


University Avenue
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Pine Street and a point 120 feet west of the
west line of the intersection


University Avenue
 
North
 
Between its intersection with Pine Street and James Street


Vine Street
 
West
 
Between its intersections with Main Street and Jackson Street


Vine Street
 
East
 
Between its intersection with Main Street and a point 120 feet south of the
intersection of Broadway Street and Vine Street


West Main
 
South
 
Between its intersection with North James Street and North St. Louis Street


West Main
 
Both
 
For a distance of 330 feet east of the intersection of Hillcrest Drive and
Main Street




 



(1994 Code, Ch. 72 Schd. I)  (Ord. 13, passed 10-21-1940; Ord. 379, passed
9-26-1988; Ord. 398, passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 400, passed 4-22-1991; Ord.
94-013, passed 11-28-1994; Ord. 95-016, passed 8-14-1995; Ord. 95-18, passed
10-23-1995; Ord. 96-02, passed 1-8-1996; Ord. 97-07, passed 9-22-1997; Ord.
05-12, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 07-06, passed 8-13-2007; Ord. 17-03, passed
7-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.999



SCHEDULE II. PARKING TIME LIMITED.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park at any of
the locations designated in this schedule between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and at other times for a period of time
longer than prescribed in this schedule.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Description
 
Time Limit


Broadway
 
South
 
In front of the United States Post Office, while transacting business in the
post office
 
5 minutes


Broadway
 
Both
 
Between its intersections with Vine Street and James Street
 
2 hours


College Street
 
North
 
Between its intersection with Market Street and St. Louis Street
 


Jackson Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with Vine Street and Market Street and St. Louis
Street and James Street
 
2 hours


Market Street
 
Both
 
Between its intersection with College Street and Broadway
 
2 hours



 



(1994 Code, Ch. 72 Schd. II)  (Ord. 82, passed 12-20-1954; Ord. 186, passed
7-22-1968; Ord. 204, passed 9-2-1969; Ord. 358, passed 8-11-1986)  Penalty,
see § 70.999



SCHEDULE III. RESIDENTIAL PARKING ONLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than occupants (or their
invitees) of residences located on the street, hereinafter set forth, to
permit any vehicle to stand or park, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
traffic signal, at the following locations.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Description


Church Street
 
North
 
Between its intersection with St. Louis Street and James Street



 



(1994 Code, Ch. 72 Schd. VI)  (Ord. 14-06, passed 6-9-2014)  Penalty, see
§ 70.999



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      91.   ANIMALS



      92.   CEMETERIES



      93.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



      94.   FAIR HOUSING POLICY



      95.   FIRE PREVENTION



      96.   HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION



      97.   NOISE



      98.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      99.   PLANTS AND WEEDS



      100.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited



   90.02   Notification of abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor
vehicle



   90.03   Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles



   90.04   Inoperable motor vehicles



   90.05   Record searches



   90.06   Reclaimed vehicles



   90.07   Notification of impounded vehicle



   90.08   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles



   90.09   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles without notice



   90.10   Records



   90.11   Disposition of proceeds from sale of unclaimed vehicles



   90.12   Liability



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any street
or highway in the city is unlawful and subject to the penalties as set forth
in § 90.99 of this chapter.



   (B)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or
public property, other than a street or highway, in view of the general
public anywhere in this city is unlawful. A vehicle or any part thereof so
abandoned on private property shall be authorized for removal by the Chief of
Police of the city or any member of the Police Department designated by him
or her, after a waiting period of seven days or more or may be removed
immediately if determined to be a hazardous, dilapidated motor vehicle under
§ 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1.



   (C)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof is
abandoned on private property, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by the order of the Chief of Police of the city or by any member
of the Police Department designated by him or her.



(1994 Code, § 90.01)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  NOTIFICATION OF ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED MOTOR VEHICLE.



   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle, or any part
thereof, or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a
person in the city not the owner of the vehicle, the person shall immediately
notify the Police Department when the vehicle is in the corporate limits of
the city.



(1994 Code, § 90.02)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER VEHICLES.



   (A)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on any
street in the city ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by order of the Chief of Police of the city or by any member of
the Police Department designated by him or her.



   (B)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard
because of its position in relation to the highway or street, or its physical
appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the
street or highway by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief
of Police of the city or any member of the Police Department designated by
him or her.



   (C)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property
or street or highway is authorized by order of the Chief of Police of the
city or by a member of the Police Department designated by him or her, the
owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.



(1994 Code, § 90.03)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.04  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
means:



         (a)   Any motor vehicle which does not possess current
state registration, license plates or valid application therefor; or



         (b)   Any motor vehicle from which, for a person of at
least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise disassembled that the vehicle is incapable of being driven or moved
under its own power.



      (2)   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES shall not include:



         (a)   Motor vehicles which have been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repairs;



         (b)   Motor vehicles that are kept within a building
when not in use;



         (c)   Motor vehicles displayed for sale by persons
engaged in the business of selling new or used vehicles within a B-1 or B-2
Business District; or



         (d)   Motor vehicles on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.



   (B)   (1)   All inoperable vehicles, whether on public or private
property, or on any street or highway within the city, and in view of the
general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any person failing
to obey a notice received from the city which states that the person is to
dispose of the inoperable motor vehicles under his control and to remove the
inoperable vehicle or parts thereof after seven days from the issuance of the
notice shall be subject to the penalties provided by § 90.99.



      (2)   Inoperable vehicles may not use car covers or tarps as a
method of relief from this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   The Chief of Police of the city or any member of the
Police Department designated by him or her is hereby authorized to remove any
inoperable motor vehicle or any parts thereof after seven days from the
issuance by the city of notice to dispose of the inoperable motor vehicle
under his control.  The vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Inoperable vehicles may not use car covers or tarps as a
method of relief from this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 90.04)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 424, passed
9-14-1992; Ord. 00-12, passed 4-10-2000)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  RECORD SEARCHES.



   (A)   When the city’s Police Department impounds any motor vehicle
under the authority of this chapter and does not know the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, the Chief of
Police of the city or any member of the Police Department designated by him
or her will cause the vehicle registration records of the state to be
searched by the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the required
ownership information.



   (B)   In addition, he or she shall cause the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) files to be searched by a directed communication to
the State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle.



(1994 Code, § 90.05)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.06  RECLAIMED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed
of as hereinafter provided, the owner, lienholder or other person legally
entitled to possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police
Department or other person having custody of the vehicle proof of ownership
or proof of right of possession of the vehicle.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder or other
person under this section until all towing, storage charges and processing
costs have been paid in full.



(1994 Code, § 90.06)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.07  NOTIFICATION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   Based on the information determined from the record searches as
provided in § 90.05 of this chapter, the Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Department designated by him or her shall send a notification by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled
person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition to be
made and setting forth public sale information. Notification shall be sent no
later than ten days after the date of impoundment; provided that, if the
Police Department is unable to determine the identity of the registered
owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of the
vehicle within the ten-day period after impoundment, then notification shall
be sent no later than two days after the date of the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of
the impounded vehicle is determined.



(1994 Code, § 90.07)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.08  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   When an abandoned, lost, stolen, inoperable or other unclaimed vehicle
seven years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of
30 days after notice has been given as provided in § 90.07 of this chapter,
the Police Department or towing service having possession of the vehicle
shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an
automotive parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor under Ch. 5 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/5-100 et seq.). Notice of the time and
place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten
days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
At least ten days prior to the sale, the Police Department or the towing
service where the vehicle is impounded shall cause a notice of the time and
place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner,
lienholder and other person known by the Police Department or towing service
to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The notice shall
contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must
be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle. If any notice
is returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department or towing
service due to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address
obtained from the registration records of the state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.



(1994 Code, § 90.08)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.09  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES WITHOUT NOTICE.



   (A)   (1)   When an abandoned or inoperable vehicle of more than
seven years of age is impounded as provided in this section, it will be kept
in custody for a minimum of ten days for the purpose of obtaining the
identity of the registered owner and lienholder and contacting the registered
owner and lienholder by U.S. mail, public service or in person for a
determination of disposition.



      (2)   At the expiration of the ten-day period, without the
benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner
or lienholder, the Police Department having jurisdiction will authorize the
disposal of the vehicle as junk, provided a vehicle classified as an antique
vehicle may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it.



   (B)   When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other
person legally entitled to possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed
vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as herein provided
without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.



(1994 Code, § 90.09)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.10  RECORDS.



   (A)   When a motor vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed
listing the color, year, manufacturer, manufacturer’s trade name,
manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to,
reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.



   (B)   When a vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is
reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled
person or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by
the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the
reclamation, sale or disposal.



(1994 Code, § 90.10)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.11  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS FROM SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   The proceeds from the public sale or disposition after the deducting of
towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited into the municipal
treasury of the city.



(1994 Code, § 90.11)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.12  LIABILITY.



   The Chief of Police of the city or any member of the Police Department
designated by him or her, or any other officer or employee of the Police
Department, towing service owner, operator or employee, shall not be held to
answer or be liable for any damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or his or her legal representative,
lienholder or any other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by
this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 90.12)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violation of
any section of this chapter:



      (1)   Shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750; and



      (2)   Shall be required by the court to make a disposition of
the abandonment or unclaimed vehicle and pay all towing and storage charges
and processing costs incurred in respect to the vehicle.



   (B)   Each day an inoperable vehicle remains after seven days from
issuance of the notice to remove the same shall constitute a separate offense.



(1994 Code, § 90.99)  (Ord. 393, passed 3-11-1991)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.001   Purpose



   91.002   Interpretation



   91.003   Definitions



Care and Treatment



   91.015   Harboring or keeping of certain animals prohibited



   91.016   Duty of animal owners



   91.017   Cruelty to animals prohibited



   91.018   Tethering



   91.019   Disturbance of the peace; nuisance



   91.020   Animal at large prohibited



   91.021   Trapping prohibited



   91.022   Vehicles containing animals, parking time limited



   91.023   Hunting restriction



   91.024   Animals in heat to be confined in building



Licensing and Rabies Control



   91.035   Requirement



   91.036   Number of animals



   91.037   Issuance of license for domestic animals



   91.038   License year



   91.039   License tag



   91.040   Inoculation against rabies



   91.041   Quarantine



Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs; Feral Cats



   91.055   Registration of potentially dangerous dogs



   91.056   Potentially dangerous dogs; restrictions and conditions



   91.057   Crime-prevention dogs



   91.058   Removal of “potentially dangerous” designation



   91.059   Dangerous dogs; prohibitions



   91.060   Dog declared to be dangerous; notice, seizure and
impoundment



   91.061   Feral cats; seizure



   91.062   Managing feral cat populations



Impoundment and Disposition of Animals



   91.075   Grounds for impoundment



   91.076   Notice to owner



   91.077   Report of impoundment



   91.078   Return of captured animal without impoundment



   91.079   Return of impounded animal to its owner



   91.080   Impoundment and kennel fees; disposition



   91.081   Mandatory sterilization of impounded animals



   91.082   Mandatory inoculation against rabies



   91.083   Disposition of owner-surrendered animals and impounded
animals not claimed by owner; adoption



   91.084   Use of owner-surrendered or impounded animal for research
prohibited



   91.085   Restrictions on return of certain animals



   91.086   Injured or diseased animals



   91.087   Capture, holding and maintenance and disposition of animals
by the Humane Society



Administration and Enforcement



   91.100   Animal Control Officer



   91.101   Issuance of citations



 



   91.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.001  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city has undertaken to establish this chapter in order to
protect the public health and safety of its residents and to promote the
general welfare of both the residents and any animal residing within the
city. Responsible animal ownership is encouraged and welcomed within the
city. All animal owners are encouraged to respect the rights of other
residents and their animals.



   (B)   Responsibility is placed upon all animal owners to properly
train and/or secure their animals in order to prevent them from causing
injuries and/or creating nuisances.



(1994 Code, § 91.01)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.002  INTERPRETATION.



   The requirements contained in this chapter are declared to be the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to
accomplish the purpose thereof.



(1994 Code, § 91.02)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Every living creature other than humans which may be affected
by rabies.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. An adult resident of the city appointed by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety to perform the duties set forth in
this chapter.



   CRIME-PREVENTION DOG. A dog which is formally trained and used
primarily for the protection of the owner or his or her property, including
guard or attack dogs.



   DANGEROUS DOG. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any dog that, without provocation, inflicts severe
injury on, or kills, a human being either on public or private property;



      (2)   Any dog, previously declared to be potentially dangerous
and required to be registered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
that continues the behavior described in the definition of potentially
dangerous dog, as evidenced by:



         (a)   The unprovoked infliction of less-than-severe
injury upon a human being while on either public or private property on more
than one occasion;



         (b)   The unprovoked killing or infliction of severe
injury on a domestic animal while at large on more than one occasion; or



         (c)   The unprovoked infliction of less-than-severe
injury on a human being or domestic animal while at large on more than two
occasions within a six-month period.



      (3)   Any dog declared to be DANGEROUS or like term by any
other jurisdiction pursuant to definitions and standards of DANGEROUS that
are substantially similar to those set forth in this chapter.



   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.



   FERAL CAT. A cat that:



      (1)   Is born in the wild or is an offspring owned of feral
cat and is not socialized;



      (2)   Is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is
no longer socialized; or



      (3)   Lives on a farm.



   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps
or harbors an animal, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied
by him or her. OWNER does not include a feral cat caretaker participating in
a trap, spay/neuter, return-and-release program.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society,
association or other legal entity, any public or private institution or any
other business unit.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any dog that without provocation inflicts
less-than-severe injury on any human being on either public or private
property;



      (2)   Any dog at large that without provocation kills or
inflicts severe injury on any other domestic animal; or



      (3)   Any dog at large that without provocation inflicts
less-than-severe injury on any other domestic animal on more than one
occasion within a six-month period.



   SERIOUS INJURY. Any injury which results in a broken bone, lacerations
severe enough to require multiple sutures, render cosmetic surgery necessary
or appropriate or death.



   SPAY or NEUTER. To alter surgically, chemically or by any other method
routinely utilized by a veterinarian, a dog or cat for the purpose of
rendering such incapable of reproduction.



   TETHER. Attaching an animal to a stationary object by means of a chain,
rope, cable or a similar restraint. TETHER shall not include the use of a
leash by an owner to walk an animal.



   VETERINARIAN. A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the
state.



(1994 Code, § 91.03)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



CARE AND TREATMENT



§ 91.015  HARBORING OR KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall own or keep, suffer or permit certain domesticated or
wild animals including swine, cattle, horses, mules or game birds within the
city, except as may be permitted by the provisions of Ch. 155 of this code of
ordinances, Zoning, or as otherwise may be permitted by special permit issued
by the city, or in conjunction with 4-H activities in conjunction with
Randolph County Fair activities.



(1994 Code, § 91.10)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.016  DUTY OF ANIMAL OWNERS.



    Each animal owner shall provide the following:



   (A)   Sufficient quantity of palatable food and water free of
contamination;



   (B)   Adequate shelter and protection from inclement weather and
sufficient shade;



   (C)   Veterinarian care when necessary;



   (D)   Adequate space in order to allow an animal to stand to its
full height, stretch, turn, lay down and make normal postural adjustments
comfortable; and



   (E)   Freedom to allow each animal to exercise and adequate space
for movement.



(1994 Code, § 91.11)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.017  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or
unjustifiably kill, wound, injure, torture, torment, tease, molest, bait,
overdrive, overwork, deprive of necessary sustenance or otherwise abuse,
abandon or otherwise subject any animal to conditions detrimental to its
health or general welfare.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, shelter or
harbor any animal under unsanitary or inhuman conditions or to fail to
provide proper food, water, shelter or reasonable clean quarters, or fail to
provide proper medical attention for sick, disease or injured animals.



   (C)   No person shall cause or permit any premeditated dog fight,
cockfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to throw or deposit poisoned
meat or any other poison or harmful substance with the intent to kill or
injure any animal.



(1994 Code, § 91.12)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.018  TETHERING.



   No dog shall be tethered, except under the following conditions.



   (A)   All dogs must be tethered by means of a properly fitting
collar or harness worn by the animal.



   (B)   Choke collars and pinch collars are strictly prohibited.



   (C)   No more than one dog may be tethered on each cable.



   (D)   No owner shall tether a dog under circumstances which endanger
its health and safety as follows:



      (1)   Tethering a dog for more than three hours in any 24-hour
period;



      (2)   Tethering a dog that does not allow access to sufficient
food, water, dry ground and appropriate shelter;



      (3)   Tethering a dog which does not allow it to defecate or
urinate in an area separate from the area from which it must eat, drink or
lay down; or



      (4)   Tethering a dog which causes injury, strangulation or
choking.



   (E)   No dangerous dog shall be tethered, except within a fully
enclosed area, but not less than six feet in height.



(1994 Code, § 91.13)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.019  DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE; NUISANCE.



   No animal owner shall suffer or permit it to disturb the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood or otherwise create a nuisance by barking or the
making of loud noise to the discomfort of neighbors or others in close
proximity where the animal is kept or harbored for more than one hour.



(1994 Code, § 91.14)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.020  ANIMAL AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   All dogs shall be kept under restraint either by leash, a
tethering device authorized by § 91.018 of this chapter or within an
enclosure.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the person to cause, suffer or allow
a dog owned or kept by such person to be at large within the city. Any dog
running at large within the city will be deemed to be a public nuisance and
impounded in the manner provided within this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 91.15)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.021  TRAPPING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in trapping for any game
animals or fowl within the city, except as otherwise authorized by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety or Animal Control Officer. This
provision shall not prohibit the humane trapping and neutering of feral cats.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to instruct, devise, place or
maintain any trap as herein defined upon, in or about any public place or
private place where another person or domesticated animal may reasonably be
on or about such place.



      (2)   A TRAP, as defined herein, shall be a pitfall, snare or
device that is mechanically operated which shuts suddenly with a spring
designed for the taking of game, other animals or fowl.



(1994 Code, § 91.16)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.022  VEHICLES CONTAINING ANIMALS, PARKING TIME LIMITED.



   No person shall permit any vehicle containing livestock or other
animals to stand or park in any place within the city for a period of time
longer than 30 minutes, except when necessary for the loading or unloading
thereof.



(1994 Code, § 91.17)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.023  HUNTING RESTRICTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or engage in killing any
animal within the city without the expressed written consent from the city.



(1994 Code, § 91.18)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.024  ANIMALS IN HEAT TO BE CONFINED IN BUILDING.



   All female dogs shall be confined by the owner or keeper thereof in a
suitable building, shed or other enclosure during such time that the animal
is in heat.



(1994 Code, § 91.19)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



LICENSING AND RABIES CONTROL



§ 91.035  REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Any owner of a animal over four months of age shall obtain a
license for each such animal as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   This provision shall not apply to the keeping of small caged
birds, aquatic or amphibian animals owned solely as pets.



(1994 Code, § 91.25)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.036  NUMBER OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to have more than four animals on
any one premises within the city; provided, however, that, this provision
shall not apply to the Humane Society, veterinary hospital or a feral cat
colony registered and in compliance with this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 91.26)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.037  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   Upon application, a license shall be issued to qualified animal owners
upon payment of fees as follows:



   (A)   For each male or female altered dog: $10;



   (B)   For each male or female altered cat: $10;



   (C)   For each unaltered male or female dog: $30;



   (D)   For each unaltered male or female cat: $30;



   (E)   For any animal of other species: $20;



   (F)   For any kennel or pet shop covering all animals kept during
the year: $100; and



   (G)   For any livery or riding stable covering all horses kept: $100.



(1994 Code, § 91.27)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 14-07, passed
7-28-2014)



§ 91.038  LICENSE YEAR.



   A license (if not revoked) shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance. A new license shall be obtained each year by every animal owner
upon payment of the applicable fee.



(1994 Code, § 91.28)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.039  LICENSE TAG.



   (A)   Upon issuance of a license as herein above set forth in this
chapter, the City Clerk shall issue to the animal owner a metallic or durable
plastic tag, stamped with an identifying number and with the year of
issuance. Such tag shall be designed that it may be conveniently fastened to
a collar or harness. The license tag shall be fastened to the collar or
harness by the animal owner and shall be worn at all times by the animal.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall maintain a record of identify numbers and
issued license tags as public record.



(1994 Code, § 91.29)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.040  INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.



   It shall be the duty of all animal owners to have all animals in the
custody of such person annually inoculated against rabies. No license shall
be issued under this chapter unless the animal owner exhibits a certificate
of a veterinarian showing compliance with the provisions of this section.



(1994 Code, § 91.30)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.041  QUARANTINE.



   Any animal which causes severe injury to a person shall be quarantined
for a period of ten days as ordered by the Animal Control Officer or the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety. During quarantine, the animal shall
be securely confined and refrain from any contact with any other animal. At
the discretion of the Animal Control Officer or the Commissioner of Public
Health and Safety, the quarantine may be on the premises of the owner. The
Animal Control Officer or the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety
requires other confinements, the owner shall surrender the animal for the
quarantine period to an animal shelter or shall, at the owner’s expense,
place the animal in a veterinary hospital.



(1994 Code, § 91.31)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; FERAL CATS



§ 91.055  REGISTRATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall register as potentially dangerous dogs:



      (1)   All dogs declared by the Animal Control Officers to be
potentially dangerous;



      (2)   All dogs residing within the city and declared by any
other jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or like term; and



      (3)   All crime-prevention dogs.



   (B)   Within ten days after any of the circumstances described in
division (A) above, the owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall register
with the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety by completing a form
containing the name and address of the owner, the breed, age, sex, color and
any other identifying marks of the dog, the location where the dog is to be
kept if not at the address of the owner and such other information that the
Commissioner may require. A registration fee shall be established by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



   (C)   Each dog registered pursuant thereto shall be assigned an
official registration number by the Commissioner. Such registration number
shall be inscribed on a metal tag which shall be attached to a collar,
harness, halter or other device of a style and color designated by the
Commissioner and shall be worn by the dog at all times.



   (D)   The Office of the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety
shall include the POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS designation on the licensing records
of the dog. The designation may be removed if the designation is reversed by
order of a court of competent jurisdiction.



(1994 Code, § 91.32)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.056  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS.



   A potentially dangerous dog while on the owner’s property shall, at
all times, be kept indoors or in a secure and locked enclosure approved by
the Animal Control Officer. A potentially dangerous dog shall be spayed or
neutered at the owner’s expense.



(1994 Code, § 91.33)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.057  CRIME-PREVENTION DOGS.



   A crime-prevention dog shall be subject to all conditions and
restrictions delineated above for potentially dangerous animals. A guard or
attack dog shall be permanently identified by means of tattoo or microchip.



(1994 Code, § 91.34)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.058  REMOVAL OF “POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS” DESIGNATION.



   If there are no additional violations consisting of the behavior
described within the definition of potentially dangerous animal within a
24-month period from the date of the designation thereof, the Animal Control
Officer, at his or her discretion, may remove the animal from the registry of
potentially dangerous animals at the owner’s request.



(1994 Code, § 91.35)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.059  DANGEROUS DOGS; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall bring into the city or keep within the city
any dog declared to be dangerous or like term by any jurisdiction.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly sell, offer for sale, breed, buy or
attempt to by any dangerous dog within the city.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall not issue a license to any animal owner
for any dog that has been declared dangerous or like term by any
jurisdiction. Any license inadvertently so issued shall be invalid upon the
discovery that the dog has been declared dangerous or like term, and said
license shall be revoked.



(1994 Code, § 91.36)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.060  DOG DECLARED TO BE DANGEROUS; NOTICE, SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any dog when suspected of being dangerous as defined by this
chapter shall be seized and impounded by the Animal Control Officer pursuant
to the terms and conditions provided herein.



   (B)   Any dog seized pursuant to this chapter shall be impounded
until a final disposition as to whether the dog is dangerous is made. The
Animal Control Officer shall take all reasonable action to determine the
identity of the impounded dog. If the owner can not be identified within five
days of the dog’s impoundment, unless earlier disposal is recommended by a
veterinarian, the Animal Control Officer may humanely destroy the dog in
accordance with this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   The owner of any seized and impounded dog suspected
to be dangerous shall be notified by the Animal Control Officer by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery of the owner’s right
to a hearing before the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety to determine
whether the dog is dangerous. This notice shall require that the owner return
within seven days of receiving such notice by certified mail or personal
delivery a signed statement indicating whether the owner wishes the hearing
to be conducted or, if not, that the owner waives his or her right to such
hearing and agrees to abide by the findings of the Animal Control Officer or
agrees to relinquish ownership of such dog, in which case the Animal Control
Officer shall dispose of the impounded dog in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.



      (2)   If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail,
return receipt requested, refuses to sign for the certified letter or does
not reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days
of receipt thereof, the Animal Control Officer shall be empowered to dispose
of the dog in accordance with the terms of this chapter.



   (D)   Within 21 days of the Animal Control Officer’s receipt of a
request for hearing pursuant to this section, a hearing shall be held by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety. If a hearing is not held within
that time frame, the dog shall be released to its owner and the charges made
pursuant to this section shall be dismissed, unless the delay is requested by
the owner and approved by the Commissioner.



   (E)   Upon an adverse determination by the Commissioner of Public
Health and Safety, the owner of any seized or impounded dog pursuant to this
section may appeal to the Mayor and City Council for relief at the next
regularly scheduled City Council Meeting. Upon final determination by the
Mayor and City Council that the finding of the dog to be dangerous is upheld,
the owner may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction
within 30 days of decision of the Mayor and City Council. No animal shall be
destroyed pending the appeal rights of the owner of such seized or impounded
animal. Upon expiration of the appeal rights of said owner, the Animal
Control Officer shall cause the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed at the
owner’s expense as soon as practicable.



   (F)   The owner of any animal brought into or kept within the city
that has been declared by another jurisdiction to be dangerous, or like term,
shall be issued a notice of violation directing the removal of the animal
from the city within ten days. The owner of the animal in question may appeal
such notice and directive within said ten-day period to the Commissioner of
Public Health and Safety. If, on appeal, a finding is made that an animal has
been declared dangerous or like term by another jurisdiction, the
Commissioner shall order that the animal be removed from the city within ten
days.



   (G)   If the owner of the animal in question fails to either remove
the animal or appeal the notice of violation or fails to remove the animal as
ordered by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, the animal shall
then be seized by the Animal Control Officer and humanely destroyed at the
owner’s expense.



(1994 Code, § 91.37)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.061  FERAL CATS; SEIZURE.



   (A)   The Animal Control Officer has the right to immediately seize
and remove any feral cat found within the city for the following reasons:



      (1)   Public heath and safety concerns, including rabies, as
identified by the Animal Control Officer or county’s Health Department; or



      (2)   Animals creating a public nuisance pursuant to § 91.020
of this chapter.



   (B)   The animal owner/caretaker shall be notified within 24 hours
of the removal of any feral cat.



   (C)   Any cost incurred by the city as a result of a seizure
pursuant this section shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/caretaker
of the feral cat, or its colony.



(1994 Code, § 91.38)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.062  MANAGING FERAL CAT POPULATIONS.



   (A)   Any person or organization wishing to act as a caretaker for
feral cats within the city must:



      (1)   Register the feral cat colony with the Animal Control
Officer or member of the Department of Public Health and Safety. Any person
or organization operating a feral cat colony in the city shall pay the annual
license fee for each feral cat assessed pursuant to § 91.061 of this chapter;



      (2)   Maintain the colony in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times;



      (3)   File with the Animal Control Officer or other person
charged with the enforcement of this chapter of the Department of Public
Health and Safety, an annual written status report of all colonies. Each
status report shall include the name, address and phone number of each
caretaker;



      (4)   Assure responsibility and arrangements for feeding the
cats or cat colony regularly throughout the year, including weekends,
holidays and vacation of the feral cat caretaker;



      (5)   Sterilize (neuter/spay) all adult cats registered within
the colony;



      (6)   Vaccinate all cats registered within the colony against
rabies and other infectious disease as mandated by law;



      (7)   Sterilize (neuter/spay) all kittens over eight weeks of
age and before 16 weeks of age;



      (8)   Make every attempt to remove kittens from the colony
before eight weeks of age for domestication and placement (adoption);



      (9)   Remove sick or injured cats from the colony for
immediate veterinary care or humane euthanasia;



      (10)   Ear-crop all cats with a single cut preferably on the
left ear, at least one inch from the outside tip of the auricle;



      (11)   Provide either a tattoo on the inside of the right ear
or a microchip implant that will aid in animal identification; and



      (12)   Maintain written proof of sterilization, vaccination,
tattoo or microchip implant and medical records for all cats associated with
the colony. Records must be maintained for all litters delivered within the
colony and adoptions of animals born at or housed within the colony. Records
must be provided to the Animal Control Officer upon request.



   (B)   Upon request, the city shall issue the feral cat caretaker
certification necessary to allow said caretaker to become eligible to have
all felines spayed, neutered and vaccinated at a reduced fee in accordance
with the Illinois Public Health and Safety Animal Population Control Act
codified at 510 ILCS 92/1 et seq.



(1994 Code, § 91.39)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS



§ 91.075  GROUNDS FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   (1)   An animal found at large and in violation of this
chapter shall be captured and impounded.



      (2)   This provision shall not apply to a feral cat colony
registered and in compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   An animal confined or abandoned on private property not
provided with a minimum food sustenance and space requirements set forth in
§ 91.016 of this chapter shall be impounded.



(1994 Code, § 91.50)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.076  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   (A)   Upon the impoundment of any animal, a reasonable attempt shall
be made to notify and inform the owner of the animal of the requirements for
regaining custody of the animal.



   (B)   Such attempt shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
the following:



      (1)   In the instance of an impounded dog or cat, contact with
the owner identified by the microchip tag or other permanent means of
identification, if any, worn by the dog or cat;



      (2)   In the instance of an impounded dog or cat not bearing a
permanent means of identification, contact with the veterinarian facility
listed on the animals vaccination tag, if available; and



      (3)   Cooperation and effort with other governmental or
private agencies including, but not limited to, the county’s Humane Society
or other humane and/or breed rescue organizations recognized by the
Department of Public Health and Safety.



(1994 Code, § 91.51)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.077  REPORT OF IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any person who confines an animal found by that person to be at large
within the city shall notify the Animal Control Officer, City Hall or other
person charged with the enforcement of this chapter of the Department of
Public Health and Safety within 48 hours thereafter.



(1994 Code, § 91.52)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.078  RETURN OF CAPTURED ANIMAL WITHOUT IMPOUNDMENT.



   When the owner of a captured animal is known, such animal need not be
impounded, but may be returned to the owner, if in the opinion of the Animal
Control Officer, the return will not present a danger to the public or
otherwise result in a violation of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 91.53)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.079  RETURN OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL TO ITS OWNER.



   (A)   An animal impounded under this chapter, if claimed by its
owner, shall be returned to its owner subject to the provisions set forth in
this chapter.



   (B)   The owner of an impounded animal may obtain the return of such
animal upon compliance with any applicable provisions the Animal Control
Officer may impose, and the payment of the appropriate impoundment and kennel
fees, and any other applicable fees and fines.



(1994 Code, § 91.54)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.080  IMPOUNDMENT AND KENNEL FEES; DISPOSITION.



   (A)   The impoundment and kennel fee for animals impounded under
this chapter shall be $30, plus $10 per day for each day of impoundment for
the firs and second offense, $60 plus $10 per day of impoundment for the
third offense and $90 plus $10 per day of impoundment thereafter.



   (B)   The impoundment and kennel fee shall be collected by and paid
to the City Clerk, who shall remit funds to the City Treasurer.



(1994 Code, § 91.55)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 14-07, passed
7-28-2014)



§ 91.081  MANDATORY STERILIZATION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   An animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this
chapter a second or subsequent time must be spayed or neutered. All costs of
sterilization shall be borne by the owner prior to return.



(1994 Code, § 91.56)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.082  MANDATORY INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.



   No animal impounded pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
returned to the owner without proof of inoculation against rabies being
submitted by the owner. Failure to provide proof of inoculation of rabies
shall subject the animal to inoculation for which all costs shall be the
responsibility of the animal owner prior to redemption.



(1994 Code, § 91.57)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.083  DISPOSITION OF OWNER-SURRENDERED ANIMALS AND IMPOUNDED ANIMALS
NOT CLAIMED BY OWNER; ADOPTION.



   (A)   (1)   An animal surrendered by its owner to the Animal
Control Officer and not reclaimed by its owner, adopted or rescued by a
humane or breed rescue organization, may be kept or otherwise humanely
disposed of, in the reasonable exercise of discretion of the Animal Control
Officer, but consistent with the provisions of the county’s Humane Society
regarding the capture, surrender, impoundment, adoption, sale and destruction
of animals.



      (2)   No owner-surrendered animal shall be humanely disposed
of, while there is sufficient room in the kennel to reasonably house such
animal at the animal care and control shelter; provided, however, that, empty
spaces for animals shall exist for the purposes of moving animals during
cleaning.



   (B)   (1)   An animal impounded under this section which is not
claimed by its owner shall be confined by the Department of Public Health and
Safety in a humane manner for a period after capture of not less than four
days.



      (2)   An animal not claimed within the four-day impoundment
period may be kept or otherwise humanely disposed of, in the reasonable
exercise of discretion of the Animal Control Officer, but consistent with the
provisions of the county’s Humane Society regarding the capture, surrender,
impoundment, adoption, sale and destruction of animals.



      (3)   Even after the expiration of the four-day impoundment
period, no animal shall be humanely disposed of, while there is sufficient
room in the kennel to reasonably house such animal at the animal care and
control shelter; provided, however, that, empty spaces for animals shall
exist for the purposes of moving animals during cleaning.



   (C)   Following the four-day impoundment period, a person other than
the animal’s owner or a member of the owner’s family who wishes to adopt
an impounded animal which has not been claimed, and which is otherwise
available for adoption, may adopt the animal. It is declared that the
adoption of as many animals as possible is the priority of the Department of
Public Health and Safety. Such person wishing to adopt an animal from the
animal control shelter shall pay to the city an adoption fee of $50 to cover
the enforcement authorities expenses, including all expenses of vaccinations,
identification and impoundment.



   (D)   A person who wishes to adopt an animal that has been impounded
under this chapter or is otherwise available for adoption, that has not been
spayed or neutered, must have the animal sterilized at that person’s
expense prior to the adoption.



(1994 Code, § 91.58)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.084  USE OF OWNER-SURRENDERED OR IMPOUNDED ANIMAL FOR RESEARCH
PROHIBITED.



   No animal surrendered by its owner or impounded under this chapter
shall be utilized or disposed of for the purpose of research or
experimentation by use of the animal.



(1994 Code, § 91.59)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.085  RESTRICTIONS ON RETURN OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an animal
which has been impounded pursuant to this chapter on two or more prior
occasions shall be returned to its owner only if the Animal Control Officer,
in his or her discretion, determines that such return shall not result in
further or ongoing violations of this chapter.



   (B)   If such determination cannot be made, the Animal Control
Officer may, in his or her discretion, order to dispose of the animal
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 91.60)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.086  INJURED OR DISEASED ANIMALS.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, an
injured or diseased animal need not be retained four days, but may be
disposed of at any time in accordance with the state’s Humane Euthanasia in
Animal Shelters Act, being 510 ILCS 72/1 et seq., when in the reasonable
discretion of the Animal Control Officer, it would be more humane and
reasonable to do so, rather than provide veterinary care or further
impoundment.



(1994 Code, § 91.61)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.087  CAPTURE, HOLDING AND MAINTENANCE AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS BY
THE HUMANE SOCIETY.



   (A)   The county’s Humane Society, by its duly authorized agents,
employees or other personnel, shall have the authority to proceed to the
scene or location of a diseased, sick or injured animal which is at large
within the city after being requested to do so by any member of the general
public for the purpose of capturing and transporting such animal to its duly
established humane shelter, and to hold and properly maintain the animal
until it is either claimed by its owner, or in the discretion of the Humane
Society, otherwise properly disposed of. The Humane Society may also receive
an animal brought to its shelter by members of the general public or proper
governmental personnel and either keep, or in the discretion of the Humane
Society, otherwise humanely dispose of such animal.



   (B)   Upon the capture of any diseased, sick or injured animal or
taking of an animal brought to its shelter by a person or any local
governmental personnel, the Humane Society personnel shall make a reasonable
attempt to notify and inform the owner of the animal of the requirements and
procedures for claiming ownership and regaining custody thereof.



   (C)   (1)   When the owner of a captured or held animal is
discovered or known, the animal shall be returned to the owner upon the
payment of any applicable fees or upon the compliance with all other
applicable procedures of the Humane Society.



      (2)   If the owner does not claim an animal or desires not to
claim it, the Humane Society, within its discretion, may return the animal to
any person desiring to assume ownership, custody or care thereof in
conformance with the established requirements of the Humane Society provided
that such animal has been inoculated against rabies.



   (D)   Upon the capture of any diseased, sick or injured animal or
the taking of an animal brought to its shelter by any person or any local
governmental personnel, the Humane Society shall, subject to the provisions
of this hereof, confine the animal in a humane manner for a period of not
less than four days. Thereafter, the Humane Society, in its discretion, may
keep, release or otherwise humanely dispose of the animal consistent with the
established procedures of the Humane Society as may be amended from time to
time.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the section to the contrary,
diseased or injured animals need not be retained four days, but may be
humanely disposed of at any time in accordance with the Humane Euthanasia in
Animal Shelters Act, 510 ILCS 72/1 et seq., if, in the discretion of the
proper Humane Society personnel or authorized veterinarian, such disposition
in necessary and proper for such animals.



   (F)   Nothing in this section requires the Humane Society to assume
any of the impoundment and disposition functions of the city, the Department
of Public Health and Safety or the Animal Control Officer.



   (G)   Nothing in this section shall inhibit the Department of Public
Health and Safety or the Animal Control Officer in any way from carrying out
its functions in accordance with applicable law and provisions and
regulations set forth to regulate the capture, impoundment, sale and
destruction of animals in accordance with this chapter.



   (H)   In accordance with the Humane Euthanasia in Animal Shelters
Act, 510 ILCS 72/1 et seq., all animals must be scanned for a microchip prior
to euthanasia.



(1994 Code, § 91.62)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 91.100  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)   The Animal Control Officer shall have police powers in the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and no person shall interfere
with, hinder, molest or abuse the Animal Control Officer in the exercise of
such powers.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to
investigate any complaint concerning the harboring or keeping of any animal
in the city, to capture and impound in a place furnished by the City Council
every animal found at large in violation of this chapter and every dog or cat
without a metallic or durable plastic tag issued as a city license for the
current year.



(1994 Code, § 91.63)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.101  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.



   (A)   The Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to issue
citations or complaints for the violation of any provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Police officers are authorized to arrest for violations of the
Humane Care for Animals Act, being 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq., violations of the
dangerous and vicious dog provisions under the state’s Animal Control Act,
510 ILCS 5/1 et seq., and sexual contact with an animal (720 ILCS 5/12-35),
and violations of the Humane Euthanasia in Animal Shelters Act, 510 ILCS 72/1
et seq..



(1994 Code, § 91.64)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 91.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not less than $75, nor
more than $750; provided, however, that, any person found in violation of
§§ 91.017, 91.021, 91.023, 91.056, 91.059 or 91.060 of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $250, nor more than $750. In addition to the foregoing
penalties, any person who has violated this section shall be responsible for
the payment of all expenses incurred by the city necessitated by the
enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, shelter, food and
veterinary care.



(1994 Code, § 91.99)  (Ord. 07-07, passed 11-13-2007)



CHAPTER 92:  CEMETERIES



Section



General Provisions



   92.001   Establishment of a cemetery or burial of persons restricted



City Cemeteries



   92.015   Office of Sexton created; duties



   92.016   Damaging property prohibited



   92.017   Permission required to enter cemeteries; use of gates



   92.018   Conduct of persons inside cemetery; grounds for expulsion



   92.019   Burial, removal and grave-opening permit required



   92.020   Enforcement of provisions



Lots



   92.035   Definition



   92.036   Addition to Caledonia Cemetery



   92.037   Costs of lots and perpetual upkeep



   92.038   Persons to be buried in lot to be designated at time of
purchase; right to alter designation



   92.039   Disposition of funds from lot sales



   92.040   Scope of deed; form; approval



   92.041   Restrictions on alienation of lots; approval required



   92.042   Testamentary or written disposition of control of lots



   92.043   Order of succession to lots where no device or written
directions made



   92.044   Transfer fee



   92.045   Authority of Board of Trustees to reserve lots



Interments



   92.060   Permit required; application; fee



   92.061   Application fee may be applied to cost of opening grave



   92.062   Payment of costs of opening grave prerequisite to grave
opening; city employee to open graves



   92.063   Procedure upon granting of permit



   92.064   Specifications for grave openings and vaults



   92.065   Closing of grave; restrictions on decorations



   92.066   Proof of burial required; forms; content



   92.067   Hours of funeral services in city cemeteries



Markers and Monuments



   92.080   Erection of coping, fences or cornerstones prohibited;
exception



   92.081   Permit required for monument, headstone; application;
approval of location



   92.082   Fees



   92.083   Standards for monuments and headstones



Administration and Enforcement



   92.095   Cemetery Board of Trustees



   92.096   City Clerk and City Treasurer to be ex-officio members of
Board



   92.097   Board of Trustees to conform to law



   92.098   Calling meetings of Board of Trustees



   92.099   Duties of President of Board; execution of deeds



   92.100   Adoption of rules and regulations; quorum



   92.101   Inspectors; appointment and duties



   92.102   Protection of sanctity of funeral and memorial services



 



   92.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.001  ESTABLISHMENT OF A CEMETERY OR BURIAL OF PERSONS RESTRICTED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to establish a cemetery or to bury any person within the city
limits or within one mile thereof.



(1994 Code, § 92.01)  Penalty, see § 92.999



CITY CEMETERIES



§ 92.015  OFFICE OF SEXTON CREATED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Office of Sexton of the city
cemeteries, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
City Council.



   (B)   The Sexton shall perform the duties as may be prescribed by
the Mayor and the City Council and shall receive the compensation as the
Council may fix from time to time by resolution.



(1994 Code, § 92.10)



§ 92.016  DAMAGING PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   Any person who shall mutilate, deface or otherwise injure any
tombstone, monument, vault, vase, enclosure, furniture, ornament, building or
structure of any description or any tree, shrub, flower, wild or cultivated
in a city cemetery or who, without permission from the Board of Trustees,
shall erect, build, plant, cut or remove any tombstone, monument, vault,
vase, enclosure, furniture, ornament, tree, plant, shrub, building or other
structure or interfere with any grave in a city cemetery, or operate any
vehicle over or across any lot in a city cemetery, shall be guilty of an
offense.



(1994 Code, § 92.11)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.017  PERMISSION REQUIRED TO ENTER CEMETERIES; USE OF GATES.



   No person shall enter the city cemeteries at any time without
permission and persons are hereby prohibited from entering or leaving the
grounds of the city cemeteries, except through the gates provided by the city
for that purpose.



(1994 Code, § 92.12)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.018  CONDUCT OF PERSONS INSIDE CEMETERY; GROUNDS FOR EXPULSION.



   The following regulations shall apply to all persons inside the city
cemeteries.



   (A)   No person shall lie down or sit upon any grave or walk upon
any grave, participate in any loud or angry discussion or use any profane
language within the city cemeteries.



   (B)   Automobiles may be admitted to the cemeteries by the Sexton
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



   (C)   All automobiles entering in or upon the cemetery grounds shall
stop if signaled by the Sexton and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the cemeteries, and the owner and the driver shall be held
liable for any damage committed.



   (D)   The speed limit shall be 20 mph; no mufflers shall be opened
and no horn or bell sounded within the cemeteries. When an automobile stops,
the engine must stop. No automobile shall pass a funeral going in the same
direction, or when an interment is in progress. No automobile shall turn or
attempt to turn on the driveways.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees may exclude any automobile from the
cemeteries for a violation of the rules and regulations or for other
sufficient cause.



   (F)   The roads of the cemeteries shall not be used as near or
short-cuts from one section of the surrounding territory to another.



   (G)   No person shall be in the cemetery grounds between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the next day.



(1994 Code, § 92.13)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.019  BURIAL, REMOVAL AND GRAVE-OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall inter, bury or remove or re-inter a body in
the city cemeteries without having first obtained a burial or removal permit
as prescribed by and furnished by the state’s Department of Public Health
and a permit to open a grave as prescribed by and furnished by the Board of
Trustees of the city cemeteries.



   (B)   Removal permits from other states or jurisdictions must be
presented to the local registrar for a burial permit before the burial or
interment of a body is made in any city cemetery.



(1994 Code, § 92.14)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 22, passed
8-14-1944)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.020  ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   The Sexton, and all persons appointed and qualified as police officers
of the city, shall have full authority to enforce this chapter and to arrest
any person or persons violating any provisions thereof.



(1994 Code, § 92.15)



LOTS



§ 92.035  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERPETUAL UPKEEP. This term, in regard to city cemetery lots, shall be
defined as follows:



      (1)   To keep the graves on the lot or lots properly filled
and graded;



      (2)   To sow the lot or lots with lawn grass, which shall be
attended, cut and kept free of weeds, vines and trash;



      (3)   To keep the markers or headstones on the lot or lots in
proper place, in alignment and on proper foundations; and



      (4)   The usual and customary upkeep of cemetery lots.



(1994 Code, § 92.25)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.036  ADDITION TO CALEDONIA CEMETERY.



   (A)   The new addition of Caledonia Cemetery is hereby designated to
be that portion of Caledonia Cemetery lying south and southwest of Roselawn
Addition to the old Caledonia Cemetery, which new addition to the Caledonia
Cemetery was purchased by the city in 1988 and is described of Record in
Volume 102 of Miscellaneous Deed Records at Pages 205 and 206 of the Records
of Randolph County, Illinois.



   (B)   The new addition of Caledonia Cemetery is hereby designated by
Sections “A”, “B”, “C” and “D”, respectively.



   (C)   A map of the new addition to Caledonia Cemetery is on file in
the office of the City Clerk, copies of which may be furnished upon request.



(1994 Code, § 92.26)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 98-04, passed
3-27-1998)



§ 92.037  COSTS OF LOTS AND PERPETUAL UPKEEP.



   A lot or portion thereof or burial space therein, together with the
cost of perpetual upkeep, shall be sold in the Caledonia Cemetery for the
following prices:



   (A)   Single burial space:



      (1)   Section A: $300;



      (2)   Section B: $400 (minimum purchase of two spaces
required);



      (3)   Section C: $400 (minimum purchase of two spaces
required);



      (4)   Section D: $600 (minimum purchase of two spaces
required);



      (5)   Rosedale Section: $200;



      (6)   Roselawn Section: $200;



      (7)   Ranges Section: $200; and



      (8)   Evergreen Section: $200.



   (B)   One-fourth lot, consisting of burial spaces for three:



      (1)   Section A: $750;



      (2)   Section B: $1,000;



      (3)   Section C: $1,000; and



      (4)   Section D: $1,500.



   (C)   One-half lot, consisting of burial spaces for six:



      (1)   Section A: $1,500;



      (2)   Section B: $2,000;



      (3)   Section C: $2,000; and



      (4)   Section D: $3,000.



   (D)   One lot, consisting of burial spaces for 12:



      (1)   Section A: $3,000;



      (2)   Section B: $4,000;



      (3)   Section C: $4,000; and



      (4)   Section D: $6,000.



(1994 Code, § 92.27)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 352, passed
10-15-1985; Ord. 98-04, passed 3-27-1998; Ord. 2002-04-1, passed 5-13-2002;
Ord. 08-02, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 10-04, passed 6-14-2010)



§ 92.038  PERSONS TO BE BURIED IN LOT TO BE DESIGNATED AT TIME OF PURCHASE;
RIGHT TO ALTER DESIGNATION.



   (A)   At the time of the purchase of any city cemetery lot or any
part thereof, the purchaser shall specify in writing and designate the
persons or person to be buried therein.



   (B)   Any purchaser of any lot or part thereof may, in writing, at
any time during his or her lifetime change the person or persons to be buried
in the burial space or spaces.



(1994 Code, § 92.28)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.039  DISPOSITION OF FUNDS FROM LOT SALES.



   (A)   All sums of money received from the sale of the lots in the
new addition to Caledonia Cemetery shall be paid to the treasury of the
Cemetery Board of Managers.



   (B)   The Cemetery Board of Managers may set apart such portion of
said lot sales proceeds as they see fit and shall hold such sums set aside in
trust, the income therefrom to be used for the perpetual upkeep of the lots
sold, as far as the proceeds of this trust will do so.



   (C)   The funds are to be invested by the Cemetery Board of Managers
as provided in this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 92.29)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 341, passed
7-23-1984; Ord. 2002-05, passed 5-13-2002)



§ 92.040  SCOPE OF DEED; FORM; APPROVAL.



   (A)   All deeds or other instruments of transfer made by the city to
any parcel, tract, lots, lot or burial space, shall be designated as a
“deed of perpetual right of burial” and the deeds shall convey only the
perpetual right of burial and shall contain a provision as to perpetual care,
which shall be in substantially the following form:



      “And the City of Sparta hereby covenants and agrees, on its
part, to maintain and keep in good order and condition, for all time to come,
said burial lot or lots.”



   (B)   All deeds or contracts for cemetery lots shall be on forms
approved by the Cemetery Board of Trustees.



(1994 Code, § 92.30)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.041  RESTRICTIONS ON ALIENATION OF LOTS; APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   No tract, lot or any part thereof in the city cemetery may be
sold for resale or for any speculative purposes whatsoever.



   (B)   The transfer of any tract, lot or any part thereof may be made
only with the consent of the Board of Trustees at a regular or special called
meeting of the Board of Trustees.



(1994 Code, § 92.31)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.042  TESTAMENTARY OR WRITTEN DISPOSITION OF CONTROL OF LOTS.



   (A)   An owner of a city cemetery lot or burial rights shall not
sell or dispose of the places of burial, except with the consent of the
Cemetery Board of Trustees, but the owner may, by will or by writing directed
to the Cemetery Board of Trustees, executed by the owner and attested by two
witnesses, determine who shall control the right of burial after the
owner’s death, in the event the owner has failed to so specify the rights
at the time of the purchase of the lot.



   (B)   A mere residuary devise shall not be construed as including
any interest in or control of any lot in the city-owned cemeteries.



(1994 Code, § 92.32)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.043  ORDER OF SUCCESSION TO LOTS WHERE NO DEVICE OR WRITTEN DIRECTIONS
MADE.



   In the absence of a specific devise or directions to the Board of
Trustees specifying the person in whom control of a cemetery lot has been
vested by the purchaser, the right of burial in any of the lots in the
city-owned cemeteries shall go and descend to the lineal descendants of the
original owner thereof. In case there shall be no lineal descendants of the
original owner, his or her heirs at law, in the order of their deaths shall
have the right of burial in the lot. The determination and decision as to any
and all rights of burial and the order thereof by the Board of Trustees shall
be final and conducive.



(1994 Code, § 92.33)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.044  TRANSFER FEE.



   All transfers of ownership in city cemetery lots shall be subject to a
charge of $10, which must be paid to the Clerk of the Cemetery Board of
Trustees when the transfer is made.



(1994 Code, § 92.34)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.045  AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES TO RESERVE LOTS.



   The Cemetery Board of Trustees shall have the power and authority to
reserve perpetually any tract, parcel, lots, lot or any part thereof, for
landscaping purposes.



(1994 Code, § 92.35)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



INTERMENTS



§ 92.060  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.



   No grave shall be opened, nor shall a body be interred, disinterred or
re-interred, in a city cemetery unless an application in writing shall first
have been made to the Clerk of the Board of Trustees and a permit is issued
by him or her for the interment, disinterment or re-interment. The fee for
filing the application for the permit required by this section shall be $10.



(1994 Code, § 92.45)  (Ord. 110, passed 10-31-1960)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.061  APPLICATION FEE MAY BE APPLIED TO COST OF OPENING GRAVE.



   In the event that the application for the permit required by this
subchapter is granted, the amount paid to the Clerk of the Board of Trustees
as a fee for the filing of the application shall be credited upon the sum to
be paid to the Clerk to cover the cost of opening the grave.



(1994 Code, § 92.46)  (Ord. 110, passed 10-31-1960; Ord. 176, passed
1-8-1968)



§ 92.062  PAYMENT OF COSTS OF OPENING GRAVE PREREQUISITE TO GRAVE OPENING;
CITY EMPLOYEE TO OPEN GRAVES.



   No city cemetery grave shall be opened until a fee, in the sum of $475
for the opening of said grave, has been paid to the Clerk of the Board of
Trustees. No grave shall be opened, except by an employee of the city under
the direct supervision of the caretaker of the cemetery.



(1994 Code, § 92.47)  (Ord. 110, passed 10-31-1960; Ord. 10-05, passed
6-14-2010)



§ 92.063  PROCEDURE UPON GRANTING OF PERMIT.



   Upon the issuance of a permit required under § 92.061 of this chapter,
and upon the payment of the fee as set forth in § 92.062 of this chapter,
the Clerk shall forthwith notify the caretaker of the cemetery to open the
grave for which the permit has been issued and the caretaker of the cemetery
shall cause said grave to be opened. Following the interment, re-interment or
removal of the body, if the body is not returned to the grave, the caretaker
shall cause the grave to be filled and the lot to be restored to its original
condition.



(1994 Code, § 92.48)  (Ord. 110, passed 10-31-1960; Ord. 369, passed
4-11-1988; Ord. 388, passed 5-14-1990; Ord. 94-006, passed 6-13-1994; Ord.
2002-07, passed 5-13-2002; Ord. 08-02, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 10-05, passed
6-14-2010)



§ 92.064  SPECIFICATIONS FOR GRAVE OPENINGS AND VAULTS.



   (A)   All grave openings for burials in the city cemetery shall be
at least five feet deep, except infant burials. In infant burials, the Board
of Trustees or its duly authorized agent may determine burial at whatever
depth may be necessary, but in no event shall any grave opening be less than
four feet deep.



   (B)   The head end of the grave or burial openings must be two feet
from the west lot line of the burial lot of which the burial space is a part.



   (C)   No wooden boxes for vaults shall be used for interments in the
city cemetery known and designated as Caledonia Cemetery.



(1994 Code, § 92.49)  (Ord. 110, passed 10-31-1960; Ord. 25, passed
5-21-1945; Ord. 243, passed 2-5-1973)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.065  CLOSING OF GRAVE; RESTRICTIONS ON DECORATIONS.



   (A)   After burial in a city cemetery, the lot shall be restored to
the original surface level.



   (B)   No grave mounds or ridges shall be permitted on any burial
lot. No person shall plant any tree, bush, shrub or flower upon any grave
lot, nor shall any person place or cause to be placed anything whatsoever
upon the lot which may interfere with care of the lot in any way, except as
provided in this code or other ordinance of the city.



(1994 Code, § 92.50)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 25, passed
5-21-1945)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.066  PROOF OF BURIAL REQUIRED; FORMS; CONTENT.



   (A)   Within 24 hours after an interment, burial or removal of a
body is made by any undertaker or other person, the undertaker or other
person must file a certificate with the Clerk of the Board of Trustees
showing the disposition of the body, the exact location of the interment or
removal, the lot number and the grave number and other information as may be
required.



   (B)   Proper forms for the certificate required by this section
shall be furnished by the city and may be obtained at the office of the City
Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 92.51)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.067  HOURS OF FUNERAL SERVICES IN CITY CEMETERIES.



   All funeral services for interments of bodies in the city cemeteries
shall commence one hour before sunset or the hour of 4:00 p.m., whichever
occurs first.



(1994 Code, § 92.52)  (Ord. 243, passed 2-5-1973)



MARKERS AND MONUMENTS



§ 92.080  ERECTION OF COPING, FENCES OR CORNERSTONES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful to erect any coping, fences, linemarkers or
cornerstones on any grave lot or burial spaces in the city cemetery, except
cornerstones furnished by the city.



(1994 Code, § 92.65)  (Ord. 25, passed 5-21-1945)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.081  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR MONUMENT, HEADSTONE; APPLICATION; APPROVAL OF
LOCATION.



   (A)   (1)   No monument, headstone or marker of any kind shall be
placed by any person on any tract, lot, part of a lot or burial space,
without first having secured a permit therefor.



      (2)   Application for a permit to erect a monument, headstone
or a marker shall be made in writing to the Clerk of the Board of Trustees on
forms to be furnished by the city.



   (B)   No permit required by this section shall be granted until the
site for its location has been approved by the Inspector for the Board of
Trustees.



(1994 Code, § 92.66)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.082  FEES.



   The following fees shall be collected by the Clerk of the Board of
Trustees for the erection, location and inspection of monuments and
headstones:



   (A)   For designating the location of the monument and inspecting
the erection of the monument and foundation materials therefor: $25; and



   (B)   For designating the location and inspecting of the placement
of small markers, headstones or plaques and for inspecting the foundation
materials: $25.



(1994 Code, § 92.67)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 2002-06, passed
5-13-2002; Ord. 10-06, passed 6-14-2010)



§ 92.083  STANDARDS FOR MONUMENTS AND HEADSTONES.



   Monuments and headstones erected in the city cemetery shall comply with
the following standards and specifications.



   (A)   Monuments and monument bases shall not exceed an overall
height of 48 inches and no monument shall be erected except on full lots of
12 burial spaces and in no event shall more than one monument be placed on
any one full lot of 12 burial spaces.



   (B)   Monuments shall be erected in the center of the lot and the
monument shall be erected parallel with the east line of the lot and shall
not exceed four feet in width.



   (C)   On fraction lots of less than 12 burial spaces, a headstone,
marker or plaque may be erected on a space provided at the head of each
grave. All markers or plaques shall be placed flush with ground level and on
a foundation of the same width and length. Raised headstones shall be not
less than 22 inches in height, including the base, and shall not exceed 30
inches in height, including the base. The base of the headstone shall not
exceed 16 inches in width and eight inches in thickness. Raised headstones
may be erected upon the full lots of 12 burial spaces if no monument is
placed in the center of the lot; if a monument is erected in the center of
the lot, all headstones, markers or plaques shall be placed flush with the
ground level on the surface of the burial lot.



   (D)   Headstones, markers or plaques shall be located at the west
side of each burial space in the lot and shall be erected parallel with the
west lot line of the lot. Foundations for headstones, markers or plaques
shall extend not more than two feet inside of the west lot line. The
headstones, markers or plaques shall be placed on foundations five feet deep.
All foundations for monuments or raised headstones shall be placed flush with
the grave level on the surface of the burial lot and shall be eight inches
wider and eight inches longer than the base of the monument or headstone and
the base of the monument or raised headstone shall be centered on the
foundation. In no event shall a concrete foundation, base or plate extend
above the surface of the burial lot.



(1994 Code, § 92.68)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942; Ord. 40, passed 2-16-1948)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 92.095  CEMETERY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Cemetery Board of Trustees which
shall have control, supervision and direction of the Caledonia Cemetery and
the Old Bethel Cemetery of the city, subject to the direction or approval of
the City Council.



   (B)   The Cemetery Board of Trustees shall consist of the Mayor, who
shall be ex-officio President of the Board, and six other members, at least
one of whom shall be a representative from either the Veteran of Foreign Wars
or the American Legion organizations. All members shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 92.80)  (Ord. 09-07, passed 11-9-2009; Ord. 09-08, passed
12-14-2009)



§ 92.096  CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER TO BE EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS OF BOARD.



   The City Clerk shall be ex-officio Clerk of the Cemetery Board of
Trustees and the City Treasurer shall be ex-officio Treasurer of the Board,
neither of whom shall receive any compensation as members of the Board.



(1994 Code, § 92.81)



§ 92.097  BOARD OF TRUSTEES TO CONFORM TO LAW.



   The provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city
governing the city cemeteries shall control the Cemetery Board of Trustees in
all its actions.



(1994 Code, § 92.82)



§ 92.098  CALLING MEETINGS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The Cemetery Board of Trustees shall meet at the call of the President
or of a majority of the members of the Board.



(1994 Code, § 92.83)



§ 92.099  DUTIES OF PRESIDENT OF BOARD; EXECUTION OF DEEDS.



   The President of the Cemetery Board of Trustees shall preside at the
meetings of the Board and shall sign all deeds for the conveyance of lots of
city cemeteries as Mayor of the city. The Clerk shall attest all deeds and
affix the corporate seal of the city.



(1994 Code, § 92.84)



§ 92.100  ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS; QUORUM.



   (A)   All rules and regulations made after 12-7-1942, by the Board
of Trustees of the city cemeteries shall be approved by a majority of the
Board of those present at any regular or special called meeting of the Board.



   (B)   At any regular or called meeting of the Board, the President
of the Board and any two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.



(1994 Code, § 92.85)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.101  INSPECTORS; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Trustees shall appoint an inspector or inspectors, whose
duties shall be to inspect all grave openings before any burials are made
therein, to determine whether or not the burial is being made on the proper
lot and burial space and to determine whether or not the grave opening
satisfies the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the city.



(1994 Code, § 92.86)  (Ord. 19, passed 12-7-1942)



§ 92.102  PROTECTION OF SANCTITY OF FUNERAL AND MEMORIAL SERVICES.



   No person shall commit one or more of the following acts within the
city limits or within any area maintained or controlled by the city with
respect to a funeral or memorial service:



   (A)   Engage in any loud protest of signing, chanting, whistling or
yelling with or without noise amplification including, but not limited to,
bullhorns, auto horns and microphones within 300 feet of any entrance of a
facility being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time during the
period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or memorial service is
scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral or memorial
service terminates;



   (B)   Display any visual images that convey fighting words, actual
or veiled threats against any other person within 300 feet of any entrance of
a facility being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time during
the period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or memorial service is
scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral or memorial
service terminates;



   (C)   Block access to any facility being used for a funeral or
memorial service during the period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or
memorial service is scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after the
funeral or memorial service terminates; or



   (D)   Engage in a directed protest march or picket at any public
location within 300 feet of any entrance of a facility being used for a
funeral or memorial service at any time during the period starting 30 minutes
before any funeral or memorial service is scheduled to begin and ending 30
minutes after the funeral or memorial service terminates.



(1994 Code, § 92.87)  (Ord. 06-01, passed 3-13-2006)  Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person found in violation of § 92.102 of this chapter
shall be fined not more than $750 for each violation.



(1994 Code, § 92.87)  (Ord. 06-01, passed 3-13-2006)



CHAPTER 93:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Declaration of emergency by Mayor



   93.03   Imposition of curfew



   93.04   Issuance of additional orders



   93.05   Duration of proclamation of emergency; reproclamation of
emergency



   93.06   Notice of proclamation of emergency



   93.07   Preservation of powers of Police and Fire Department;
provisions declared cumulative



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.



      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence, disturbing the public peace or any threat to use
force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by two or more persons
acting together and without authority of law; or



      (2)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
corporate limits of the city, or one-half mile thereof, resulting in the
death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent
that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.



   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, or
one-half mile thereof, excepting officials of any governmental unit and
persons officially designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency.



(1994 Code, § 93.01)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.02  DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY BY MAYOR.



   Whenever an emergency as defined in § 93.01 of this chapter exists,
the Mayor shall declare the existence by means of a written declaration
setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.



(1994 Code, § 93.02)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.03  IMPOSITION OF CURFEW.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may
order a general curfew applicable to the geographical areas within one-half
mile of the corporate limits of the city and to the city as a whole, as he or
she deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as
he or she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.



(1994 Code, § 93.03)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.04  ISSUANCE OF ADDITIONAL ORDERS.



   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders applicable to the city and one-half mile area:



   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;



   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by
any wholesaler or retailer;



   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing
or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
and/or



   (E)   Issue other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



(1994 Code, § 93.04)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.05  DURATION OF PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY; REPROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.



   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of
48 hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating
that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to
reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour
period during the time the civil emergency exists.



(1994 Code, § 93.05)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.06  NOTICE OF PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.



   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police
shall notify the news media situated within the city and shall cause three
copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at the following places within the city: the City Hall; the police
station; and the post office.



(1994 Code, § 93.06)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.07  PRESERVATION OF POWERS OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT; PROVISIONS
DECLARED CUMULATIVE.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impair the
powers contained in this code, giving powers to the Police and Fire
Departments, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in
effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.



(1994 Code, § 93.07)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or executive order
issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the city and
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.



(1994 Code, § 93.99)  (Ord. 210, passed 8-3-1970)



CHAPTER 94:  FAIR HOUSING POLICY



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Purpose



   94.02   Jurisdiction



   94.03   Interpretation



   94.04   Definitions



   94.05   Construction of terms



   94.06   Effect on other rights



   94.07   Disclaimer of liability



Prohibitions Against Discriminatory Housing Practices



   94.20   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   94.21   Discrimination in the incidents of sale



   94.22   Discriminatory advertising of housing



   94.23   Misrepresentation of availability of housing



   94.24   Blockbusting prohibited



   94.25   Steering prohibited



   94.26   Discrimination in financing housing



   94.27   Membership in real estate organizations



   94.28   Interference with others’ rights



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to:



   (A)   Prohibit discrimination based on race, color, creed, ancestry,
national origin or physical or mental handicap in the marketing, disposition
and financing of housing; and



   (B)   Establish procedures for the fair and efficient administration
and enforcement of such regulations.



(1994 Code, § 94.01)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 94.02  JURISDICTION.



   This chapter shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the
city.



(1994 Code, § 94.02)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 94.03  INTERPRETATION.



   Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally to further
the fair housing policy and purpose of this chapter and every requirement
imposed herein shall be deemed minimal.



(1994 Code, § 94.03)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 94.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMISSION. The Human Relations Commission of the city (or any other
agency designated by the City Council to administer this chapter).



   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof containing one or more
dwelling units, or any parcel of land offered for sale or lease for the
construction or placement of such building.



   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by
one family.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any bank, savings and loan association,
insurance company or any other person or firm whose business consists, in
whole or in part, of making or guaranteeing loans.



   HOUSING. Synonym for DWELLING.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, organization or corporate
body acting in any capacity.



   RENT. To lease, sublease, let or otherwise grant or receive for
consideration the right to occupy any dwelling not owned by the occupant.



(1994 Code, § 94.04)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 94.05  CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS.



   In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter,
the following rules shall be observed.



   (A)   All time periods expressed in days shall be construed as
calendar days, not working days.



   (B)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all
divisions within that section; but a reference to a particular division
designates only that division.



   (C)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of
specific terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly
limited.



(1994 Code, § 94.05)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 94.06  EFFECT ON OTHER RIGHTS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any person from exercising any
right or seeking any remedy to which he or she might otherwise be entitled.



(1994 Code, § 94.06)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 94.07  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, commission member, agent or employee of the city shall render
himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter. Any suit brought against
any official, commission member, agent or employee of the municipality, as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties
under this chapter, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final
determination of the legal proceedings.



(1994 Code, § 94.07)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)



PROHIBITIONS AGAINST DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES



§ 94.20  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   It shall be unlawful to refuse to sell or rent, or to otherwise make
unavailable, any dwelling to any person on the basis of race, color, creed,
ancestry, national origin or physical or mental handicap.



(1994 Code, § 94.20)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.21  DISCRIMINATION IN THE INCIDENTS OF SALE.



   It shall be unlawful to discriminate against any person on the basis of
race, color, creed, ancestry, national origin or physical or mental handicap
with respect to:



   (A)   The terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of any
dwelling; or



   (B)   The provision of information, services or facilities in
connection with the sale or rental of any dwelling.



(1994 Code, § 94.21)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.22  DISCRIMINATORY ADVERTISING OF HOUSING.



   It shall be unlawful to print or publish any statement or advertisement
that, with respect to the sale or rental of any dwelling, indicates any
discrimination or intent to discriminate against any person on the basis of
race, color, creed, ancestry, national origin or physical or mental handicap.



(1994 Code, § 94.22)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.23  MISREPRESENTATION OF AVAILABILITY OF HOUSING.



   It shall be unlawful to represent to any person because of his or her
race, color, creed, ancestry, national origin or physical or mental handicap
that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the
dwelling is, in fact, available therefor.



(1994 Code, § 94.23)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.24  BLOCKBUSTING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce any
person to sell or rent any dwelling by making representations (whether true
or false) regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood in
which the dwelling is located of persons of a particular race, color, creed,
ancestry or national origin.



(1994 Code, § 94.24)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.25  STEERING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce any
person to refrain from buying or renting a dwelling by doing the following:



   (A)   Make representations (whether true or false) regarding the
race, color, creed, ancestry or national origin of occupants or prospective
occupants of other dwellings in the neighborhood wherein the dwelling is
located; or



   (B)   Show the potential buyer/renter available dwellings only in
certain neighborhoods on account of race, color, creed, ancestry or national
origin.



(1994 Code, § 94.25)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.26  DISCRIMINATION IN FINANCING HOUSING.



   (A)   Discrimination against applicant directly. It shall be
unlawful for any financial institution to discriminate against any applicant
on the basis of his or her race, color, creed, ancestry, national origin or
physical or mental handicap with respect to:



      (1)   The approval/provision of any loan or other financial
assistance for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing
or maintaining any dwelling; or



      (2)   Any term or condition of the loan/financial assistance
including, but not limited to, loan amount, down payment, earnest money,
duration of loan, interest rate and/or closing costs.



   (B)   Discrimination against applicant’s associates, red-lining.
It shall be unlawful for any financial institution to discriminate with
respect to the matters indicated in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above on the
basis of the race, color, creed, ancestry, national origin or physical or
mental handicap of:



      (1)   The applicant’s personal or business associates;



      (2)   Any person having any interest in the dwelling or
financial transaction in question;



      (3)   The present or prospective occupants of the dwelling; or



      (4)   The present or prospective residents of the neighborhood
in which the dwelling is located.



(1994 Code, § 94.26)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.27  MEMBERSHIP IN REAL ESTATE ORGANIZATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to discriminate on the basis of race, color,
creed, ancestry, national origin or physical handicap with respect to access
to or membership or participation in:



   (A)   Any multiple-listing service;



   (B)   Real estate brokers’ organization; or



   (C)   Any other service, organization or facility connected with the
business of buying, selling or renting dwellings.



(1994 Code, § 94.27)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.28  INTERFERENCE WITH OTHERS’ RIGHTS.



   (A)   Interference. It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate,
threaten or interfere with any person:



      (1)   In the exercise or enjoyment of any right protected by
this chapter, because he or she has exercised/enjoyed any such right or
because he or she intends to do so; or



      (2)   In the aiding or encouraging of another person to
exercise or enjoy any right protected by this chapter, because he or she has
proffered such aid/encouragement or because he or she intends to do so.



   (B)   Harassment. It shall be unlawful to knowingly make false
statements, allegations or complaints concerning violations of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 94.28)  (Ord. 436, passed 10-12-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 95:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   International Fire Code adopted by reference; action on new
materials, processes or occupancies; notice to persons affected; hearings



   95.02   Duty of spectators at fire



   95.03   Bonfires



Explosives and Flammable Liquids and Gases



   95.15   Storage and use of volatile combustibles



Fireworks



   95.30   Definitions



   95.31   Possession, sale and use



   95.32   Violations; searches and seizures



   95.33   Exemption



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; ACTION ON NEW
MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES; NOTICE TO PERSONS AFFECTED; HEARINGS.



   (A)   (1)   The International Fire Code (2006), is hereby adopted
by reference as the fire code of the city. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Fire Code
(2006) are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
forth in this section. If any of the International Fire Code (2003) adopted
are in conflict with the laws of the state, state law shall prevail; any and
other applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances or parts of
ordinances of the city in conflict herewith are repealed.



      (2)   At least three copies of the International Fire Code
(2006), have been on file for more than 30 days prior to the adoption of this
Fire Code for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided and
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the
International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Sparta,
Illinois.



      (2)   Wherever the term CORPORATION COUNSEL is used in the
International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city.



   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department and the members of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those
now enumerated in the International Fire Code adopted in this section.



(1994 Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. 138, passed 8-10-1964; Ord. 03-07, passed
8-11-2003)



§ 95.02  DUTY OF SPECTATORS AT FIRE.



   It shall be the duty of all spectators at fires to obey the orders of
the members of the Fire Department on duty there, with respect to keeping
away from the scene of the fire or the handling of or interference with the
apparatus of the Fire Department.



(1994 Code, § 95.02)



§ 95.03  BONFIRES.



   It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire close to any
building or other structure, as to endanger the building or structure, or on
any public street, sidewalk or pavement. No open burning shall be permitted,
except as provided by state law and regulations. No open fire outside a
building shall be started or permitted to burn after sunset or before sunrise
of any day.



(1994 Code, § 95.03)  (Ord. 319, passed 5-10-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



EXPLOSIVES AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES



§ 95.15  STORAGE AND USE OF VOLATILE COMBUSTIBLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation
to keep, store, transport, sell or use any crude petroleum, benzine, benzol,
gasoline, naphtha, ether or other like volatile combustibles, or other
compounds, in such manner or under such circumstances as will jeopardize life
or property.



(430 ILCS 15/1)  (1994 Code, § 95.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate storage of combustible or explosive material,
see 65 ILCS 5/11-8-4



FIREWORKS



§ 95.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who distributes, offers for sale,
sells or exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in the state to
another distributor or directly to any retailer or person for resale.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks that must comply with the
construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations of the U.S.
Consumer Products Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and
1507 and classified as fireworks UN0036 and UN0337 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. § 172.101. CONSUMER FIREWORKS
shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick
noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”,
“trick matches”, “cigarette loads” and “auto burglar alarms”;
sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper
or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive
compound are used; provided, they are so constructed that the hand cannot
come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol,
paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths grains of
explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY or CONSUMER DISPLAY. The detonation,
ignition or deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible
effect.



   CONSUMER OPERATOR. An adult individual who is responsible for the
safety, setup and discharge of the consumer fireworks display and who has
completed the training required by state law.



   CONSUMER RETAILER. Any person who offers for sale, sells or exchanges
for consideration consumer fireworks in the state directly to any person with
a consumer display permit.



   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further
defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.



   FIREWORKS. Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. § 172.101.



   FLAME EFFECT. The detonation, ignition or deflagration of flammable
gases, liquids or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual or
audible effect before the public, invitees or licensees regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator
Licensing Act.



   LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR. An individual who is responsible for the
safety, setup and discharge of the pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic service
and who is licensed pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
company, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, state, municipality or
political subdivision of a state or any agency, department or instrumentality
of the United States and any officer, agent or employee of these entities.



   PRODUCTION COMPANY. Any person in the film, digital and video media,
television, commercial and theatrical stage industry who provides pyrotechnic
services or pyrotechnic display services as part of a film, digital and video
media, television, commercial or theatrical production in the state and is
licensed by the office pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator
Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 227/1 et seq..



   PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY. The detonation, ignition or deflagration of
display fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the
Pyrotechnic Distributer and Operator Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 227/1 et
seq..



   PYROTECHNIC DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who distributes display fireworks
for sale in the state or provides them as part of a pyrotechnic display
service in the state or provides only pyrotechnic services and is licensed by
the office pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing
Act, being 225 ILCS 227/1 et seq..



   PYROTECHNIC SERVICE. The detonation, ignition or deflagration of
display fireworks, special effects or flame effects to produce a visual or
audible effect.



   SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS.



      (1)   Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical
or other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as intended for indoor use.



      (2)   SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS are classified as fireworks
UN0431 or UN0432 by the United States Department of Transportation under 49
C.F.R. § 172.101.



(425 ILCS 35/1)  (1994 Code, § 95.25)



§ 95.31  POSSESSION, SALE AND USE.



   (A)   General. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, co-partnership or corporation to knowingly possess,
offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any display
fireworks, flame effects or consumer fireworks; provided that the Mayor and
City Council shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
pyrotechnic or consumer displays.



(425 ILCS 35/2)



   (B)   Pyrotechnic displays or pyrotechnic service.



      (1)   Each pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic service shall be
conducted by a licensed lead pyrotechnic operator employed by a licensed
pyrotechnic distributor or a licensed production company, or insured as an
additional named insured on the pyrotechnic distributor’s product liability
and general liability insurance, as required under paragraphs 2 and 3 of
subsection (c) of § 35 of the Pyrotechnic Distribution and Operating
Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 227/35, or insured as an additional named
insured on the production company’s general liability insurance, as
required under paragraph (1) of subsection (c-3) of § 35 of the Pyrotechnic
Distribution and Operating Licensing Act. Applications for a pyrotechnic
display permit shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the
date of the pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic service, unless agreed to
otherwise by the local jurisdiction issuing the permit and the fire chief of
the jurisdiction in which the display or pyrotechnic service will occur.
After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of
display fireworks for the display or pyrotechnic service shall be lawful for
that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.



      (2)   Pyrotechnic display permits may be granted hereunder to
any adult individual applying therefor. No permit shall be required under the
provisions of 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq. for supervised public displays by state
or county fair associations.



      (3)   The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit
must provide proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000
to the local governmental entity issuing the permit.



      (4)   A permit shall be issued only after the chief of the
fire department providing fire protection coverage to the area of display or
pyrotechnic service, or his or her designee, has inspected the site and
determined that the display or pyrotechnic service can be performed in full
compliance with the rules adopted by the state’s Fire Marshal and that the
display or pyrotechnic service shall not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person or persons. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuer of a
permit from adopting more stringent rules.



      (5)   All indoor pyrotechnic displays and pyrotechnic services
shall be conducted in buildings protected by automatic sprinkler systems and
meeting the requirements of rules adopted by the state’s Fire Marshal
pursuant to 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq. At the time an individual applies for an
indoor pyrotechnic display permit from the local jurisdiction, written notice
of the permit application and the indoor display or pyrotechnic service
information shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date
of the pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic service to the office, unless
agreed to otherwise by the office.



      (6)   Permits shall be signed by the Chief of the Fire
Department providing fire protection to the area of display or pyrotechnic
service, or his or her designee, and must identify the licensed pyrotechnic
distributor or licensed production company and the lead pyrotechnic operator.



(425 ILCS 35/2.1)



   (C)   Consumer displays.



      (1)   Each consumer display shall be handled by a competent
individual who has received training from a consumer fireworks training class
approved by the office of the state’s Fire Marshal. Applications for
consumer display permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance
of the date of the display, unless agreed to otherwise by the local
jurisdiction issuing the permit and the Fire Chief of the jurisdiction in
which the display will occur. After a permit has been granted, sales,
possession, use and distribution of consumer fireworks for display shall be
lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.



      (2)   Permits may be granted hereunder to any adult individual
applying for a permit who provides proof that he or she has received the
requisite training. The local jurisdiction issuing the permit is authorized
to conduct a criminal background check of the applicant as a condition of
issuing a permit.



      (3)   A permit shall be issued only after inspection of the
display site by the Fire Chief providing fire protection coverage to the area
of display, or his or her designee, to determine that the display is in full
compliance with the rules adopted by the state’s Fire Marshal. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit the issuer of a permit from adopting more
stringent rules.



(425 ILCS 35/2.2)



   (D)   Consumer distributors and retailers. No person may act as a
consumer distributor or retailer or advertise or use any title implying that
the person is a consumer distributor or retailer unless registered with the
office of the state’s Fire Marshal. No consumer fireworks may be
distributed, sold, transferred or provided free of charge to an individual
who has not been issued a permit in accordance with division (C) above or has
not registered with the office of the state’s Fire Marshal in accordance
with this section. No person may sell to a single individual a quantity of
consumer fireworks exceeding 499 pounds without prior approval by the office
of the state’s Fire Marshal. The state’s Fire Marshal, in the name of the
people, through the Attorney General, the State’s Attorney of any county,
any resident of the state or any legal entity within the state may apply for
injunctive relief in any court to enjoin any person who has not registered
from distributing or selling consumer fireworks. Upon filing a verified
petition in court, the court, if satisfied by affidavit, or otherwise, that
the person is or has been distributing in violation of 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
may enter a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction, without
bond, enjoining the defendant from further activity. A copy of the verified
complaint shall be served upon the defendant and the proceedings are to be
conducted as in other civil cases. The court may enter a judgment permanently
enjoining a defendant from further unregistered activity if it is established
that the defendant has been or is distributing in violation of 425 ILCS 30/1
et seq. In case of violation of any injunctive order or judgment entered
under this section, the court may summarily try and punish the offender for
contempt of court. Injunctive proceedings are in addition to all penalties
and other remedies in 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.



(425 ILCS 35/2.3)



(1994 Code, § 95.26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate fireworks, see 65 ILCS 5/11-8-4



§ 95.32  VIOLATIONS; SEARCHES AND SEIZURES.



   Whenever the Mayor or any member of the City Council has reason to
believe that any violation of this subchapter has occurred within the city
and that the person so violating this subchapter has in his or her possession
fireworks or combustibles, the Mayor or the City Council may file a complaint
in writing, verified by affidavit, with any circuit court within whose
jurisdiction the premises to be searched are situated, stating the facts upon
which such belief is founded, the premises to be searched and the property to
be seized, and procure a search warrant and execute the same. Upon the
execution of such search warrant, the person executing the same shall make
due return thereof to the court issuing the same, together with an inventory
of the property taken thereunder. The court shall thereupon issue process
against the owner of such property if he or she be known, otherwise against
the party in whose possession the property so taken was found, if known. In
case of inability to serve such process upon the owner or the person in
possession of the property at the time of its seizure, as hereinbefore
provided, notice of the proceedings before the court shall be given as
required by the statutes of the state governing cases of attachment. Upon the
return of the process duly served or upon the posting or publishing of notice
made, as hereinabove provided, the court or jury, if a jury shall be
demanded, shall proceed to determine whether or not such property so seized
was held or possessed in violation of this subchapter. In case of a finding
that the fireworks or combustibles seized were possessed in violation of this
subchapter, judgment shall be entered confiscating and forfeiting the
property and ordering its destruction.



(425 ILCS 35/4)  (1994 Code, § 95.27)



§ 95.33  EXEMPTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as applying to the
transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the
regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nor as applying
to the military or naval forces of the United States, nor to the duly
authorized militia of the state, nor to the use of signals necessary for the
safe operation of railroads, steamboats, trucks or aircraft.



(425 ILCS 30/23)  (1994 Code, § 95.28)



CHAPTER 96:  HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Obstructing or polluting watercourse prohibited



   96.02   Stagnant pools



   96.03   Act which endangers or discomforts public



   96.04   Common drinking utensils



   96.05   Spitting on public sidewalk, street or other public places
prohibited



   96.06   Air pollution control standards adopted



Vital Statistics



   96.20   City Clerk to be local registrar of vital statistics



   96.21   Local registrar to comply with law



   96.22   Birth and death reports; required information



   96.23   Burial permits; death certificates required



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  OBSTRUCTING OR POLLUTING WATERCOURSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or
pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the city.



(1994 Code, § 96.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.02  STAGNANT POOLS.



   (A)   Any stagnant pool of water in the city is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any nuisance to
remain or exist on any property under his or her control.



(1994 Code, § 96.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.03  ACT WHICH ENDANGERS OR DISCOMFORTS PUBLIC.



   It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public
health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public.



(1994 Code, § 96.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  COMMON DRINKING UTENSILS.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or
other similar utensil for the use of more than one person, in any public
hall, theater, store or other place frequented by the public.



(1994 Code, § 96.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  SPITTING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALK, STREET OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk,
street or other public place or on the floor or walls of any store, theater,
hall, public vehicle or other place frequented by the public or to which the
public is invited.



(1994 Code, § 96.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.06  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   There are hereby adopted by reference the standards promulgated by the
state’s Department of Health for the control of air pollution; three copies
of the standards adopted in this section shall be on file in the office of
the City Clerk for public inspection.



(1994 Code, § 96.06)



VITAL STATISTICS



§ 96.20  CITY CLERK TO BE LOCAL REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS.



   The City Clerk shall be the Local Registrar of Vital Statistics for the
city.



(1994 Code, § 96.15)



§ 96.21  LOCAL REGISTRAR TO COMPLY WITH LAW.



   (A)   The provisions of the laws of the state shall be fully
complied with by the Local Registrar of Vital Statistics in connection with
his or her reports.



   (B)   The Local Registrar shall make or cause to be made sufficient
copies of all records so that one complete set of records may be retained and
kept by the city.



(1994 Code, § 96.16)



§ 96.22  BIRTH AND DEATH REPORTS; REQUIRED INFORMATION.



   The report of each birth and death in the city and adjoining territory,
as prescribed by state law, shall be made to the local registrar of vital
statistics, and the reports shall contain information as is required by law.



(1994 Code, § 96.17)



§ 96.23  BURIAL PERMITS; DEATH CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to bury, inter or cremate any person whose death
is required to be reported to the Local Registrar, without having first
secured a burial permit therefor. Application for a burial permit shall be
accompanied by a death certificate signed by the attending physician or by
the coroner or other office holder holding an inquest.



(1994 Code, § 96.18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 97:  NOISE



Section



   97.01   Definitions



   97.02   Unnecessary noise prohibited



   97.03   Sound pressure levels



   97.04   Enumeration of noises prohibited or regulated



   97.05   Emergency work



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All
technical terms, unless the context otherwise requires, shall be defined in
accordance with the American National Standards Institute publication,
5.1.1-1960 as revised in 1971, published by the American Standards Institute,
1430 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10018.



   COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. Includes, but not be limited to, any parcel of
land zoned commercial under the zoning provisions of the city as set forth in
Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning, as well as the following:



      (1)   An area where offices, clinics and the facilities needed
to serve them are located;



      (2)   An area with local shopping and service establishment;



      (3)   A tourist-oriented area where hotels, motels and
gasoline stations are located;



      (4)   A business strip along a main street containing offices,
retail businesses and commercial enterprises; and



      (5)   Other commercial enterprises and activities which do not
involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity.



   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. Includes the use, operation or maintenance of any
sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, any
goods or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the
public to, or advertising for or soliciting the patronage of customers to or
for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event, or for the
purpose of demonstrating any sound equipment.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES. Any and all activity incidental to the
erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of
buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land
clearing, grading, excavating and filing.



   CONTINUOUS NOISE. A steady, fluctuating or impulsive noise which
exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten minutes or
more, with an accumulation of an hour or more over a period of eight hours.



   DEVICE.Any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually
produces sound when operated or handled.



   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE. A device used primarily on trucks for the
conversion of the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air
compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.



   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger or potential danger.



   FLUCTUATING NOISE. The sound pressure level of a fluctuating noise
which varies more than six dB(A) during the period of observation when
measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter.



   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



      (1)   An area in which enterprises and activities which
involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity are
located.



      (2)   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT shall include, but not be limited
to, any parcel of land zoned as an industrial district, under the zoning
provisions of the city (Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning).



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle such as, but not limited to, a passenger
vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by
mechanical power, and shall include motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes,
go-carts and any other vehicle which is self-propelled.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



      (1)   An area of single- or multiple-family dwellings and
shall include areas where multiple-unit dwellings, high-rise apartments and
high-density residential districts are located.



      (2)   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT shall also include, but is not
limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, schools, courts and
similar institutional facilities.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.



      (1)   An instrument or apparatus including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter, and weighing networks for the measurement of
sound pressure.



      (2)   The output meter reads sound pressure level when
properly calibrated, and the instrument is of Type 2 or better as specified
in the American National Standards Institute publication 51.4-1971.



(1994 Code, § 97.01)  (Ord. 318, passed 5-10-1982)



§ 97.02  UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or
cause to be made or continued, any unnecessary noise within the city.



(1994 Code, § 97.02)  (Ord. 318, passed 5-10-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.03  SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS.



   (A)   (1)   The maximum permissible sound pressure levels of any
continuous source of sound shall be as herein established for the time period
and district listed in the table below.



      (2)   This includes, but is not limited to, sound from such
activities as production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, operating
or repairing either vehicles, materials, goods, products or devices. Sound
pressure levels in excess of those established for the districts of the city,
in times herewith listed, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
sound is an unnecessary noise.



      (3)   Sound pressure levels shall be measured at the
approximate location of the property line or the boundary of the public way,
at a height of at least four feet above the immediate surrounding surface, on
a sound level meter of standard design and operated on the “A” weighing
network.



 

Sound Pressure Level Limit dB(A)


District
 
Day
(7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.)
 
Night
(10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.)


Residential
 
55
 
50


Commercial
 
60
 
55


Industrial
 
80
 
75



 



      (4)   When a noise source can be identified and its noise
measured in more than one district, the sound pressure level limits of the
most restrictive district shall apply.



   (B)   The sound pressure level limits, and provisions hereof,
applicable to commercial districts shall also apply to any parcel of land
zoned agricultural district under Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor
vehicles operating on public rights-of-way; any bell or chime or any device
for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells or chimes from any
church, clock or school; the loading of any trucks; domestic power equipment
and commercial power equipment.



(1994 Code, § 97.03)  (Ord. 318, passed 5-10-1982)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.04  ENUMERATION OF NOISES PROHIBITED OR REGULATED.



   (A)   Bells and chimes. It shall be unlawful for any person to use,
operate, cause or permit to be sounded any bell or chime or any device for
the production or reproduction of the sounds of bells or chimes, from any
church, clock or school, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00
a.m. of the following day.



   (B)   Radios, television sets, phonographs and similar devices.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or
permit to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television,
phonograph, drum or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound in such a manner as to cause to be made or continued
any unnecessary noise as heard without measurement.



      (2)   The operation of any set, instrument, television,
phonograph, machine or device at any time in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at either the property line, or 25 feet in the case of a vehicle on
public rights-of-way, shall be prima face evidence of a violation of this
division (B).



      (3)   This division (B) shall not apply to any person who is
participating in a school band or in a parade for which a permit has been
issued by the city.



   (C)   Animals. No person shall keep or maintain or permit the
keeping of, on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by the person, any
animal or bird otherwise permitted to be kept, which by frequent or habitual
howling, barking, meowing, squawking or other noise unreasonably disturbs the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood or causes discomfort or annoyance to any
person.



   (D)   Mufflers. No person shall discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, air
compressor equipment, motorboat, motor vehicle or other power device, which
is not equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly
maintained to prevent any unnecessary noise, and no muffler or exhaust system
shall be modified or used with a cutoff, bypass or similar device.



   (E)   Trucks.  No person shall load any garbage, trash or compactor
truck, or any other truck, whereby the loading, unloading or handling of
boxes, crates, equipment or other objects is conducted within a residential
district, nor within 300 feet of any hotel or motel, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (F)   Construction.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person
shall engage in, cause or permit any person to be engaged in construction
activities in any residential or commercial district between the hours of
9:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.



      (2)   Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum
permissible noise level specified for industrial districts for the periods
within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable
building permit.



      (3)   Construction activities directly connected with the
abatement of an emergency are excluded from the provisions of this division
(F).



   (G)   Power equipment rated five horsepower or less. No person shall
operate or permit to be operated on private property or on the public way
within any residential or commercial districts any power equipment rated five
horsepower or less and used for home or building repair or grounds
maintenance between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the
next day or operate or permit to be operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. any power equipment which emits a noise sound pressure level
in excess of 80 decibels in the “A” weighing network dB(A). The power
equipment shall include, but not be limited to, lawn mowers, garden tools,
snow removal equipment, electric or chain saws or any other power equipment
used for home or building repair or grounds maintenance. Noise sound pressure
levels shall be measured at a distance of 25 feet from the noise source.



   (H)   Power equipment rated more than five horsepower. No person
shall operate on any property within a residential or commercial district or
on any public way within a residential or commercial district, any power
equipment rated more than five horsepower, excluding construction equipment
used for construction activities, such as, but not limited to, chain saws,
pavement breakers, log chippers, riding tractors, powered hand tools, between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the next day or within
residential, commercial or industrial noise districts between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. which emits a noise level in excess of 88 decibels,
in the “A” weighing network dB(A). Noise sound pressure levels shall be
measured at a distance of 25 feet from the noise source.



   (I)   Sound amplifiers. The commercial and non-commercial use of
sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations.



      (1)   The sound amplifying equipment shall be operated only
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each day.



      (2)   The maximum sound emanating from sound-amplifying
equipment shall not exceed the sound pressure levels established in § 97.03
of this chapter as measured at least 25 feet from the noise source.



      (3)   In any event, the intensity of sound shall be so
controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, annoying,
disturbing or a nuisance to any person or persons.



      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sound
of bells or chimes from any church, clock or school.



   (J)   Warning signals. No person shall sound any horn or signaling
device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or
highway within the city, except as a danger warning, and then only for a
reasonable period of time.



(1994 Code, § 97.04)  (Ord. 318, passed 5-10-1982; Ord. 16-05, passed
7-25-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.05  EMERGENCY WORK.



   Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals of the community,
or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity shall
not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 97.05)  (Ord. 318, passed 5-10-1982)



CHAPTER 98:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   98.01   City park and neighborhood park facilities established



   98.02   Regulation of city water impoundments



Park Board



   98.15   Creation; composition



   98.16   Purpose



   98.17   Qualifications of members; appointment; term of office;
compensation



   98.18   Promulgation of rules



   98.19   Pool Manager



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  CITY PARK AND NEIGHBORHOOD PARK FACILITIES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a city park to be known as Brown
Memorial Park, which park shall consist of that property conveyed to the city
as described in deed recorded in Book 171, at page 78 of the records of the
office of the Recorder for the county.



   (B)   There is hereby established a neighborhood park facility to be
known as the Tom Reid Memorial Community Park, which park shall consist of
that property conveyed to the city as described in deed recorded in Book 205,
at page 447 of the records of the office of the Recorder for the county.



   (C)   There is hereby established a neighborhood park facility to be
known as the Sparta Swimming Pool Community Park, which park is located on
property consisting of the Sparta Community Swimming Pool Facility and other
property adjacent thereto that was conveyed to the city as described in deed
recorded in Book 388, at page 300 of the records of the office of the
Recorder for the county.



   (D)   There is hereby established a neighborhood park facility to be
known as the South City Lake Community Park, which park shall consist of that
property conveyed to the city as described in deed recorded in Book 98, at
page 327 of the records of the office of the Recorder for the county.



   (E)   There is hereby established a city park to be known as Sparta
Memorial Downtown Park, which park shall consist of that property conveyed to
the city as described in deed recorded in Book 400, at page 219 of the
records of the office of the Recorder for the county.



   (F)   There is hereby established a city park to be known as Vernon
School Park, which park shall consist of that property conveyed to the city
as described in deed recorded in Book 272, at page 264 of the records of the
office of the Recorder for the county.



(1994 Code, § 98.01)  (Ord. 68, passed 8-23-1964; Ord. 404, passed
6-24-1991; Ord. 406, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004; Ord.
05-15, passed 12-27-2005; Ord. 10-03, passed 6-14-2010; Ord. 14-08, passed
10-27-2014)



§ 98.02  REGULATION OF CITY WATER IMPOUNDMENTS.



   The following regulations shall apply to the operation of boats on and
other uses of city water impoundments.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motorboat as hereinafter
defined upon any city water impoundment owned or maintained by the city.



      (1)   (a)   The term MOTORBOAT shall be construed to mean
any boat, canoe, raft or other vessel or platform intended for carrying or
transporting of a person or persons upon or across water and propelled by a
motor operated by the use of gasoline, gas, kerosene, fuel oil or other type
of fuel.



         (b)   The term MOTORBOAT shall not include any boat,
canoe and the like, as hereinabove described propelled by an electric motor.



      (2)   This provision shall not apply to employees of the city
while engaged in or about the improvement and maintenance of the reservoirs
or lakes.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any troutlines or
engage in jug fishing on any city water impoundment. Fishing may be conducted
thereon by pole and line only.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to take, catch, seine or otherwise remove
from any city water impoundment large-mouth bass of less than 15 inches in
length, nor in excess of a daily limit of six fish.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to otherwise take, catch, seine or
otherwise remove from any city water impoundment channel catfish in excess of
a daily limit of six fish.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful to take, catch, seine or otherwise remove
from any city water impoundment bluegill or redear sunfish in excess of a
daily limit of 15 fish.



(1994 Code, § 98.02)  (Ord. 95, passed 4-1-1957; Ord. 321, passed
10-12-1982; Ord. 12-07, passed 6-25-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PARK BOARD



§ 98.15  CREATION; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Park Board which shall consist of seven
members.



(1994 Code, § 98.15)  (Ord. 267, passed 6-14-1976)



§ 98.16  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Park Board shall be to advise the city
administration regarding the city park and neighborhood park facilities,
including the operation and maintenance of the municipal swimming pool, and
to formulate, regulate and encourage the use of the city park, neighborhood
park facilities and municipal swimming pool by all members of the public.



(1994 Code, § 98.16)  (Ord. 404, passed 6-24-1991; Ord. 406, passed
7-22-1991; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 98.17  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE;
COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The members of the Park Board shall be residents of the city
and shall consist of the President of the Sparta Khoury League, Incorporated,
and six other residents of the city who shall be appointed by the
Commissioner of Public Property with the advice and consent of the Council.



   (B)   The terms of the initial appointment of members shall be as
follows.



      (1)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of one year
each.



      (2)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of two years
each.



      (3)   Two members shall be appointed for terms of three years
each.



      (4)   The president of the City Khoury League shall serve for
a term commensurate with the term of office of President of the City Khoury
League.



   (C)   After the initial appointments, the members of the Park Board
shall be appointed for a term of two years each. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointments for unexpired terms only. All members shall serve without
compensation.



(1994 Code, § 98.17)  (Ord. 372, passed 4-25-1988; Ord. 04-01, passed
1-12-2004)



§ 98.18  PROMULGATION OF RULES.



   (A)   The Park Board shall make rules to carry out the purpose of
the Park Board and from time to time may make changes in these rules. The
rules of the Park Board shall apply only to the conduct and regulations of
the city park, all neighborhood park facilities and the municipal swimming
pool facility; and may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
curfew provisions; regulation of recreational facilities; regulation of
parking of automobiles; regulation of the use of motor vehicles on
recreational facility grounds; regulation of the conduct of members of the
public while visiting the recreational facilities of the city.



   (B)   The Park Board shall give notice of these rules by posting the
rules on or about the park grounds.



   (C)   After enactment and posting of these rules and regulations as
herein provided, any person violating the provisions of the rules shall be
guilty of an offense against the city and, if convicted thereof, shall be
subject to § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 98.18)  (Ord. 252, passed 5-20-1974; Ord. 404, passed
6-24-1991; Ord. 406, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 98.19  POOL MANAGER.



   The Pool Manager for the Sparta Municipal Swimming Pool facility shall
be appointed by the Commissioner of Public Property with the advice and
consent of the Council. The salary of the Pool Manager shall be set by the
City Council.



(1994 Code, § 98.19)  (Ord. 04-01, passed 1-12-2004)



CHAPTER 99:  PLANTS AND WEEDS



Section



Weeds



   99.01   Declaration of nuisance



   99.02   Height limitation



   99.03   Notice to destroy weeds, grass or growth



   99.04   Action upon non-compliance



   99.05   Notice of lien



   99.06   Violation



Trees and Shrubbery



   99.20   Trees not to be planted in streets and parkways; permit
required for other public property



   99.21   Permit required to remove trees and shrubs planted in public
places



   99.22   Injuring trees or shrubs prohibited



   99.23   Attaching sign, advertisement or notice to trees prohibited



   99.24   Maintenance of trees



   99.25   Attaching wires or ropes to trees prohibited



   99.26   Gas pipes



   99.27   Excavations



   99.28   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees and
bushes



WEEDS



§ 99.01  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   Any weeds such as ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, Johnson grass, sow
thistle, sorghum almun or other noxious weeds of a like kind or variety, or
so designated by the state’s Noxious Weed Law, 505 ILCS 100/1 et seq. are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to permit the weeds
to grow or remain on any premises within the corporate limits of the city.



(1994 Code, § 99.01)  (Ord. 421, passed 7-27-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.02  HEIGHT LIMITATION.



   (A)   Except as provided under division (B) below, no owner or
person in possession and control of any lot, place or area within the city,
and no agent of the owner or person in possession and control, shall permit
on the lot, place or area or upon any abutting area between the right-of-way
line/property line and street pavement, any weeds, plants or grass, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental vegetation, to grow in excess
of eight inches in height.



   (B)   The following are generally exempted from the provisions of
this section: land zoned agricultural (A-1) as designated by Ch. 155 of this
code of ordinances, Zoning, and as shown on the official zoning map of the
city, unless used for non-agricultural purpose. For purposes of this
subchapter, AGRICULTURAL USE shall be construed to mean vacant land or the
active production of crops, livestock, fowl or other conventional pursuits.
However, portions of those lands exempted by this division (B) which are
within 40 feet of the right-of-way of a public street or alley maintained for
traffic, or within 40 feet of the property line of adjacent lands used for
non-agricultural purposes, shall not be exempted from the provisions of this
subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 99.02)  (Ord. 421, passed 7-27-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.03  NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS, GRASS OR GROWTH.



   The Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, annually, at or
near the commencement of the growth season, shall notify, by general
publication in a newspaper published within the city, all owners or persons
in possession and control or agents, to cut, destroy or remove any weeds,
grass, growths or any matter found growing, lying or located on the
properties as regulated by § 99.02 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 99.03)  (Ord. 357, passed 6-24-1986; Ord. 421, passed
7-27-1992)



§ 99.04  ACTION UPON NON-COMPLIANCE.



   Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, person in possession and
control, or agent so notified to cut, destroy or remove the weeds, grass,
growths or matter, after publication of the notice provided for in § 99.03
of this chapter, the city or its authorized agent shall cut, destroy or
remove weeds, grass, growth or matter, and any expense incurred by the city
or its authorized agent in doing so shall be a charge against the owner,
person in possession or control, or agent so failing, which charge may be
recovered in an appropriate action by law. However, no land clearance made
necessary by excessive growth shall be done unless the city or its authorized
agent shall first post a notice on the property to clear the excessive
growth, and that the owner, person in possession and control or agent shall
fail for three days after the notice to clear the land.



(1994 Code, § 99.04)  (Ord. 357, passed 6-23-1986; Ord. 421, passed
7-27-1992)



§ 99.05  NOTICE OF LIEN.



   If weeds, grass, growth or other matter are cut, destroyed or removed
by city or its agent, a notice of lien of the costs and expense thereof
incurred shall be recorded in the following manner: the city or its agent
shall file notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the
county. The notice of lien shall contain a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the
cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and the date or dates
when said costs and expenses were incurred. The notice shall be made under
oath and shall be filed within 60 days after the costs and expenses are
incurred. The liens are assessed to recover the expenses incurred by the city
and shall be separate and shall not serve as an exemption from any other
penalties or costs imposed for violation of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 99.05)  (Ord. 421, passed 7-27-1992)



§ 99.06  VIOLATION.



   Any owner, person in possession and control, firm or corporation, who
permits weeds, plants or grass to grow or remain on the premises in violation
of this subchapter shall be fined in accordance with § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances, in addition to repayment of all costs incurred by the city
pursuant to §§ 99.04 and 99.05 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 99.06)  (Ord. 357, passed 6-23-1986; Ord. 421, passed
7-27-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TREES AND SHRUBBERY



§ 99.20  TREES NOT TO BE PLANTED IN STREETS AND PARKWAYS; PERMIT REQUIRED
FOR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public
street or parkway. It shall be unlawful to plant trees or bushes in any other
public place without having first secured a permit therefor. Application for
a permit shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be referred by him or her
to the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements.



   (B)   All trees and shrubs planted subject to this section shall be
placed subject to the directions and approval of the Commissioner of Streets
and Public Improvements.



(1994 Code, § 99.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.21  PERMIT REQUIRED TO REMOVE TREES AND SHRUBS PLANTED IN PUBLIC
PLACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub
in any public place without having secured a permit therefor.



   (B)   Application for a permit shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall be referred to the Council before issuance.



(1994 Code, § 99.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.22  INJURING TREES OR SHRUBS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted or growing in
any public place.



(1994 Code, § 99.17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.23  ATTACHING SIGN, ADVERTISEMENT OR NOTICE TO TREES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any
tree or shrub in any public place.



(1994 Code, § 99.18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.24  MAINTENANCE OF TREES.



   (A)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or
other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with
traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which the
tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.



   (B)   Upon refusal of the owner to do so, any tree or limb of a tree
which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be
removed by the owner of the premises on which the tree grows or stands.



   (C)   The Superintendent of Streets may trim any tree or shrub or
remove any tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall be done away with.



(1994 Code, § 99.19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.25  ATTACHING WIRES OR ROPES TO TREES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or
shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the
permission of the Council.



   (B)   Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the
streets, alleys or other public places, shall in the absence of provision in
the franchise concerning the subject, keep the wires and poles free from and
away from any trees and shrubs in the such places so far as may be possible,
and shall keep all trees and shrubs near wires and poles properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Commissioner of Streets and Public
Improvements, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or
to the shrubs and trees by their contact.



(1994 Code, § 99.20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.26  GAS PIPES.



   Any person maintaining any gas pipes in the city shall keep the pipes
free from leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby to any trees or
shrubs.



(1994 Code, § 99.21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.27  EXCAVATIONS.



   In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care
shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, whenever
possible.



(1994 Code, § 99.22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.28  CUTTING AND REMOVAL OF NEGLECTED WEEDS, GRASS, TREES AND BUSHES.



   (A)   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety may cause the
removal of nuisance greenery from any parcel of private property within the
city if the owners of that parcel after 30 days’ written notice issued by
the city’s Code Enforcement Officer refuse or neglect to remove the
nuisance greenery. The city may collect from the owners of that parcel the
reasonable costs of removal.



   (B)   The costs of removal incurred by the city pursuant to this
section shall become a lien on the underlying parcel in accordance with 65
ILCS 5/11-20-16.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      REMOVAL COST. The total cost of removal activity.



      REMOVAL OF NUISANCE GREENERY or REMOVAL ACTIVITIES. The cutting
of weeds or grass, the trimming of trees or bushes and the removal of
nuisance bushes or trees.



(1994 Code, § 99.23)  (Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-2010)



CHAPTER 100:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   100.001   Injuring sidewalks prohibited



   100.002   Injuring new pavement prohibited



   100.003   Barricades and lights; use of; disturbance of



   100.004   Depositing dangerous substance or refuse on streets or
sidewalks prohibited



   100.005   Permission required to erect poles and wires



   100.006   Openings in public ways



   100.007   Barbed wire or electric fence



Excavations



   100.020   Permit required; application



   100.021   Deposit required; disposition of deposit



   100.022   Backfilling and resurfacing



Driveways



   100.035   Permit required; application



   100.036   Grade and surface requirements



   100.037   Materials; supervision of work



   100.038   Driveway to be kept in good repair



Obstructions and Encroachments



   100.050   Creation or maintenance of obstructions of streets or
sidewalks prohibited



   100.051   Display of goods on streets or sidewalks prohibited



   100.052   Encroachment upon streets or property of building or
structures



   100.053   Storage of merchandise on sidewalks



   100.054   Obstruction of drains



   100.055   Obstruction of streets



House Numbering



   100.070   House numbering system



   100.071   Specifications for numbers; failure to number an offense



Administration and Enforcement



   100.085   Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements to
supervise work and enforce provisions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 100.001  INJURING SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavement.



(1994 Code, § 100.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.002  INJURING NEW PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to walk upon, drive any vehicle or animal
upon, or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while it is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft
newly-laid pavement.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle, animal or
other vehicle over or on any freshly oiled street or alley, unless the street
or alley has been opened for traffic by order of the Commissioner of Streets
and Public Improvements.



(1994 Code, § 100.02)  (Ord. 1, passed 6-21-1937)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.003  BARRICADES AND LIGHTS; USE OF; DISTURBANCE OF.



   (A)   (1)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a
street, sidewalk or other public place, or making an excavation in any such
place, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or
vehicle by reason of the work; the barricades shall be protected by a light
at night.



      (2)   Any defects in any pavement shall be barricaded to
prevent any injury; and any person properly maintaining any opening or
excavation in any such place shall guard the opening or excavation while it
remains open by proper barricades and lights.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any
barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or
excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful to drive through, around or under
any barricade on to any street or alley, which has been closed or partially
closed by the barricade.



(1994 Code, § 100.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.004  DEPOSITING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE OR REFUSE ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street, sidewalk or alley any
dangerous or noxious substance or any refuse without the consent of the
Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements and the Council.



(1994 Code, § 100.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.005  PERMISSION REQUIRED TO ERECT POLES AND WIRES.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over
any public street, alley or other public way without having first secured
permission from the Council.



(1994 Code, § 100.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.006  OPENINGS IN PUBLIC WAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or
stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without a permit from the
Council.



   (B)   All lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a
suitable strong cover or a railing, to the approval of the Commissioner of
Streets and Public Improvements.



(1994 Code, § 100.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.007  BARBED WIRE OR ELECTRIC FENCE.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in
whole or in part, of barbed wire or with any similar material designed to
cause injury to persons, or any wire charged with electric current, anywhere
within three feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public
way or place.



(1994 Code, § 100.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



EXCAVATIONS



§ 100.020  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in, or tunnel under any
public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place, in the city, without
having first secured a permit therefor. Application shall be made to the City
Clerk and shall be referred to the Commissioner of Streets and Public
Improvements; no permit shall be issued without the Commissioner’s
approval, except upon order of the Council, and no permit incident to making
a new connection with the water or sewer system shall be issued, except on
order of the Council. All applications shall specify the intended location
and purpose of the excavation.



(1994 Code, § 100.20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.021  DEPOSIT REQUIRED; DISPOSITION OF DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Each application for a permit required by this subchapter
shall be accompanied with a deposit to be known as an “excavation deposit
charge”.



      (1)   Sidewalk excavation deposit:  $500; and



      (2)   Street and curb excavation deposit:  $1,500.



   (B)   The deposit shall be kept by the city until such time as the
depositor making the excavation shall have refilled the same in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter and the refill has been approved by
the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements; at such time, the
deposit shall be applied toward any expense the city has incurred in regard
to the excavation, if any, and the balance shall be refunded to the depositor.



(1994 Code, § 100.21)



§ 100.022  BACKFILLING AND RESURFACING.



   Any person making any excavation shall refill the same by flooding in
sand to within 12 inches of the surface, followed by eight inches of crushed
rock, and then followed by four inches of the same material as the original
surface, or where the original surface was asphalt, by four inches of cold
asphalt patch material.



(1994 Code, § 100.22)  (Ord. 171, passed 8-14-1967)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DRIVEWAYS



§ 100.035  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals
across any sidewalk in the city without having obtained a permit therefor.



   (B)   Application for a permit required by this section shall be
made to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by the required fee.



   (C)   No permit for the construction of a driveway for commercial
use, or the habitual use of any other than the owner or occupant of the
premises served, shall be issued, except upon the order of the Council.



(1994 Code, § 100.35)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.036  GRADE AND SURFACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to
leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk.



      (2)   The grade shall be as nearly as possible the same as
that of the adjoining sidewalk.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any
driveway where it crosses the sidewalk constructed of materials as to render
it slippery and hazardous for pedestrians, or to have the grade of such
portion vary from the grade of the sidewalk, or be other than level.



(1994 Code, § 100.36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.037  MATERIALS; SUPERVISION OF WORK.



   Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or of other
materials as may be approved by the Council, and construction work shall be
done under the supervision of the Commissioner of Streets and Public
Improvements.



(1994 Code, § 100.37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.038  DRIVEWAY TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR.



   It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a driveway to keep it
in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from obstruction and
openings.



(1994 Code, § 100.38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS



§ 100.050  CREATION OR MAINTENANCE OF OBSTRUCTIONS OF STREETS OR SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction, visual or physical, of any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way, except as may be specifically authorized by this code or other
city ordinance or by the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements.



(1994 Code, § 100.50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.051  DISPLAY OF GOODS ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or
other public place as space for the display or sale of goods or merchandise,
or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any pavements.



(1994 Code, § 100.51)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.052  ENCROACHMENT UPON STREETS OR PROPERTY OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure
which encroaches upon any public street or property.



(1994 Code, § 100.52)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.053  STORAGE OF MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALKS.



   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory
to delivery, if the usable width of the walk is not thereby reduced to less
than four feet; no article shall remain on a sidewalk for more than one-half
hour.



(1994 Code, § 100.53)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.054  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINS.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.



(1994 Code, § 100.54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.055  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.



   Any person who shall willfully and necessarily hinder, obstruct or
delay, or who shall willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or
obstruct any other person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any
street or highway or who shall offer for barter or sale merchandise on the
street or highway so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1994 Code, § 100.55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



HOUSE NUMBERING



§ 100.070  HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM.



   All lots, buildings and structures in the city shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan.



   (A)   The base line for streets running north and south shall be
Main Street, and numbers lying north or south thereof shall be designated
north, or south, as the case may be; the base line for streets running east
and west shall be Market Street to Fourth Street and St. Louis Street from
Fourth Street, south, and numbers lying east or west of this line shall be
designated east, or west, as the case may be.



   (B)   Numbering shall begin with the base lines with the number 100,
and one unit shall be allowed for each 30 feet of frontage. The numbers at
each block shall begin with 100 or a multiple thereof.



   (C)   Odd numbers shall be on the north and west sides of the
streets.



(1994 Code, § 100.65)



§ 100.071  SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMBERS; FAILURE TO NUMBER AN OFFENSE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every
building in the city to have placed thereon in a place visible from the
street figures at least three inches high showing the number of the building.



   (B)   Any person failing to so number any house owned or occupied by
him, her or it, after receiving notice to do so from the City Clerk, fails to
number the building, he or she shall be guilty of an offense.



(1994 Code, § 100.66)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 100.085  COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS TO SUPERVISE
WORK AND ENFORCE PROVISIONS.



   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the city
shall be under the supervision of the Commissioner of Streets and Public
Improvements. The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall have
supervision over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be
charged with the enforcement of all provisions of this subchapter and other
city ordinances relating to public places, except traffic laws, and he or she
is hereby authorized to enforce such laws.



(1994 Code, § 100.75)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   LICENSING PROVISIONS



      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      112.   AMUSEMENTS



      113.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS



      114.   TAXICABS



      115.   ADULT USE LICENSING AND REGULATION



      116.   CONTRACTORS



      117.   MEDICAL PROVIDERS



      118.   MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATIONS



      119.   LICENSING AND REGULATION OF OTHER BUSINESSES



      120.   RAFFLES



      121.   TRANSITORY LODGING LICENSING AND REGULATION



      122.   CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



CHAPTER 110:  LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Application for license and permits; contents



   110.02   Forms



   110.03   License or permit to bear signature of City Clerk



   110.04   Investigation; referral; time limits



   110.05   Payment of license fee; proration of fee



   110.06   License year; notice of expiration of license



   110.07   Additional fee for late renewals



   110.08   Premises to comply with regulations



   110.09   Transferability of license



   110.10   Not to be operated as a nuisance



   110.11   Inspections; right of entry



   110.12   Samples; duty to furnish



   110.13   Refusal of entry, sample grounds for revocation of license



   110.14   Revocation



   110.15   License to be posted



§ 110.01  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND PERMITS; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, applications for all licenses and
permits required by this code or any other ordinance of the city shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk.



   (B)   Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered
and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain any additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the city officials in
issuing the permit or license applied for.



(1994 Code, § 110.01)



§ 110.02  FORMS.



   Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 110.02)



§ 110.03  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO BEAR SIGNATURE OF CITY CLERK.



   Unless otherwise provided, each license or permit issued shall bear the
signature of the City Clerk only.



(1994 Code, § 110.03)



§ 110.04  INVESTIGATION; REFERRAL; TIME LIMITS.



   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where the
provisions of this business title or any other ordinance of the city
necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of the permit
or license, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the proper officer
for making the investigation within 48 hours of the time of receipt of the
application by the City Clerk. The officer charged with the duty of making
the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten days after receiving the application or a copy thereof.



(1994 Code, § 110.04)



§ 110.05  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE; PRORATION OF FEE.



   In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the City Clerk. When application for an annual license is made
after the expiration of six months of the current license year, the license
for the remainder of the year shall be issued upon payment of one-half the
annual fee.



(1994 Code, § 110.05)



§ 110.06  LICENSE YEAR; NOTICE OF EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   All annual licenses shall terminate on March 31 of each year,
except licenses for alcoholic beverage sales.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a
statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if
an annual license, three weeks prior to the date of expiration. However, a
failure to send out such a notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive
it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license or a
renewal, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating without a
license.



(1994 Code, § 110.06)



§ 110.07  ADDITIONAL FEE FOR LATE RENEWALS.



   No person shall receive a renewal of any license issued under the
provisions of this business title after May 1 of each year unless he or she
shall pay an additional fee of 25% of the regular license fee, in addition to
the regular license fee.



(1994 Code, § 110.07)



§ 110.08  PREMISES TO COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to
be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this
business title and other ordinances of the city. No license or permit shall
be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which
would involve a violation of Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning.



(1994 Code, § 110.08)



§ 110.09  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Licenses issued may be transferred by the original licensee;
provided that, written notice thereof is given to the City Clerk within ten
days before the transfer is made, but no more than one transfer of any
license shall be made within any license year. However, it shall be unlawful
to transfer any peddler’s, itinerant merchant’s liquor or chauffeur’s
license and any attempted transfer of a license shall have no effect.



   (B)   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any
permitted act, may be changed. Ten days’ notice of the transfer of location
shall be given to the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the
contrary. The building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of this code
and other ordinances of the city must be complied with.



(1994 Code, § 110.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.10  NOT TO BE OPERATED AS A NUISANCE.



   No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to
amount to a nuisance in fact.



(1994 Code, § 110.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.11  INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by this code or any other city ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with any provision of or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to
be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any
officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make the
inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.



(1994 Code, § 110.11)



§ 110.12  SAMPLES; DUTY TO FURNISH.



   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure conformance with any provision of this business title or
any other city ordinance, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the
duty of any licensee to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
city requesting a sample, sufficient samples of the material or commodity for
analysis.



(1994 Code, § 110.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.13  REFUSAL OF ENTRY, SAMPLE GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may
revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the
city who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make
an inspection or take a sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate
sample of the desired commodity, or who interferes with the officer or
employee while in the performance of his or her duty in making the
inspection. However, no license shall be revoked for such cause unless
written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the city, stating that the inspection or sample is desired at
the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.



(1994 Code, § 110.13)



§ 110.14  REVOCATION.



   Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Mayor at
any time during the term of the license or permit for any violation by the
licensee or permittee of the provisions of this business title or any other
city ordinance relating to the license or permit; the subject matter of the
license or permit; or to the premises occupied; the revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed.



(1994 Code, § 110.14)



§ 110.15  LICENSE TO BE POSTED.



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the city to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for the business at all times.



(1994 Code, § 110.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Exemptions



   111.03   Mayor to be Liquor Commissioner



   111.04   Scope of review; appeals of Liquor Commissioner findings
limited to record



Licensing Provisions



   111.15   License required; violation of license terms



   111.16   Application; contents; execution



   111.17   Provisions for non-issuance



   111.18   Location restrictions; certain businesses not subject to
restrictions



   111.19   Classes of licenses; annual fees



   111.20   Allocation of number of licenses by class



   111.21   License year; proration of fee



   111.22   Payment of fee; refund if license denied; disposition of fee



   111.23   List of licenses in force; copies; revision



   111.24   Scope of license; transferability; decedent’s and
insolvent’s estates; refund of fee



   111.25   Renewal privileges; rights not vested



   111.26   Change of location



   111.27   Revocation



Standards of Operation



   111.40   Closing hours; Sunday sales



   111.41   Unobstructed view of premises required; lighting standards;
submission of plans



   111.42   Certain activities prohibited



   111.43   Dispensing of alcoholic liquor by minor



   111.44   Purchases by persons under age



   111.45   Misrepresentation of person’s age



   111.46   Possession or consumption by person under age



   111.47   Selling or delivering to person under age



   111.48   Underage persons; habitual drunkards



   111.49   Gambling and gambling devices



 



   111.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of fermented liquids, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term ALCOHOL does not include denatured alcohol
or wood alcohol.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirituous, vinous and malt
beverages and every liquid or solid, patented or not patented, containing
alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by
a human being.



   MALT BEVERAGES. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt, hops in water and
includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the
like.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg or
other receptacle or container whatsoever, used corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of the alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor.



   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are
actually and regularly served without sleeping accommodations, the premises
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor, for
use or consumption and not for resale in any form.



   SALE. Any transfer or exchange in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for direct or indirect consideration, and including all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. SALE
includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts:



      (1)   The selling of alcoholic liquor;



      (2)   The giving away of alcoholic liquor;



      (3)   The dispensing of alcoholic liquor;



      (4)   The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for
consumption of alcoholic liquor on premises;



      (5)   The pouring of alcoholic liquor;



      (6)   The providing of setups containing alcoholic liquor; and



      (7)   The storage of any alcoholic liquor.



   SELL. Includes to solicit or receive an order for alcoholic liquor or
to keep or expose alcoholic liquor for sale and to keep alcoholic liquor with
the intent to sell.



   SPECIAL EVENT. An event conducted by a special event retailer.



   SPECIAL EVENT RETAILER. Any educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious, non-profit organization or other lawful and qualified person or
entity which sells or offers for sale beer, wine or spirituous liquor only
for consumption at the locations and on the dates designated by a special
event retail license.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. Any beverage which contains alcohol by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance, in solution and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors when blended, rectified or otherwise
mixed with alcohol or other substances.



   VINOUS LIQUOR. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar including such
beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits.



(1994 Code, § 111.01)  (Ord. 389, passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 95-22, passed
12-26-1995; Ord. 12-01, passed 2-13-2012)



§ 111.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used
in the manufacture of denatured alcohol or to any liquid or solid containing
0.5% or less of alcohol by volume.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to flavoring
extracts, concentrates, syrups or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary
or toilet preparations or food products unfit for beverage purposes, but the
provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to exclude or not to apply
to alcoholic liquors used in the manufacture of preparations or compounding
products. None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to wine intended
for use and used by any church or religious organization for sacramental
purposes.



(1994 Code, § 111.02)



§ 111.03  MAYOR TO BE LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.



   The Mayor of the city shall be the Liquor Commissioner, with all of the
authority and duties prescribed by state law, this code and any other
ordinance of the city.



(1994 Code, § 111.03)



§ 111.04  SCOPE OF REVIEW; APPEALS OF LIQUOR COMMISSIONER FINDINGS LIMITED
TO RECORD.



   All appeals to the state’s Liquor Control Commission by a city liquor
licensee of a decision, order or action by the Mayor acting as Local Liquor
Control Commissioner or his or her designee having the effect of levying a
fine upon a licensee, or suspending, not renewing or revoking a liquor
license issued under this chapter shall be limited to a review of the
official record of the formal proceedings before the Commissioner, upon which
it shall be determined whether the action was based upon substantial evidence.



(1994 Code, § 111.04)  (Ord. 94-012, passed 10-24-1994)



LICENSING PROVISIONS



§ 111.15  LICENSE REQUIRED; VIOLATION OF LICENSE TERMS.



   It shall be unlawful to sell at retail in the city any alcoholic liquor
without first having secured a retail liquor dealers’ license or to sell
alcoholic liquor in violation of the terms of such a license.



(1994 Code, § 111.15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.16  APPLICATION; CONTENTS; EXECUTION.



   (A)   An applicant for a license required by this subchapter shall
submit to the Mayor, as Liquor Commissioner, an application in writing under
oath stating:



      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case
of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to
share in the profits thereof; and, in the case of  a  corporation, for
profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors; and, if a
majority in interest of the stock of the corporation is owned by one person
or his or her nominees, the name and address of the person;



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of
birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization;



      (3)   The character of business of the applicant; and, in case
of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed;



      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been in
business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on
which its charter was issued;



      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at
the time application is made;



      (6)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under the license;



      (7)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar
application for a similar other license on premises other than described in
this application, and the disposition of the application;



      (8)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a
felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this code, other ordinances of the city or laws of the
state;



      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons
therefor;



      (10)   The date of incorporation if an Illinois corporation,
or the date of becoming qualified under the state’s Business Corporations
Act (i.e., 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.) to transact business in the state if a
foreign corporation;



      (11)   He or she will not violate any of the laws of the city,
the state or of the United States in the conduct of his or her place of
business; and



      (12)   He or she has not received or borrowed money or
anything else of value, and that he or she will not receive or borrow money
or anything else of value, other than merchandising credit in the ordinary
course of business for a period not to exceed 90 days, directly or indirectly
from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor representative of
any the manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing information, the application
shall contain such other and further information as the Mayor may, by rule or
regulation not inconsistent with law, prescribe.



   (C)   If the application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to
by at least two members of the partnership or the president and secretary of
the corporation.



(1994 Code, § 111.16)



§ 111.17  PROVISIONS FOR NON-ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, no license
of any kind issued by the state’s Commission or any local commission shall
be issued to:



      (1)   A person who is not a resident of any city, village or
county in which the premises covered by the license are located, except in
case of railroad or boat licenses;



      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he or she resides;



      (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any
federal or state law, unless the Commission determines that such person will
not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice after
considering matters set forth in such person’s application in accordance
with 235 ILCS 5/6-2.5 and the Commission’s investigation;



      (5)   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of
prostitution or keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting
prostitution that involves keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting
juvenile prostitution that involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution;



      (6)   A person who has been convicted of pandering;



      (7)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has
been revoked for cause;



      (8)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a
first application;



      (9)   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or
any limited partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political
subdivision, unless residency is required by local ordinance;



      (10)   A corporation or limited liability company, if any
member, officer manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such
corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any
reason other than citizenship and residence within the political subdivision;



      (11)   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is
incorporated or organized in the state or unless it is a foreign corporation
or foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983, being 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq., or the Limited
Liability Company Act, being 805 ILCS 180/1-1 et seq., to transact business
in the state. The Commission shall permit and accept from an applicant for a
license under this Act proof prepared from the Secretary of State’s website
that the corporation or limited liability company is in good standing and is
qualified under the Business Corporation Act or the Limited Liability Company
Act to transact business in the state;



      (12)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required by the licensee;



      (13)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this chapter or has forfeited
his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation,
unless the Commission determines, in accordance with 235 ILCS 5/6-2.5, that
the person will not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed
practice;



      (14)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;



      (15)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of
a local liquor control commission, any mayor, alderman or member of the city
council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any
member of a county board; and no such official shall have a direct interest
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor; except that, a
license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not
located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if
the issuance of such license is approved by the state’s Liquor Control
Commission;



      (16)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business
to be operated by the licensee;



      (17)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense
as proscribed by any of 720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3) through (11), or as proscribed
by §§ 28-1.1 or 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 2012, being 720 ILCS 5/28-1.1
or 5/28-3, or the Criminal Code of 2012,  or as proscribed by a statute
replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;



      (18)   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has
been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is
eligible to be issued a license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230
ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., or the state’s Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act, being 230
ILCS 20/1 et seq.;



      (19)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use
or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have
liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at
last equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in 235 ILCS 5/6-21(a);



      (20)   A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as
a manufacturer of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any
legal, equitable or beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person
licensed in the state as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes
of this division (A)(20), a person who is licensed by any licensing authority
as a MANUFACTURER OF BEER shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer
who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a partnership, corporation,
limited liability company or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate or agent
thereof, or any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer
of beer; or



      (21)   A person who is licensed in this state as a distributor
or importing distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise licensed in the state as a distributor or
importing distributor having any legal, equitable or beneficial interest,
directly or indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any
licensing authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or after the
effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, no more
than 5% of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are
publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 78a et seq.. For the purposes of this
division (A)(21), a person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a
MANUFACTURER OF BEER shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who
is also a manufacturer of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited
liability company or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate or agent thereof, or
any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.



   (B)   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the
denial, suspension or revocation of a license applied for or held by the
corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of
any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in
any financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its
relationship with each director, officer, employee or controlling shareholder
whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall determine if all provisions of
division this division (B) have been met before any action on the
corporation’s license is initiated.



(235 ILCS 5/6-2)  (1994 Code, § 111.17)



§ 111.18  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS; CERTAIN BUSINESSES NOT SUBJECT TO
RESTRICTIONS.



   No license required by this subchapter shall be issued for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school or
hospital. However, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels or restaurants,
regularly operated as restaurants or food shops or other places where the
sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if the
place of business so exempted shall have been established for such other
purpose prior to the effective date of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 111.18)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.19  CLASSES OF LICENSES; ANNUAL FEES.



   Licenses required by this subchapter shall be divided into nine
classes, as follows.



   (A)   Class A licenses. Class A licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as other
retail sales of alcoholic liquor. Effective 7-1-2007, the annual license fee
for Class A licenses shall be $500; effective 7-1-2009, the annual fee shall
increase to $700.



   (B)   Class B licenses. Class B licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as other
retail sales of alcoholic liquor. Effective 7-1-2007, the annual fee for
Class B licenses shall be $400; effective 7-1-2009, the annual fee shall
increase to $600.



   (C)   Class C licenses. Class C licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor by an organized club, fraternity or society to
members of the club, fraternity or society only, for consumption on the
premises. Effective 7-1-2007, the annual license fee for Class C licenses
shall be $400; effective 7-1-2009, the annual fee shall increase to $600.



   (D)   Class D licenses. Class D licenses authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor but which shall not be consumed on the premises where
sold. Effective 7-1-2007, the annual fee for Class D licenses shall be $400;
effective 7-1-2009, the annual fee shall increase to $600.



   (E)   Class E licenses. Class E licenses authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of restaurants, but not
for consumption off the premises of restaurants and not for resale in any
form. For the purpose of this Class E license, a RESTAURANT is defined to
mean a public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the
public for the purpose of serving meals and where meals actually are served
on a regular basis without sleeping accommodations; the public place being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable foods for its patrons; provided
further that, a restaurant as herein defined shall mean an establishment with
derives more than 50% of its gross sales from the sale of food. Effective
2-1-2007, the annual license fee for Class E licenses shall be $300;
effective 7-1-2009, the annual fee shall increase to $500.



   (F)   Class F licenses. Class F licenses authorize the retail sale
of malt beverages and vinous liquor only as defined herein which shall not be
consumed on the premises where sold. Effective 7-1-2007, the annual fee for
Class F licenses shall be $500; effective 7-1-2009, the annual fee shall
increase to $700.



   (G)   Class G licenses. Class G licenses authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor as defined herein by hotels, motels and bed and breakfast
establishments but not for consumption off the premises and not for resale in
any form. For purposes of this Class G licenses, a BED AND BREAKFAST
ESTABLISHMENT shall be defined as set forth in § 155.004 of this code of
ordinances; a HOTEL or MOTEL shall be defined as an establishment that
provides lodging on a short-term basis and other guest services, including,
but not limited to, meals, swimming pool and childcare and other facilities.
The annual fee for a bed and breakfast Class G license shall be $50; the
annual fee for a hotel or motel Class G license shall be $100.



   (H)   Class H licenses.



      (1)   Class H licenses authorize a customer or patron to bring
beer, vinous or spirituous liquor into the permitted premises to be consumed
within an enclosed building on the premises; provided that:



         (a)   Said licensee shall not directly or indirectly
serve, store or handle alcoholic liquor in any fashion;



         (b)   All alcoholic liquor brought into the premises
must be in its original package and no open alcohol containers may be removed
from the premises;



         (c)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed
into the premises at any time when alcoholic liquor is present therein; and



         (d)   The licensee shall maintain liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in like manner to any liquor licensee
governed by this code or the state’s Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq..



      (2)   The annual fee for a Class H license shall be $250.



   (I)   Class special event retailer license. Special event retailer
license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail beer,
wine and spirituous liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any
form and only at the location and on specific dates designated for the
special event in the license. An applicant for a special event retailer
license must also submit with the application proof satisfactory to the Mayor
as Liquor Control Commissioner that the applicant will provide dram shop
liability insurance in the maximum limits. A special event retailer license
shall permit the licensee to purchase beer, wine and spirituous liquor from a
state licensed distributor and to sell beer, wine and spirituous liquor only
for the consumption at the location and on the dates designated for the
event. Effective 7-1-2007, the license fee for special event retailer license
shall be $50; effective 7-1-2009, the license fee shall increase to $100.



(1994 Code, § 111.19)  (Ord. 7, passed 5-29-1939; Ord. 303, passed
2-11-1980; Ord. 389, passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 00-04, passed 2-14-2000; Ord.
2006-02, passed 4-10-2006; Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-22-2007; Ord. 12-02, passed
2-13-2012; Ord. 14-05, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 111.20  ALLOCATION OF NUMBER OF LICENSES BY CLASS.



   (A)   No more than a combined total of 14 Class A, Class B, Class C,
and Class D licenses shall be issued and be in force at any one time; no more
than four Class F licenses shall be issued and be in force at any one time;
no more than five special event retailer licenses shall be issued and be in
force at any one time.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the
provisions hereof shall not limit, nor prohibit, the reissuance of additional
licenses of any class to the holder of any license in force in areas which
may hereinafter be annexed by the city. Except as provided in division (C)
below, any license reissued shall not be included in the total number of
licenses allocated in division (A) above.



   (C)   Upon the lapse, non-renewal or revocation of any liquor
license formerly utilized in determining the total number of licenses issued
pursuant to division (A) above, a license reissued under the terms of
division (B) above shall then be included in the total number of licenses to
be issued under this section.



(1994 Code, § 111.20)  (Ord. 7, passed 5-29-1939; Ord. 389, passed
7-9-1990; Ord. 407, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 94-008, passed 6-27-1994; Ord.
98-05, passed 6-8-1998; Ord. 00-04, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 2002-01, passed
1-14-2001; Ord. 2002-11, passed 7-22-2002; Ord. 05-11, passed 9-12-2005; Ord.
06-04, passed 4-24-2006; Ord. 2006-08, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 14-05, passed
5-27-2014; Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-2017)



§ 111.21  LICENSE YEAR; PRORATION OF FEE.



   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter, except the
special event retailer license, shall terminate on the last day of June next
following its issuance.



   (B)   The special event retailer license shall terminate on the date
designated in the license when issued.



   (C)   The fee, except the fee for the special event retailer
license, to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar
months which have expired on the license year prior to the issuance of the
license.



(1994 Code, § 111.21)  (Ord. 24, passed 3-26-1945; Ord. 389, passed
7-9-1990)



§ 111.22  PAYMENT OF FEE; REFUND IF LICENSE DENIED; DISPOSITION OF FEE.



   All fees required by this subchapter shall be paid to the Mayor, as
Liquor Commissioner, at the time application for a license is made and the
fees shall be forthwith turned over to the City Treasurer. In the event that
license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license
is granted, the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or such
other fund as shall be designated by the Council.



(1994 Code, § 111.22)



§ 111.23  LIST OF LICENSES IN FORCE; COPIES; REVISION.



   The Mayor, as Liquor Control Commissioner, shall keep or cause to be
kept, a complete record of all licenses required by this subchapter which
have been issued by him or her and the Mayor shall furnish the City Clerk,
the City Treasurer and the City Marshal (i.e., the Chief of Police), each
with a copy of the list. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the
revocation of any old license, the Mayor shall give written notice of the
action to each of the officials named in this section within 48 hours of the
action.



(1994 Code, § 111.23)



§ 111.24  SCOPE OF LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY; DECEDENT’S AND INSOLVENT’S
ESTATES; REFUND OF FEE.



   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, except special
event retailer licenses, unless sooner revoked as is provided in this
subchapter, and it shall not constitute property, nor shall it be the subject
of attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to be encumbered or
hypothecated. The license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided that, the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee
after the death of the licensee or the insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of the license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of the licensee. A special event retailer license
shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed 15 days per
licensee in any 12-month period. A refund shall be made of that portion of
the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented
from operating under the license due to death or bankruptcy.



(1994 Code, § 111.24)  (Ord. 389, passed 7-9-1990)



§ 111.25  RENEWAL PRIVILEGES; RIGHTS NOT VESTED.



   (A)   Any licensee, except a special event retailer licensee, may
renew his or her license issued pursuant to this subchapter at the expiration
thereof; provided, he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable for the purpose.



   (B)   The renewal privilege provided in this section shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall, in any case, prevent the Mayor as
Liquor Commissioner from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued
within the city.



(1994 Code, § 111.25)  (Ord. 389, passed 7-9-1990)



§ 111.26  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only on the premises described in the application and license. The
location may be changed only upon a written permit to make the change issued
by the Mayor, as Liquor Commissioner. No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor under the law of the state, the provisions of this
code and the ordinances of the city.



(1994 Code, § 111.26)



§ 111.27  REVOCATION.



   The Mayor, as Liquor Commissioner, may revoke any license issued
pursuant to this chapter for any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or for any violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic liquor.



(1994 Code, § 111.27)



STANDARDS OF OPERATION



§ 111.40  CLOSING HOURS; SUNDAY SALES.



   (A)   Class A, D and E licenses. It shall be unlawful for the holder
of a Class A license, Class D license or a Class E license to sell at retail
any alcoholic liquor in the city between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
of any day, and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   (B)   Class B licenses. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a
Class B license to sell at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, and between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   (C)   Class C licenses. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a
Class C license to sell at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, and between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   (D)   Class F licenses. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a
Class F license to sell any alcoholic liquor at retail in the city between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.



   (E)   Class G licenses. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a
Class G license to sell any alcoholic liquor, as defined herein, in the city
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.



   (F)   Class H licenses. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a
Class H license to remain open for business in the city between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   (G)   In general. It shall be unlawful to keep open for business any
premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours in
which the sale of the liquor is prohibited (hereinafter referred to as
closing hours). No person shall be admitted to the premises after the closing
hours established in this section and no person shall remain on any such
premises 15 minutes after the closing hours, except the licensee, or one
representative thereof and one paid employee. However, in the case of
restaurants and hotels, such establishments may remain open during the
closing hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold or consumed on the
premises by any person during the closing hours.



(1994 Code, § 111.40)  (Ord. 85, passed 5-3-1951; Ord. 347, passed
5-28-1985; Ord. 368, passed 3-28-1988; Ord. 00-04, passed 2-14-2000; Ord.
2006-03, passed 4-10-2006; Ord. 14-50, passed 5-27-2014)  Penalty, see §
111.99



§ 111.41  UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF PREMISES REQUIRED; LIGHTING STANDARDS;
SUBMISSION OF PLANS.



   In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
upon the premises is licensed, other than a club, hotel, restaurant or any
bowling establishment, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing
shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of the licensed premises
or inside the premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of
the licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times and no
booth, screen, partition or other obstruction or any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of the premises which
shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of the premises from the
street, road or sidewalk and the premises must be so located that there shall
be a full view of the entire interior of the premises from the street, road
or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises
shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or
artificial white light so that all parts of the interior shall be clearly
visible. In case the view into any licensed premises required by this section
shall be willfully suffered to be so obscured or in any manner obstructed,
then the license shall be subject to revocation in the manner provided in
this section. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Mayor
shall have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings
and photographs of the premises showing the clearance of the view as required
by this section.



(1994 Code, § 111.41)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.42  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No licensee shall permit or assent or be a party in any way to
the showing of sex movies (X-rated movies) or featuring nude or semi-nude
dancers, strippers or similar type entertainment on any premises for which a
license has been issued pursuant to the terms and provisions of §§ 111.15
through 111.27 of this chapter.



   (B)   It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this section to
protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals of the community and
impose restrictions upon those activities which pander to gross sexuality in
a manner that would increase crime and violence and be repugnant to the
morals of the community. In recognition of the protections afforded to the
citizens under the First and Fourteenth Amendments, it is not the intent of
this section to inhibit freedom of speech or the press, but rather to deter
those of low morals from imposing their lack of morals upon the rest of the
community and further recognizing that those premises licensed to serve
alcoholic liquors which become centers of loose moral conduct frequently
become places of rowdiness, criminality and indecent behavior. It is further
the belief that just as advertising is designed to stimulate one’s appetite
for desiring goods or a service, an overabundance of preoccupation with
sexual activity arouses the appetites of those preoccupied and encourages
violation of the criminal statutes involving sexual offenses and is contrary
to the health, safety and welfare of the community.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
is defined as:



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and/or



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS is
defined as less than completely and opaquely covered:



      (1)   Human genitals, pubic region;



      (2)   Buttock; and/or



      (3)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.



   (E)   No licensee shall permit any movie or other form of display or
shall feature or permit dancers or other persons to be engaged in specific
sexual activities or which has significant displays of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   (F)   Any licensee violating any provisions of this section shall be
fined as set forth in § 111.99 of this chapter, and his or her license shall
be revoked or suspended. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall not be entitled to have issued or renewed any
liquor license pursuant to §§ 111.15 through 111.27 of this chapter, for a
period of five years from the date on which the violation occurs.



(1994 Code, § 111.42)  (Ord. 325, passed 4-11-1983)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.43  DISPENSING OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person having a retail liquor license
issued by the city to permit any minor, whether an employee or otherwise, to
dispense alcoholic liquor, sell alcoholic liquor, packaged or otherwise, or
to permit any minor to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor as an employee
of any retail licensee or to permit any minor at any time to attend any bar
and draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor on any licensed retail premises.
For the purpose of this section, a MINOR is any person under the age of 18
years.



(1994 Code, § 111.43)  (Ord. 356, passed 6-23-1986)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.44  PURCHASES BY PERSONS UNDER AGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor from any person to whom a retail
liquor dealer’s license has been issued by the city.



(1994 Code, § 111.44)  (Ord. 250, passed 11-5-1973; Ord. 299, passed
1-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.45  MISREPRESENTATION OF PERSON’S AGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to misrepresent his or her age or to present to or offer to any persons to
whom a retail liquor dealer’s license has been issued by the city, his or
her agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age
and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own for
the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure the serving of any alcoholic beverage.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and falsely
represent to any person to whom a retail liquor dealer’s license has been
issued by the city, that any person under the age of 21 years is of full age
for the purpose of inducing the licensee to sell or furnish alcoholic liquor
to the person.



(1994 Code, § 111.45)  (Ord. 250, passed 11-5-1973; Ord. 299, passed
1-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.46  POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION BY PERSON UNDER AGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
receive, accept, possess or consume alcoholic liquor or beer or wine in the
city unless he or she is in the immediate presence of his or her parents or
legal guardian or in a private home with the approval of his or her parent or
legal guardian. However, this provision does not apply to possession by a
person under 21 years of age making a delivery of alcoholic beverage pursuant
to an order of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment.



(1994 Code, § 111.46)  (Ord. 250, passed 11-5-1973; Ord. 299, passed
1-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.47  SELLING OR DELIVERING TO PERSON UNDER AGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a
religious ceremony or service or to one who is in the immediate presence of
his or her parent or legal guardian or in a private home with the approval of
his or her parent or legal guardian.



(1994 Code, § 111.47)  (Ord. 250, passed 11-5-1973; Ord. 299, passed
1-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.48  UNDERAGE PERSONS; HABITUAL DRUNKARDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any persons having a retail liquor license
issued by the city or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or an employee of the licensee to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of 21 years or to any intoxicated person or to any
person known by him or her to be an habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane,
mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment.



(1994 Code, § 111.48)  (Ord. 250, passed 11-5-1973; Ord. 299, passed
1-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.49  GAMBLING AND GAMBLING DEVICES.



   Except as otherwise permitted by the state’s Video Gaming Act, 230
ILCS 40/1 et seq. (2010), it shall be unlawful to keep, place, maintain or
operate any gambling device or instrument in and upon the premises used or
occupies as a place where alcoholic liquor is sold or given away.



(1994 Code, § 111.49)  (Ord. 12-03, passed 6-25-2012)  Penalty, see §
111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already herein provided shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Any licensee violating any provisions of § 111.42 of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $500 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during, or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(1994 Code, § 111.99)  (Ord. 325, passed 4-11-1983)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Amusement Provisions



   112.01   Scope



   112.02   License required; application; fees



Circuses, Carnivals and Fairs



   112.15   Parades



GENERAL AMUSEMENT PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter, except as to licensing and fees,
shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements
in the city, whether specifically licensed in another subchapter of this
chapter or not.



(1994 Code, § 112.01)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which
is open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged, without
having first secured a license therefor. However, the provisions of this
section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically
licensed by any other provision of this code or by any other ordinance of the
city.



   (B)   Applications for licenses required by this section shall be
made to the City Clerk and shall comply with the provisions of Ch. 110 of
this code of ordinances, Licensing Provisions.



   (C)   The fee for each license required by this section shall be
$50, unless the fee is waived by the Mayor.



(1994 Code, § 112.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FAIRS



§ 112.15  PARADES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or exhibit any parade
connected with a circus, carnival or fair in or on any public street, alley
or other public way or place in the city, unless a permit therefor is first
obtained from the City Clerk.



   (B)   A permit required by this section shall specify the route to
be followed.



(1994 Code, § 112.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Prerequisites to conduct business



   113.03   License required



   113.04   Application; contents



   113.05   Action on application; approval or rejection



   113.06   Surety bond or other approved security



   113.07   False representation



   113.08   Exhibition of license



   113.09   Transferability



   113.10   Revocation of license



   113.11   Attraction of attention to wares



   113.12   Exemptions



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail
sale of goods, wares or merchandise in this state and who, for the purpose of
conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of
any kind, or vacant lot. However, this chapter does not apply to any person
selling goods, wares or merchandise which are raised, produced or
manufactured by him or her, to any person selling vegetables, fruit or
perishable farm products at an established market, to any person operating a
store or refreshment stand, to any person operating a stand or booth on or
adjacent to property owned by him or her or upon which he or she resides, to
any person operating a stand or booth at a county fair, or to any person
operating a stand or booth at a trade show, exposition, convention or similar
event. This Act does not apply to any person holding a valid license, issued
by the city, to engage in retail sales.



   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm,
association or other entity.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person who transports tangible personal
property for retail sale within the city who does not maintain an established
office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center or
residence from which such business is conducted. However, this chapter does
not apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property, who is
fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or placed by mail
or other means. This chapter does apply to any person holding a valid
license, issued by the city, to engage in retail sales.



(1994 Code, § 113.01)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.02  PREREQUISITES TO CONDUCT BUSINESS.



   It is a violation of this chapter for any person either as principal or
agent to conduct business as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor within
the city without first complying with all requirements of the state’s
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq., by obtaining a
certificate of registration; without first having posted a bond or approved
security pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and without first having
obtained a license under this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 113.02)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person who wishes to obtain a license as transient
merchant or itinerant vendor shall file a written license application as set
forth herein.



   (B)   Any license issued under this chapter shall expire on December
31 of the year of issuance. The annual license fee for any license granted
under this chapter shall be $100 from any person wishing to conduct business
as either a transient merchant or itinerant vendor under this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 113.03)  (Ord. 95-014, passed 7-24-1995; Ord. 2001-11, passed
7-23-2001)



§ 113.04  APPLICATION; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the
manner of application, payment, conditions, issuance and duration of the
license required in the preceding section shall be as prescribed in Ch. 110
of this code of ordinances, Licensing Provisions.



   (B)   Applicants for a license required by this chapter must file
with the City Clerk a sworn written application in duplicate on forms to be
furnished by the City Clerk, which shall give the following information:



      (1)   The name and a description of the applicant;



      (2)   The address, legal and local, of the applicant;



      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and
the goods to be sold and, in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether
produced or grown by the applicant;



      (4)   The location of the proposed business activity,
including submission of written consent from the landowner or person or
persons otherwise in possession of said site;



      (5)   If the applicant is employed, the name and address of
his or her employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship and, if the employer is a corporation, the name and address of
the local registered agent;



      (6)   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



      (7)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the
vehicle, including make, model and year, together with current license number;



      (8)   A photograph of the applicant taken within 120 days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application; the picture shall
be at least two inches square showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and distinguishing manner;



      (9)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever
been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal code
provision or ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty assessed therefor; and



      (10)   A copy of a certificate of registration as issued to
applicant by the state’s Department of Revenue pursuant to Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act.



(1994 Code, § 113.04)  (Ord. 95-014, passed 7-24-1995; Ord. 2001-11, passed
7-23-2001)



§ 113.05  ACTION ON APPLICATION; APPROVAL OR REJECTION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the application required by this chapter, the
original shall be referred to the Chief of Police who shall cause an
investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made.



   (B)   If the investigation reveals the applicant’s character or
business responsibility to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall
endorse on the application his or her disapproval and his or her reasons,
returning the application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant
that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.



   (C)   If the investigation reveals that the character and the
business responsibility of the applicant to be satisfactory and the Chief of
Police so notes on the application or, if the Chief of Police fails to make a
return of the application within three days, the City Clerk shall, upon
payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant the license
applied for.



(1994 Code, § 113.05)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)



§ 113.06  SURETY BOND OR OTHER APPROVED SECURITY.



   The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a surety bond or shall
make cash deposit unless waived by the city. The amount of the bond or
deposit shall be equal to 50% of the wholesale value of the merchandise that
the applicant intends to offer for sale; however, the amount of the bond or
deposit shall not be less than $1,000, nor more that $10,000. The city may
waive the requirement of posting a surety bond or cash deposit.



(1994 Code, § 113.06)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)



§ 113.07  FALSE REPRESENTATION.



   No applicant for a license pursuant to this chapter shall make any
false representation as to the character, quality or nature of his or her
wares either for the purpose of obtaining a license or for the purpose of
inducing the purchase thereof.



(1994 Code, § 113.07)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.08  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.



   Licensees under this chapter are required to exhibit their license at
the request of any citizen.



(1994 Code, § 113.08)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.09  TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used at
any time by any person other than the person to whom it was issued.



(1994 Code, § 113.09)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)



§ 113.10  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained
in the application for the license;



      (2)   Fraud, the misrepresentation or a false statement made
in the course of carrying of the licensee’s business as a peddler;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or any other provision of
this code or any other ordinance of the city by licensee;



      (4)   Conviction of the licensee of any crime or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; and/or



      (5)   Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.



   (B)   Notice of a hearing for the revocation of the license shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid,
to the licensee at his or her last known address at least five days prior to
the date set for hearing.



(1994 Code, § 113.10)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)



§ 113.11  ATTRACTION OF ATTENTION TO WARES.



   No licensee, pursuant to this chapter, shall cry his or her wares upon
the street, nor shall he or she employ any device for the emanation of sound
to attract attention to his or her wares upon the streets of the city.



(1994 Code, § 113.11)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.12  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to news or magazine
vendors delivering the merchandise at the time of sale, nor shall they apply
to functions of religious, educational, charitable, not-for-profit
organizations recognized within the city, or for-profit vendors participating
in community events in which a separate license or permit fee is paid.



(1994 Code, § 113.12)  (Ord. 2001-11, passed 7-23-2001)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS



Section



   114.01   Definition



   114.02   License required; application



   114.03   Issuance of license



   114.04   Inspection of taxicabs prerequisite for issuance of license



   114.05   Insurance required



   114.06   License fee



   114.07   Requirements for the operation of taxicabs



   114.08   Taxi safety reporting



§ 114.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle used or kept for the use of the
transportation of passengers and their baggage for hire indiscriminately,
accepting and charging all such persons that may offer themselves for
transportation, but the term shall not including motor vehicles rented by
special contract to be operated by the customer.



(1994 Code, § 114.01)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate any taxicab within the city without a
license so to do.



   (B)   Application for such license shall state:



      (1)   The full name and address of the owner;



      (2)   The make and type of motorcar to be used;



      (3)   The factory number;



      (4)   The state license number thereof; and



      (5)   The length of time the vehicle has been in use.



(1994 Code, § 114.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   When the provisions of this section have been complied with and the
City Council is satisfied that the applicant for such license is a person of
good moral character, he or she may issue such license. No license shall be
granted to any person under 18 years of age.



(1994 Code, § 114.03)



§ 114.04  INSPECTION OF TAXICABS PREREQUISITE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   No license shall be issued for the operation of any taxicab until it
has been carefully inspected under the direction of the Chief of Police and
found to be in a safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean
and of good appearance.



(1994 Code, § 114.04)



§ 114.05  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before the issuance or renewal of a license, the licensee shall present
to the City Clerk a certificate showing insurance carried thereon in
compliance with the state law.



(1994 Code, § 114.05)



§ 114.06  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual license fee for each taxicab is $75.



(1994 Code, § 114.06)



§ 114.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OPERATION OF TAXICABS.



   (A)   The taxi driver's picture, the taxi driver's license or
registration number, and the taxicab medallion number or an exterior
identification number must be posted in a visible location in each cab.



   (B)   There must be posted in a visible location in each taxicab a
telephone number for a passenger to call if the taxi driver is operating the
taxicab in a reckless manner.



   (C)   If a taxi driver collides with a pedestrian while operating a
taxicab, resulting in bodily injury, then any responding law enforcement
officers must test the taxi driver for drug and alcohol use.



(625 ILCS 55/5)



§ 114.08  TAXI SAFETY REPORTING.



   In counties in which vehicle citation records are not readily available
to the public, the clerk of the circuit court shall furnish a list of all
moving violations involving a taxi or an individual licensed or registered as
a taxi driver upon the request of a unit of government that licenses,
registers, or otherwise regulates taxi drivers.



(625 ILCS 55/15)



CHAPTER 115:  ADULT USE LICENSING AND REGULATION



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   License required



   115.03   Issuance of license



   115.04   Fees



   115.05   Inspection



   115.06   Expiration of license



   115.07   Suspension



   115.08   Revocation



   115.09   Transfer of license



   115.10   Business records



   115.11   Adult entertainment cabarets; restrictions



   115.12   Video viewing booths; restrictions



   115.13   Hours of operation



   115.14   Alcohol



   115.15   Exterior display



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Ch. 111



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or
for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-operated
means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment
or section devoted to the sales or display of such materials; or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from
the establishment’s premises or any other factors showing the
establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which:



      (1)   Features topless dancers, strippers, “go-go”
dancers, male or female impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion show;



      (2)   Features entertainers who display “specified
anatomical areas”; or



      (3)   Features entertainers who by reason of their appearance
or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or
are engaged in explicit simulation of, specified sexual activities.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or area used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for viewing by patrons therein.



   ADULT NOVELTY STORE. An establishment having 25% or more of its sales
or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing “novelties”,
lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
or use for specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any other factors
showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.



   ADULT USE. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely or opaquely covered:
human genitals or pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination
of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a minor; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaged in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar
offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other
states or countries.



      (2)   For which less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction which is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense; less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for conviction whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or less than five years have
elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from
confinement from the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurred within any 24-month period.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy, fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.



(1994 Code, § 115.01)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use
without a valid use business license issued by the City Clerk pursuant to
this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license shall be made on a form provided
by the city.



   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this section. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) as is needed to enable the city to
determine whether the applicants meet the qualifications established in this
chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is other than an individual,
each individual who has a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign
the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified
under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee
if the license is granted.



   (E)   The completed application for an adult use business license
shall contain the following information:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall
state his or her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she
is 18 years of age;



      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall
state its complete name and the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement,
if any; and/or



      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall
state its complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal shareholders,
and the name and address of the registered corporate agent.



   (F)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:



      (1)   The business’ fictitious name; and



      (2)   Submit any required registration documents.



   (G)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any specified
criminal activity, as defined in § 115.01 of this chapter; and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.



   (H)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the business which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a
partnership or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed
under this chapter and a license has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.



   (I)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this
chapter, or other similar ordinance from another city or county and, if so,
the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.



   (J)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises
including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business. This
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn
to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises.



(1994 Code, § 115.02)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed adult use business
license application, the city shall approve or deny the issuance of a license
to an applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license unless it
determines by a preponderance of the evidence any one or more of the
following:



      (1)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her
in relation to any business; for the issuance of the license or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form;



      (3)   The applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   The applicant has been denied a license by the city to
operate an adult use business within the preceding 12 months or whose license
to operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months;



      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity defined in § 115.01 of this chapter;



      (6)   The premises to be used for the adult use business has
not been approved by the Fire Department and the Office of Code Enforcement
as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;



      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid; and



      (8)   The applicant of the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the adult use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
space at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read
at any time.



   (C)   The Fire Chief and Code Enforcement Officer shall complete
their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance
with city codes within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city.



   (D)   No adult use business license shall be issued unless the
premises at which the adult use will operate is in conformance with the
restrictions set forth in Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning.



(1994 Code, § 115.03)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.04  FEES.



   Every application for an adult use business license (whether a new
license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $250
non-refundable application and investigation fee.



(1994 Code, § 115.04)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.05  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, Fire Department, Office of Code Enforcement or other city
or city designated departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the
adult use for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it
is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates an adult use or his or her agent or
employee violates this chapter if he or she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.



(1994 Code, § 115.05)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.06  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire on the January 1 after it was issued
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 115.02 of
this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before
the expiration date and when made less than 30 days for the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   (1)   If the city denies renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one  year from the date of
denial.



      (2)   If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis
for denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license.



(1994 Code, § 115.06)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.07  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this chapter;



      (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or



      (3)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult
use business premises.



   (B)   If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found
guilty in a court of law of a violation of this section, no hearing is
necessary prior to suspension of the license.



(1994 Code, § 115.07)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.08  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
115.07 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal
activity.



   (B)   The city shall revoke a license if it determines, after a
hearing, that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale
of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;



      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the adult use business
during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur
in or on the licensee premises; or



      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county
or state for any taxes or fees past due; and/or



      (7)   A licensee has knowingly or intentionally facilitated
another commission of the offense of public decency.



   (C)   If the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one  year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use business
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If
subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the factual basis for the
revocation did not occur, the applicant may be granted a license.



   (D)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(1994 Code, § 115.08)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 115.09  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate an adult use business under the authority of a license at
any place other than the address on the license.



(1994 Code, § 115.09)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.10  BUSINESS RECORDS.



   All adult uses shall file a verified report with the city showing the
licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during the
preceding calendar year. In addition, all adult uses shall maintain and
retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons
employed, including independent contractors, by the licensee.



(1994 Code, § 115.10)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.11  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS; RESTRICTIONS.



   All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended for
that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor.
No dancing or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet to any
patron. In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any
patron and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any performer.
No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no
performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities may
be indirectly given to performers by placing the gratuity on the stage.



(1994 Code, § 115.11)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.12  VIDEO VIEWING BOOTHS; RESTRICTIONS.



   No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms
used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment shall
have doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or
partitioned portions or a room or individual rooms so used shall have at
least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is
visible to persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas
shall be lighted in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for
viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the
adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to
prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or other offered entertainment.



(1994 Code, § 115.12)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.13  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult use shall be open prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 12:00 a.m.



(1994 Code, § 115.13)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.14  ALCOHOL.



   No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or
consumed on the premises of any adult use.



(1994 Code, § 115.14)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 115.15  EXTERIOR DISPLAY.



   No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any materials depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from
any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to
any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.



(1994 Code, § 115.15)  (Ord. 03-10, passed 10-27-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 116:  CONTRACTORS



Section



   116.01   Definition



   116.02   License required



   116.03   Issuance of license



   116.04   Denial and appeal



   116.05   License fee; renewal



   116.06   License year; notice of expiration of license



   116.07   Insurance required



   116.08   Revocation



   116.09   Evidence of license posted



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  DEFINITION.



   For purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly  indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm, organization, partnership or corporation
that holds itself out for hire engaged in the business of providing
professional construction services including, but not limited to, carpentry,
plumbing, roofing, electrical, mechanical, landscaping, tree trimming and
removal, communications, home repair, masonry, swimming pool installation,
demolition and general contracting.



(1994 Code, § 116.01)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 116.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall operate as a contractor within the city
without first having been issued a license by the Department of Public Health
and Safety.



   (B)   The Office of Code Enforcement shall maintain applications for
contractor’s licenses, which shall include:



      (1)   Full name and address of owner/operator;



      (2)   Type of business;



      (3)   Reference of past performance;



      (4)   State license number or registration, if applicable;



      (5)   Length of time business has been in operation; and



      (6)   Social Security number or federal employer
identification number.



(1994 Code, § 116.02)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)  Penalty, see §
116.99



§ 116.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Office of
Code Enforcement shall conduct an investigation before the issuance of such
license, and shall file a report with the Commissioner of Public Health and
Safety in 14 days after receiving an application or copy thereof.



   (B)   When the provisions of this chapter have been complied with
and the Department of Public Health and Safety is satisfied that the
applicant for such license meets the qualifications thereof, the license
shall be granted to the applicant.



(1994 Code, § 116.03)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 116.04  DENIAL AND APPEAL.



   (A)   In the case that a Department of Public Health and Safety
shall find and determine in writing that the applicant for a license under
this chapter is not qualified to carry on the business of a contractor within
the city, a copy of such findings denying the application shall be served
upon the applicant.



   (B)    Such applicant may appeal to the City Council within 20 days
from the date the copy of findings is served upon the applicant.



   (C)   Upon perfection of the appeal, the City Council shall consider
such application, shall conduct such examination as shall be deemed necessary
or desirable to determine the appeal, and shall so determine the appeal
within 30 days from the perfection thereof.



(1994 Code, § 116.04)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 116.05  LICENSE FEE; RENEWAL.



   (A)   In the absence of the provisions to the contrary, all fees and
charges for licenses shall be paid in advance at the time the application
therefor is made to the Department of Code Enforcement.



   (B)   The initial license and all annual renewals thereof shall
require the payment of a $50 fee.



(1994 Code, § 116.05)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000; Ord. 09-01, passed
3-9-2009)



§ 116.06  LICENSE YEAR; NOTICE OF EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   All licenses granted under this chapter shall terminate on
March 31 of each year.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall mail all licensees of the city pursuant
to this chapter a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by
such licensee.



   (C)   However, failure to send out such a notice or the failure of
the licensee to receive it shall not excuse licensee from failing to obtain a
new license or renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for
operating without a license.



(1994 Code, § 116.06)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 116.07  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Any licensed contractor operating within the city shall obtain and
maintain in full force and effect during the operation of the business public
liability and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than
$100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence for bodily injury, not less
than $50,000 per occurrence for property damage, and an amount not less than
$10,000 per occurrence for improper home repair or remodeling not in
accordance with applicable state, county or municipal building codes.



(1994 Code, § 116.07)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 116.08  REVOCATION.



   Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety upon the recommendation of the
Office of Code Enforcement at any time during the term of the license. The
revocation of such license may be in addition to any fine imposed by a court
of competent jurisdiction.



(1994 Code, § 116.08)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 116.09  EVIDENCE OF LICENSE POSTED.



   It shall be the duty of all licensed contractors within the city to
keep evidence of the license issued pursuant to this chapter in a prominent
place on the premises upon which services are being performed.



(1994 Code, § 116.09)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)  Penalty, see §
116.99



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of operating without a
license pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal code
violation, the penalty of which shall be not less that $250, nor more than
$750.



(1994 Code, § 116.99)  (Ord. 00-10, passed 3-27-2000)



CHAPTER 117:  MEDICAL PROVIDERS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Certificate of good standing required



   117.03   Issuance of certificate of good standing



   117.04   Licensing agent



   117.05   Denial and appeal



   117.06   Fee and renewal



   117.07   Term of certificate of good standing; notice of expiration



   117.08   Insurance required



   117.09   Revocation



   117.10   Evidence of certificate of good standing posted



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MEDICAL PROVIDER. Any person, firm, organization, partnership or
professional organization engaged in the business of providing licensed
professional medical services as a medical doctor (M.D.), doctor of
osteopathy (D.O.), nurse practitioner (N.P.) or physician assistant (P.A.)
within the city; provided, however, that, any person or entity employed by or
engaged as an independent contractor in the business of providing licensed
professional medical services with the licensing agent of the city shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 117.01)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.02  CERTIFICATE OF GOOD STANDING REQUIRED.



   No person shall practice medicine as a medical provider, as defined
herein, within the city, without having first having been issued a
certificate of good standing by the city.



(1994 Code, § 117.02)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.03  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF GOOD STANDING.



   Upon receipt of an inquiry for a certificate of good standing under
this chapter, the City Clerk shall refer the applicant to the licensing agent
of the city. The agent shall furnish said applicant a medical staff
credentialing application in accordance with the licensing agent’s medical
staff by-laws. When the provisions of this chapter have been complied with,
and the applicant has been appointed to the medical staff of said agent, the
certificate of good standing shall be granted to the medical provider by the
Mayor.



(1994 Code, § 117.03)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.04  LICENSING AGENT.



   The city’s Community Hospital District shall act as the licensing
agent of the city for the purposes of this chapter. The Medical Staff
Credentialing Committee of said licensing agent shall review all applications
pursuant to its by-laws; such investigation shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:



   (A)   Criminal history upon written consent of the applicant;



   (B)   Licensing verification from the state’s Department of
Professional Regulation;



   (C)   Verification of education, completion of residency and degrees
awarded;



   (D)   An inquiry into the National Practitioners’ Data Bank with
regard to the applicant; and



   (E)   Proof of liability insurance.



(1994 Code, § 117.04)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.05  DENIAL AND APPEAL.



   In the case that the licensing agent shall find and determine in
writing that the applicant for a certificate of good standing under this
chapter is not qualified to carry on the practice of medicine as a medical
provider, as defined herein, within the city, a copy of such findings denying
the application shall be served upon the applicant. Such applicant may appeal
to the City Council within 20 days from the date of the copy of findings
served upon the applicant. Upon perfection of the appeal, the City Council
shall consider such application, shall conduct such examination as shall be
deemed necessary or desirable to determine the appeal and shall so determine
the appeal within 30 days from the perfection thereof.



(1994 Code, § 117.05)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.06  FEE AND RENEWAL.



   In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
a certificate of good standing shall be due and payable upon issuance by the
Mayor. When an application for a certificate of good standing is made after
the expiration of six months of the current year, the certificate of good
standing for the remainder of the year shall be issued upon payment of
pro-rated portion of the licensing fee as determined by the city. The initial
fee shall be the sum of $50. All renewals shall require the payment of a fee
of $25 annually thereafter.



(1994 Code, § 117.06)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.07  TERM OF CERTIFICATE OF GOOD STANDING; NOTICE OF EXPIRATION.



   (A)   All certificates of good standing granted under this chapter
shall expire on March 31 following issuance.



   (B)   All renewals shall expire after two years after issuance
thereof.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall mail to all medical providers in the city
pursuant to this chapter, a notice of expiration of the certificate of good
standing held by such medical provider(s) within 30 days to the expiration
thereof.



   (D)   However, failure to send out such a notice or the failure of
the medical provider to receive it shall not excuse said provider from
failing to obtain a certificate of good standing renewal thereof, nor shall
it be a defense in an action for operating without a certificate.



(1994 Code, § 117.07)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.08  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Any medical provider practicing medicine within the city shall obtain
and maintain in full force and effect during said practice, medical
malpractice liability insurance and property insurance in the amount of not
less than $1,000,000 per person and $3,000,000 per occurrence.



(1994 Code, § 117.08)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.09  REVOCATION.



   Any certificate of good standing granted under this chapter may be
revoked by the Mayor and City Council upon the recommendation of the
licensing agent at any time during the term of said license.



(1994 Code, § 117.09)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



§ 117.10  EVIDENCE OF CERTIFICATE OF GOOD STANDING POSTED.



   It shall be the duty of all professional medical licensed medical
providers within the city to keep evidence of the certificate of good
standing issued pursuant to this chapter in a prominent place on the premises
upon with services are being performed.



(1994 Code, § 117.10)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of operating without a
certificate of good standing pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a
municipal code violation, the penalty of which shall be $750.



(1994 Code, § 117.99)  (Ord. 04-07, passed 5-24-2004)



CHAPTER 118:  MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATIONS



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Cessation of operation; removal of service station canopy
and underground storage tanks



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail to the public, fuels stored
only in underground tanks located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating
oil or grease for the operation of motor vehicle; and the sale or
installation of tires, batteries, other minor accessories and repairs, but
not including a bulk plant, major repairs, salvage or sales.



   SERVICE STATION CANOPY. A roof-like structure usually self-supporting
and detached, and erected primarily to provide shelter from the weather at
self-service gasoline pumps at motor vehicle service stations.



(1994 Code, § 118.01)  (Ord. 08-03, passed 7-1-2008)



§ 118.02  CESSATION OF OPERATION; REMOVAL OF SERVICE STATION CANOPY AND
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.



   Within one year after the cessation of operation of a motor vehicle
service station located within the corporate limits of the city, the owner
thereof, and any other responsible party, shall remove or cause to be removed
the service station canopy and all underground storage tanks located thereon.



(1994 Code, § 118.03)  (Ord. 08-03, passed 7-1-2008)  Penalty, see §
118.99



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation operating a motor vehicle service
station found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to payment of a fine not to exceed $750.



(1994 Code, § 118.99)  (Ord. 08-03, passed 7-1-2008)



CHAPTER 119:  LICENSING AND REGULATION OF OTHER BUSINESSES



Section



   119.01   Business license requirement



   119.02   Application



   119.03   Annual fee



   119.04   Suspension; revocation and appeal



   119.05   Posting of license



   119.06   Exemptions



 



   119.99   Penalty



§ 119.01  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   Any and all persons, firms, companies and corporations engaged in any
business or occupation from a location or locations within the city limits
and not otherwise licensed or regulated under the provisions of this business
title are required to procure a license to conduct said business or
occupation.



(1994 Code, § 119.01)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.02  APPLICATION.



   Application for business licenses issued under this chapter shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk. Each application shall state the name of
the applicant, the business location and such other additional information as
may be required by the city. Application forms shall be furnished and made
available by the office of the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 119.02)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 119.03  ANNUAL FEE.



   The annual fee for a business license issued under this chapter shall
be $50. Said amount shall be submitted with the completed application. Said
fee shall be non-refundable and shall be utilized for the administration of
the provisions set forth in this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 119.03)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 119.04  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION AND APPEAL.



   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a business
license, thereby causing the cessation of a business, when:



      (1)   The business operation constitutes a clear and present
danger to the public safety, health or general welfare; or



      (2)   The registration application information is fraudulent,
false or deceptive.



   (B)   If a license is suspended or revoked, the business shall be
notified immediately by an officer of the city. Notice shall furthermore be
forwarded by certified mail to the mailing address as set forth on the
business license application. The notification shall include the reason or
reasons for the suspension or revocation. A suspension or revocation shall
remain in place until rescinded by the Mayor or by a successful appeal to the
City Council.



   (C)   An appeal of the suspension or revocation must be requested by
the licensee at the next regular scheduled meeting of the City Council.



   (D)   At the appeal, the City Attorney shall present the complaint
against the business and represent the city. The license holder has the right
to retain his or her own counsel, to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. A simple majority vote to the City Council is required to rescind
the suspension or revocation.



   (E)   Revocation of a business license shall not preclude or
imposition of other penalties for the violation of the city’s code of
ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 119.04)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 119.05  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business under
this chapter to post said license in a prominent place in the business
premises at all times.



(1994 Code, § 119.05)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:



   (A)   Governmental entities;



   (B)   Fraternal organizations;



   (C)   Religious institutions;



   (D)   Healthcare facilities, including nursing homes; and



   (E)   Not-for-profit corporations.



(1994 Code, § 119.06)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $750 for each offense. Each
day that any such violation or failure continues shall be considered as a
separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.



(1994 Code, § 119.99)  (Ord. 09-02, passed 3-9-2009)



CHAPTER 120:  RAFFLES



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Administration



   120.03   License required



   120.04   Application for license



   120.05   Application: issuance



   120.06   Prohibited licensees



   120.07   Restrictions on the conduct of raffles



   120.08   Records



   120.09   Terms and fees



   120.10   Limited construction



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles,
less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.



      RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in § 28-2, subparagraph
(b), of the Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/28-2(b)), conducted by an organization
licensed under this chapter in which:



         (a)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of
value for a chance, presented and differentiated by a number or by a
combination of numbers, or by some other medium, one or more of which chances
is to be designated the winning chance; and



         (b)   The winning chance is to be determined through a
drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or
set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery;
except that, the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a
publicly exhibited sporting contest.



   (B)   The definitions contained in 230 ILCS 15/1 are hereby adopted
by reference as if fully set out herein.



(1994 Code, § 120.01)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/1



§ 120.02  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Mayor is hereby charged with the administration of the appropriate
provisions of this code, and may appoint persons to assist in the exercise of
the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided, including, but
not limited to, the members of his or her staff, the City Attorney, the City
Clerk and the Chief of Police.



(1994 Code, § 120.02)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/2



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person or organization shall conduct or partake in the
selling of raffle chances within the limits and territory of the city without
having a license to do so issued by the Mayor in a manner hereinafter
provided and a valid license for such purpose as provided by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application
for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona
fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives or to a non-profit
fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as
the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.



   (B)   The above mentioned types of organizations shall be defined
pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes and incorporated herein.



   (C)   No person or organization shall be issued more than one
license in a period of one week.



   (D)   (1)   The manager of a raffle game shall give a fidelity
bond in the performance of his or her duties, when the aggregate retail value
of all prizes is more than $25,000, in the sum equal to 10% of said aggregate
value. The Mayor or his or her designated representative is authorized to
waive requirement for bond by including a waiver provision in the license
issued, provided that the license containing such waiver provision shall be
granted only by majority vote of the members of the licensed organization.



      (2)   The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be
given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to
its cancellation.



   (E)   Any license issued under this code shall be non-transferable.



(1994 Code, § 120.03)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/2



§ 120.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to grant and issue licenses to
eligible organizations to conduct raffles and to participate in the sale of
raffle tickets within the limits and territory of the city upon the
conditions and in the manner provided by this code and by the Act of the
General Assembly of the state, and not otherwise. Such license shall be in
writing, signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk with the seal of
his or her office affixed thereto.



   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall submit
to the City Clerk an application, in triplicate, in writing and under oath
stating the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the organization;



      (2)   The type of organization that is conducting the raffle
(i.e., religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans or
other);



      (3)   The length of time the organization has continually
existed immediately before making application for a license;



      (4)   The applicant shall give the aggregate retail value of
all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;



      (5)   The applicant will give the maximum retail value of each
prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;



      (6)   The amount that the organization plans to charge for
each raffle chance issued or sold;



      (7)   The time and location where the raffle is to be held;



      (8)   The purpose for which the proceeds of the raffle will be
used;



      (9)   The name and address of the person conducting and
performing the raffle, and his or her relationship with the organization;



      (10)   The last date which the applicant has applied for a
raffle license;



      (11)   The area in which the organization plans to sell or
issue its raffle chances; and



      (12)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of
a felony.



(1994 Code, § 120.04)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



§ 120.05  APPLICATION: ISSUANCE.



   All licenses issued by the Mayor or City Clerk are subject to the
following restrictions.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or
chances without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this
code.



   (B)   The license and application for a license shall specify the
area or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be
sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or
issued, the time of determination in winning chances and the location or
locations with which winning chances will be determined.



   (C)   The application shall contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.



   (D)   The Mayor shall act upon a license application within 30 days
from the date of application.



   (E)   The application for license shall be prepared in accordance
with this code.



   (F)   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles, as
defined in this code.



(1994 Code, § 120.05)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/3



§ 120.06  PROHIBITED LICENSEES.



   The following are ineligible for any raffle license:



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions
(A), (B) or (C) above has a propriety, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;



   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not; and/or



   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle
as defined by this code.



(1994 Code, § 120.06)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/3



§ 120.07  RESTRICTIONS ON THE CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.



   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.



   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization, may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine a winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which has also been
licensed under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq..



   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.



   (F)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.



   (G)   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances
on a raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the
person who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not
hold a license issued by the governing body of any county or municipality
under the provisions of this code.



(1994 Code, § 120.07)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)  Penalty, see §
120.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/4



§ 120.08  RECORDS.



   (A)   (1)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and
chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined.



      (2)   All deductions from the gross receipts for each single
gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records
indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or
other reason for the deduction and the recipient.



      (3)   The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to
payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.



   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the state, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for the gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



(1994 Code, § 120.08)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)  Penalty, see §
120.99



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/6



§ 120.09  TERM AND FEES.



   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $100,000.



   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle shall not exceed $50,000.



   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance
issued or sold shall not exceed $100.



   (D)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued
or sold shall not exceed 120 days.



   (E)   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for
one raffle and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter.



   (F)   The fee for raffles shall as follows:



 

Aggregate Retail Value of All Prizes
 
Fee


Less than $100
 
$0


$101 - $1,000
 
$25


$1,001 - $25,000
 
$50


$25,001 - $50,000
 
$75


$50,001 - $100,000
 
$100



 



(1994 Code, § 120.09)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)  Penalty, see §
120.99



§ 120.10  LIMITED CONSTRUCTION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting
or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other
than raffles, as provided for herein.



(1994 Code, § 120.10)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this code shall
constitute a violation, and any person shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined no less than $50 or more than $500 for each offense. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The imposition of
the penalties herein shall prescribed shall not preclude the institution of
appropriate action to prevent unlawful raffles or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation of this code or of the conditions of a raffle license
issued pursuant to such license.



(1994 Code, § 120.99)  (Ord. 15-12, passed 10-26-2015)



CHAPTER 121:  TRANSITORY LODGING LICENSING AND REGULATION



Section



   121.01   Definitions



   121.02   Transitory lodging license required



   121.03   Application for license; inspections



   121.04   Minimum standards



   121.05   Approval, suspension and revocation of license



 



   121.99   Penalty



§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER. Any person having an ownership interest in, or conducting the
operation of a transitory lodging establishment so as to entitle that person
to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.



   PERSON. Any natural person, trustee, court-appointed representative,
organization, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company,
corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government corporation,
state government, or any political subdivision thereof, or any board or
commission thereof, state university, municipal corporation, district or
other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator,
user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative,
acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The
masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstances.



   TRANSITORY LODGING ESTABLISHMENT. A business that provides occupancy
for guests on a temporary basis, including, but not limited to, hotels,
motels, inns, resorts, campgrounds, lodging houses, rooming houses, public or
private clubs, and bed and breakfast establishments; provided, however, that
a city resident who leases his or her home solely during a four-week period
from July 20 to August 20 annually shall not be considered as engaging in the
business of transitory lodging, and shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 17-04, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 121.02  TRANSITORY LODGING LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any establishment that offers a room or rooms for rent on an
hourly, daily, weekly, or other similar basis, which is held out to the
public as a transitory lodging establishment shall be subject to the
licensure requirements outlined herein. The premises of the establishment
shall be deemed to include all areas utilized in connection therewith,
including parking areas, attached or on-site restaurants, recreation areas,
or other similar properties.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any transitory lodging
establishment without first obtaining a license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Transitory lodging licenses shall have a term commencing on
January 1 and ending on December 31, on an annual basis.



(Ord. 17-04, passed 9-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Application for a new or renewed transitory lodging license
shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk, which shall include:



      (1)   The name, address, and registered agent of the person,
corporation or other entity that owns or operates the transitory lodging
establishment, which identified person or entity shall be legally responsible
for the lawful operation of the transitory lodging establishment.



      (2)   The name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of a
representative of the transitory lodging establishment that will be available
to interact with emergency responders to the transitory lodging establishment.



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of any person
utilized as a manager of the transitory lodging establishment. The manager
shall be responsible for operations of the licensed premises, and each
establishment must have a designated manager at all times. One person may not
serve as manager for multiple licensed transitory lodging establishments.
Each manager shall be subjected to a criminal background check, and shall be
required to be approved by the Chief of Police. No manager shall be approved
if the background check results are unacceptable to the Chief of Police.
Reasons for rejection include, but are not limited to, background checks
revealing that the person has been convicted of a forcible felony, of any
felony involving the use of a hotel, motel, inn or other similar property, of
any offense involving the manufacture, sale or distribution of an illegal
drug or narcotic, or of any offense relating to pandering, pimping,
solicitation of prostitution or prostitution within the ten years preceding
the application. Any time there is a proposed change in the designated
manager, the transitory lodging establishment must update its transitory
lodging license and obtain approval of a new designated manager, following
completion of a background check, prior to changing managers.



      (4)   A copy of any citation, violation notice, warning or
other similar correspondence issued to the transitory lodging establishment
by any governmental agency (state, federal or local) other than the city, in
the past 36 months, relating to any alleged dangerous or unlawful condition
at the transitory lodging establishment.



      (5)   A copy of the building plans for the transitory lodging
establishment in a form acceptable to the city (unless such plans are already
on file with the city in an acceptable format).



      (6)   A confirmation of the number of rooms constructed or to
be constructed within the transitory lodging establishment, and the number
and type of beds in each room.



      (7)   The identity and contact information, including
telephone number, of the party or parties, if any, that hold a franchise
agreement or name licensure agreement with the transitory lodging
establishment.



      (8)   Such other information as shall be deemed necessary by
the City Code Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   New or renewal applications shall be accompanied by payment of
the then-current license and inspection fee, as reflected on the schedule of
fees then adopted by the city. The current schedule of fees for license and
inspection is $10 per room, with a maximum fee of $250 and a minimum fee of
$50 per establishment.



      (1)   The City Council may adopt updates to the fee schedule
at any time.



      (2)   The fee for the initial inspection for a transitory
lodging establishment in the city shall be reduced by 50% for any transitory
lodging establishment that applies for licensure at a time when their license
shall be issued for eight or fewer months. This fee reduction shall apply to
initial inspections only, and shall not apply to re-inspections or
complaint-based inspections.



   (C)   (1)   Submission of a signed application for a transitory
lodging license and/or acceptance of a transitory lodging license constitutes
the applicant’s consent to an inspection of any and all unoccupied portions
of the licensed premises, and any portions of the premises to which the
transitory lodging establishment may legally consent to inspection by the
city:



         (a)   At any time during the normal business hours of
the licensed premises, with or without advance notice; or



         (b)   At such other time as the city shall designate to
the applicant or licensee in writing, with not less than 48 hours advance
notice.



      (2)   Inspections pursuant to this consent may be conducted by
any city personnel, including Police Department, Office of Code Enforcement,
Public Works Department, or Fire Department staff, for purposes of
determining compliance with the provisions of this code, or for purposes of
determining compliance with any other applicable code or regulation.



         (a)   The consent for inspection shall extend to any
portion of the premises.



         (b)   An applicant or licensee’s refusal to grant
access to the premises for an inspection shall constitute grounds for denial
of a pending application (without refund of any posted application or renewal
fees), and shall constitute a violation of this code, which may subject a
transitory lodging licensee to suspension or revocation of its license,
imposition of fines and penalties under this code, or both. The existence of
code violations shall justify suspension, denial or non-renewal of a
transitory lodging license.



         (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of
rooms that are actually then-occupied by a person other than an employee of
the transitory lodging establishment, outside of the annual inspection or
re-inspection process, the transitory lodging establishment shall not be
responsible for occupants that refuse entry to city officials.



   (D)   Prior to issuance or renewal of a transitory lodging license,
the owner or operator of a transitory lodging establishment shall submit the
property to a complete inspection of the transitory lodging establishment and
the premises on which it is located. The inspection shall be completed by the
city’s agents or employees. The transitory lodging establishment shall make
all necessary arrangements to permit the inspection to be completed during
normal working hours, 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. The inspection shall include all
rooms of the transitory lodging establishment, including rooms available for
rent to the public, mechanical rooms, common rooms, or any other rooms
whatsoever. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a transitory lodging establishment
may designate one room for permanent occupancy by a manager or a
representative of the transitory lodging establishment, which room shall be
disclosed to the city and shall not be subject to inspection. The inspection
shall be for the purpose of verifying that the transitory lodging
establishment is in safe condition, in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, and in compliance with any other applicable standard,
regulation, ordinance, rule, law or statute.



      (1)   In the event that any inspection reveals any violation
of any applicable standard, the violation shall be documented in writing to
the transitory lodging establishment. The transitory lodging establishment
shall be responsible for correcting the conditions) within the timeline
specified by the city. The city may either issue a citation to the transitory
lodging establishment for any violation, or may enter into a compliance
agreement, whereby the transitory lodging establishment agrees to correct the
violation and/or pay a specified fine to the city in lieu of the issuance of
a citation.



      (2)   Upon correction of any violation(s), a re-inspection of
the transitory lodging establishment shall occur. The cost of re-inspection
shall be billed to the transitory lodging establishment at the cost of
city’s actual labor and equipment plus an administrative fee of 5%.
Re-inspections shall recur until all violations are corrected.



      (3)   If the city receives any complaint from any source,
including a complaint generated by the city, of an alleged violation of this
code or any applicable legal standard, or in the event that the transitory
lodging establishment makes a required disclosure to the city as described in
§ 121.04, the city shall conduct a re-inspection of the affected portion(s)
of the transitory lodging establishment subject to the complaint. If the
re-inspection reveals that the complaint was unfounded, there shall be no
charge for the re-inspection. If the re-inspection reveals a violation of any
applicable law or standard, the transitory lodging establishment shall be
responsible for payment of re-inspection fees as outlined in the preceding
paragraph, plus any costs or fines imposed.



      (4)   In the event that required inspections are not completed
on the scheduled date(s) of inspection through no fault of the city, the
transitory lodging establishment shall be subject to re-inspection charges on
the date(s) of re-inspection.



      (5)   In the event that the city pursues legal or
administrative action based upon any actual or alleged violation, and the
city prevails in that action, the city shall also be entitled to recover the
costs incurred by the city in providing personnel to investigate, process,
prosecute, or testify at any hearing relating to such legal action, which
cost shall be calculated consistent with the calculation process for
re-inspection (cost plus 5%), and the transitory lodging establishment shall
be responsible for such costs.



   (E)   Transitory lodging license applicants shall schedule written
inspections with the city not less than 60 days prior to the date on which
their then-current transitory lodging license expires, and shall provide
written notification of the pending room inspection of all persons who are
then-currently renting or who will be renting a room in the transitory
lodging establishment on the scheduled dates of inspection. The transitory
lodging establishment shall be responsible for obtaining authority or consent
for inspection of every room in the transitory lodging establishment on the
scheduled date(s) of inspection, and the transitory lodging establishment
shall reasonably cooperate with the city in gaining access to every room,
including, but not limited to, requiring tenants to change rooms to permit
inspection of every room at the earliest possible time.



   (F)   In the event that the city is required to apply for or seek a
search warrant for a room occupied by a rental occupant in the transitory
lodging establishment, the transitory lodging establishment shall fully
comply and cooperate with the city’s efforts to obtain the warrant, and
shall disclose all relevant information known by the transitory lodging
establishment, or its agents or employees, to the city. The city shall also
be entitled to apply and authorized to obtain a search warrant for any other
portion of the transitory lodging establishment, in the event that the
transitory lodging establishment refuses to permit access or inspection. The
failure to cooperate with the inspection program shall constitute a violation
of this chapter, which may be punishable by fine or by suspension or
revocation or non-issuance of a transitory lodging license.



(Ord. 17-04, passed 9-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.04  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   (1)   All transitory lodging establishments in the city
shall comply with all codes or ordinances that are applicable thereto,
including all city property maintenance ordinances, building or fire codes,
plumbing codes, and other similar codes and ordinances.



      (2)   No transitory lodging establishment shall operate when
any portion of the premises open to the public is missing any required
railings or safety structures, or when there are any open, unguarded holes,
structures or excavations that present a public safety threat.



   (B)   All transitory lodging establishments in the city shall be
required to post, in each room in a conspicuous location, any notices
required to be posted under applicable federal, state or local law or
ordinance.



   (C)   All transitory lodging establishments shall comply with the
following minimum standards.



      (1)   (a)   All rooms offered for rent or potential
occupancy in the establishment shall be cleaned, at minimum:



            1.   Not less than monthly when unoccupied;



            2.   At the conclusion of each occupancy, before
renting the room to another occupant; and



            3.   Not less frequently than every three days,
when occupied.



         (b)   Cleaning a room shall require complete replacement
and sanitary cleaning of all replaceable linens in the room (including
towels, bathroom linens, and bedding other than comforters), emptying of all
trash and removal of all debris, verification that all plumbing fixtures are
functional and in good repair, verification of compliance with all applicable
codes and regulations, and confirmation that there are no insect or vermin
infestations in the room. In addition, it shall require vacuuming of all
carpets, and thorough cleaning of all sanitation, bathroom, kitchen, or food
preparation or storage areas. Linens shall be free of stains, holes, rips or
odors, and shall be clean and sanitary. Mattresses shall be fully covered and
shall similarly be free of stains, holes, rips or odors.



         (c)   Transitory lodging establishments shall keep a log
denoting the date and time of all such room cleanings, and the identity of
the person who completed the room cleaning, and such log shall be made
available to the city upon request. All transitory lodging employees involved
in room cleaning or sanitation shall be required to comply with reasonable
standards regarding personal cleanliness, hand washing, containment of
infectious diseases and similar precautions, which shall be subject to review
in the reasonable discretion of the city.



         (d)   In the event that a transitory lodging
establishment has a tenant who refuses to permit cleaning to be completed in
accordance with these minimum standards, the establishment shall:



            1.   Document the tenant’s refusal in writing;
and



            2.   Require the tenant to change rooms not less
than weekly, to permit cleaning of rooms on at least a weekly basis.



      (2)   All rooms offered for rent shall be required to have:
functional plumbing, including cold and hot water; working bathroom
facilities, including, at minimum, a toilet and a sink; functional and clean
heating and ventilation systems; functional room lighting; emergency fire
escapes in accordance with all applicable codes and laws; and door locks on
each room that provide reasonable security.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the
following acts, and shall be unlawful for a transitory lodging establishment
to permit any person to:



         (a)   Make any permanent modification to a room or to
permit any person other than an agent or employee of the establishment to
redecorate a room;



         (b)   Remain within a single room for longer than 30
days (any occupancy over 30 days shall require changing rooms at least every
30 days), exclusive of a single room designated by the establishment for
permanent occupancy under § 121.03(D). Any person desirous of remaining at a
transitory lodging establishment for longer than 30 days shall be required to
switch rooms at least every 30 days, and establishments shall provide
documentation to the city demonstrating compliance with this requirement upon
request;



         (c)   Exceed any applicable weight, occupancy or fire
load limits for any room;



         (d)   Tamper with or disable any smoke detectors, fire
alarms, or other similar warning systems.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful to rent or to offer for rent any
room that has an active infestation of insects, bugs, any form of lice,
fleas, bedbugs (any members of the genus Climex, including, but not limited
to, Climex lectularius), mice, rats or other vermin. Any transitory lodging
establishment that discovers a room with the presence of any of these items
present in it shall be obligated to immediately report the same to the city,
prior to commencing a cleanup operation. This shall be deemed a required
disclosure. The city shall be permitted to conduct a re-inspection of the
affected area(s), and any other areas deemed necessary to inspect by the city
(i.e., adjoining rooms and/or areas where linens are stored or cleaned),
prior to the transitory lodging establishment making any change in the
condition thereof. Following such a required disclosure, no room in which an
active infestation is discovered shall be offered for rent to the public
until such room has been re-inspected by the city and approved as safe for
occupancy.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Rent any sleeping or occupancy room (i.e., a room other
than a meeting room not equipped with beds and not used for sleeping) by the
hour or for any period of fewer than ten consecutive hours;



      (2)   Rent any sleeping or occupancy room more than once
within any ten-hour period, measured from the start of one occupancy to the
start of the next occupancy;



      (3)   Knowingly permit prostitution, pimping, gambling,
illegal possession or delivery of, or trafficking in, controlled substances
or other unlawful drugs, including cannabis, to occur on the premises of the
licensed establishment, or to fail to discover the occurrence of such illegal
acts on the premises of the licensed establishment under circumstances in
which a reasonable person, exercising ordinary care and diligence, would
infer that such activity is occurring, or to fail to report to the police in
a timely manner any criminal activity occurring on the premises of the
licensed establishment if the activity is observed by or reported to any
agent or employee of the transitory lodging establishment. No transitory
lodging establishment or person shall be charged with a violation of this §
121.04(D)(3), where such person immediately notifies the Police Department of
the unlawful condition occurring, immediately after discovery thereof.



   (E)   Rooms offered for rental may be equipped with a refrigerator,
a microwave and/or a coffee maker, but shall not be equipped with other
kitchen appliances, such as hotplates, stoves, ovens or similar items. Any
electronic device shall be plugged into an outlet, and shall not make use of
power strips or extension cords for normal operation.



   (F)   The city may adopt additional or more detailed health and
sanitation standards for transitory lodging establishments, which standards
may be adopted once they have been approved by the joint agreement of the
City Code Enforcement Officer, the Director of Public Works, the Police Chief
and the Fire Chief. Any such changes shall be circulated to the City Council,
in writing, within ten days of the date of approval by staff.



   (G)   All transitory lodging establishments shall be required to
post a conspicuous notice on the interior of their doors, in a form and size
acceptable to the City Code Enforcement Officer, advising occupants of the
city’s license and inspection protocol, and providing contact information
for complaints or questions that the occupants may wish to direct to the city.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful to rent or to offer for rent any room
that violates or fails to satisfy any of the foregoing minimum standards.



   (I)   In addition to all applicable local requirements, all rooms
shall comply with all applicable federal or state regulations, including, but
not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act and any state regulations
affecting room occupancy.



(Ord. 17-04, passed 9-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.05  APPROVAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Responsibility of the City Code Enforcement Officer. The City
Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for approval, suspension or
revocation of transitory lodging licenses.



   (B)   Initial approval or renewal.



      (1)   A transitory lodging license shall be issued to a
qualified applicant that has successfully completed an inspection (or has
satisfactorily addressed concerns and has been successfully re-inspected
following a preliminary inspection that revealed violations or concerns).



      (2)   In the event of a transitory lodging establishment that
has pending violations or concerns that have not been addressed, but where
the operator of the establishment is undertaking reasonable measures to
address the violations or concerns, the City Code Enforcement Officer may
issue a temporary or conditional transitory lodging license that requires
compliance by a certain date, which license shall become unconditional at
such time as the City Code Enforcement Officer certifies in writing that the
conditions have been re-inspected and are satisfied. Such a conditional
license may be revoked in accordance with its terms.



      (3)   The City Code Enforcement Officer may deny a transitory
lodging license application or may refuse to issue a renewal license to any
applicant that is in violation of this code or an applicable standard, or may
require compliance and re-inspection prior to issuing a new or renewal
license. The decision of the City Code Enforcement Officer to deny a
transitory lodging license or a renewal application may be appealed to the
City Council, but the decision shall remain in effect pending any such appeal.



      (4)   No license shall be issued to or renewed for any
applicant, where the applicant, the premises proposed for licensure, or the
manager listed on the application is delinquent in the payment of any
obligation of any form to the city.



   (C)   Suspension or revocation.



      (1)   In the event of any single violation of this code that
presents an urgent, substantial and unjustified threat to public health,
welfare, safety or morals, the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety (or
appointed designate) may suspend the transitory lodging license without prior
notice, conditioned upon the establishment immediately working to rectify the
concern. In the event of such an emergency suspension, the Commissioner of
Public Health and Safety (or appointed designate) shall afford the
establishment with an opportunity for a hearing before him or her within
three business days of the emergency suspension.



      (2)   In the event of any other proposed suspension or
revocation of a transitory lodging license, the City Code Enforcement Officer
shall provide the transitory lodging establishment with not less than four
business days written notice of his or her intention to conduct a hearing,
either before himself or herself or before a city administrative hearing
officer, to determine whether there are violations of this code that merit
suspension or revocation of the transitory lodging license.



         (a)   It is the stated policy of this chapter that
fines, suspensions and revocations shall be progressive in nature. Any single
serious offense may justify suspension or revocation. Less serious offenses
shall be considered cumulatively and may, in the aggregate, merit suspension
or revocation. Suspensions shall be for a period of up to 30 days. A
transitory lodging license that is revoked may not be reapplied for by the
same applicant during the then-current term of licensure.



         (b)   In the event that a suspension or revocation is
placed into effect, based upon an urgent, substantial and unjustified threat
to public health, welfare, safety or morals, the suspension may take effect
immediately. Suspension or revocation for any other reason shall require at
minimum a five-day waiting period following the conduct of the hearing before
taking effect.



         (c)   The decision of the party conducting the hearing
shall be prepared and delivered to the transitory lodging establishment in
writing.



      (3)   The decision of the City Code Enforcement Officer to
suspend or revoke a transitory lodging license may be appealed to the City
Council, but such suspension or revocation shall remain in effect pending the
outcome of the appeal. The decision of an administrative hearing officer to
suspend or revoke a transitory lodging license may be appealed, in accordance
with the procedures for appealing the decision of an administrative hearing
officer, to the Circuit Court.



   (D)   Ordinance violation in circuit court. In the alternative to
any of the foregoing procedures, the city may elect to pursue any violation
of this code as an ordinance violation in the Circuit Court for Randolph
County, or may seek to pursue an equitable remedy, such as an injunction to
require compliance with this code, to abate any violations, to suspend or
revoke a transitory lodging license, or to prevent operation of a facility
without a transitory lodging license.



   (E)   Compliance agreement. In lieu of pursuing any of the foregoing
remedies or at any time during the pendency of any of the foregoing actions,
the City Code Enforcement Officer may enter into a compliance agreement with
a property owner or transitory lodging establishment operator. The compliance
agreement shall specify an agreed fine to be paid to the city (if any), and
the terms or conditions under which the establishment shall operate, shall
rectify any violations, or shall terminate operations. The compliance
agreement shall include any other terms deemed acceptable to the City Code
Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 17-04, passed 9-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Operating a transitory lodging establishment without a license
shall be an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not less than $500,
nor more than $1,000 per day, for each day that the violation remains in
effect.



   (B)   Any other violation of these provisions shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $500, nor more than $1,000 per day, per violation,
for each day that a violation remains in effect.



   (C)   In addition, the city shall be entitled to seek and obtain an
injunction preventing and prohibiting the use of any real property within the
city as a transitory lodging establishment, if the property is operating
without a license issued under this chapter, or is otherwise operating in
violation of these provisions.



(Ord. 17-04, passed 9-11-2017)



CHAPTER 122:  CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



Section



   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Cable or video service provider fee imposed



   122.03   Applicable principles



   122.04   No impact on other taxes from holder



   122.05   Audits of cable or video service provider



   122.06   Late fees and payments



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.



   CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contribution received
by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable
service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video service
area within the city.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment;



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation,
installation, and repair charges;



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service,  including, but not limited to, service
order and service termination charges;



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments;



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder, or its affiliates, pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers
in the city, divided by the total number of subscribers, in relation to the
relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (i);



         (i)   In the case of cable service or video service that
is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or
applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to other
services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue, unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business;



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS
5/21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);



         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments
that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization, the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount
is attributable to cable service or video service;



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged, or functionally integrated with the cable service or video service,
any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing, or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service, in
accordance with the holder’s books and records, and records kept in the
regular course of business, and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards, or orders;



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale, in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provide fee
from the purchaser’s subscribers, the extent the purchaser certifies, in
writing, that it will resell service within the city and pay the fee
permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon subscribers, or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity, and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers;



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping”
or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of GROSS REVENUES, to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate, rather than the holder, has the effect of
evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b), which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-401.



   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers, and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity
that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service
from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and 220 ILCS
5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and that is provided through wireline facilities located, at least in part,
in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.
S.C. § 332(d), or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via,
service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail,
or other services offered over the public Internet.



(Ord. 18-03, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 122.02  CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service in the city.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder’s gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the city.



   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
the holder’s receipt of Ordinance 18-03, codified as this chapter.
Ordinance 18-03 shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed
on the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)
to the city.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the city in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c),
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement, may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that the operator owes under § 122.02(B).



(Ord. 18-03, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 122.03  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 18-03, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 122.04  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
city’s simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or
charges.



(Ord. 18-03, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 122.05  AUDITS OF CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records, and
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the city. If all local franchises between the city and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant
to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the municipality’s submission of an
invoice for the sum.



(Ord. 18-03, passed 6-11-2018)



§ 122.06  LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this municipality pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’
Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.



(Ord. 18-03, passed 6-11-2018)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



      134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



      136.   WEAPONS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Definitions



   130.02   Intent



   130.03   Knowledge



   130.04   Recklessness



   130.05   Negligence



   130.06   Attempt



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this general offenses title, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action.



(720 ILCS 5/2-2)



   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.



(720 ILCS 5/2-3)



   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.



(720 ILCS 5/2-4)



   OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of the city or state.



(720 ILCS 5/2-12)



(1994 Code, § 130.01)



§ 130.02  INTENT.



   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense,
when his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result
or engage in that conduct.



(720 ILCS 5/4-4)  (1994 Code, § 130.02)



§ 130.03  KNOWLEDGE.



   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:



      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her
conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is
consciously aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such
circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the
substantial probability that the fact exists; and



      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the
section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that that
result is practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.



   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed
willfully, within the meaning of a statute using the latter term, unless the
section clearly requires another meaning.



(720 ILCS 5/4-5)  (1994 Code, § 130.03)



§ 130.04  RECKLESSNESS.



   A person is reckless or acts recklessly, when he or she consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and
such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which
a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed
recklessly is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the
latter term, unless the statute clearly requires another meaning.



(720 ILCS 5/4-6)  (1994 Code, § 130.04)



§ 130.05  NEGLIGENCE.



   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when he or she fails to be
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a
result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense; and such
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.



(720 ILCS 5/4-7)  (1994 Code, § 130.05)



§ 130.06  ATTEMPT.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits an attempt when,
with intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which
constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.



   (B)   Impossibility. It shall not be a defense to a charge of
attempt that because of a misapprehension of the circumstances, it would have
been impossible for the accused to commit the offense attempted.



   (C)   Statutory fine.



      (1)   A person convicted of an attempt may be fined or
imprisoned or both, not to exceed the maximum provided for the offense
attempted.



      (2)   If such fine exceeds that set forth in § 130.99 of this
chapter; however, the city shall enforce the offense under the provisions of
state law.



(720 ILCS 5/8-4)  (1994 Code, § 130.06)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty
is not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than
$750.



(1994 Code, § 130.99)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Theft



   131.03   Retail theft



   131.04   Theft of library materials



   131.05   Trespass to land



   131.06   Damage to property



   131.07   Damaging city property



   131.08   Damage of firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment



   131.09   Parents’ responsibility



   131.10   Unlawful interference with radio, television or telephone
operation



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER. A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any
other interest in the property involved, even though such interest or
possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no
authority to exert control over the property.



   PROPERTY. Anything of value. PROPERTY includes real estate, money,
commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets, written
instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value,
labor or services, or otherwise of value to the owner, things growing on,
affixed to or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building,
electricity, gas, water, animals, food and drink, records, recordings,
documents, blueprints, drawings, maps, designs, inventions or improvements.



   STOLEN PROPERTY. Property over which control has been obtained by theft.



(1994 Code, § 131.01)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)



§ 131.02  THEFT.



   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:



   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the
owner;



   (B)   Obtains, by deception, control over property of the owner;



   (C)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of the owner; and/or



   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to
have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him
or her to believe that the property was stolen, and:



      (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property;



      (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in
such a manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or



      (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such
use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently
of such use or benefit.



(1994 Code, § 131.02)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.03  RETAIL THEFT.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONCEAL. To “conceal” merchandise means that, although there
may be some notice of its presence, such merchandise is not visible through
ordinary observation.



      FULL RETAIL VALUE. The merchant’s stated or advertised price of
the merchandise.



      MERCHANDISE. Any item of tangible personal property.



      MERCHANT. An owner or operator of any retail mercantile
establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director,
franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator.



      PEACE OFFICER. Any person who by virtue of his or her office of
public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to
make arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is
limited to specific offenses.



      PERSON. Any natural person or individual.



      PREMISES. “Premises” of a retail mercantile establishment
includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any
common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a
merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.



      RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.



      SHOPPING CART. Those push carts of the type which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.



      UNDER-RING. To cause the cash register or other sales recording
device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.



   (B)   Offense of retail theft. A person commits the offense of
retail theft when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes
to be carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of
retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise;



      (2)   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag,
marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining
value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail merchandise establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full
retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail
value of such merchandise;



      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in
or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise;



      (4)   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant
of the full retail value of the merchandise;



      (5)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail
mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant, given at the
time of such removal, with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; and/or



      (6)   Represents to the merchant that he or she or another is
the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and
conveys or attempts to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of
the property in exchange for money, merchandise, credit or other property of
the merchant.



   (C)   Detention.



      (1)   Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that
a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail merchandise establishment, in a reasonable manner and
for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:



         (a)   To request identification;



         (b)   To verify such identification;



         (c)   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such
person has in his or her possession unpurchased merchandise, and to make
reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;



         (d)   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the
person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer; and



         (e)   In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer,
the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of
that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such
person.



      (2)   A merchant may make a detention, as permitted herein,
off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention
is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person.



      (3)   A detention as permitted in this section does not
constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the
merchant liable to the person so detained.



   (D)   Theft of labor or services, or use of property.



      (1)   A person commits theft when he or she obtains the
temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available
only for hire by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is
without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services.



      (2)   A person commits theft when, after renting or leasing a
motor vehicle, obtaining a motor vehicle or leasing any other type of
personal property under an agreement in writing which provides for the return
of the vehicle or other personal property to a particular place at a
particular time, and is thereafter served or sent a written demand mailed to
the last known address, made by certified mail return receipt requested, to
return such vehicle or other personal property within three days from the
mailing of the written demand, and who, without good cause, willfully fails
to return the vehicle or other personal property to any place of business of
the lessor within such period.



(1994 Code, § 131.03)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.04  THEFT OF LIBRARY MATERIALS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LIBRARY CARD. A card or plate issued by a library facility for
purposes of identifying the person to whom the library card was issued as
authorized to borrow library material, subject to all limitations and
conditions imposed on such borrowing by the library facility issuing such
card.



      LIBRARY FACILITY. Includes any public library or museum, or any
library or museum of an educational, historical or eleemosynary 
institution, organization or society.



      LIBRARY MATERIAL. Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph,
engraving, painting, sculpture, statute, artifact, drawing, maps, newspapers,
pamphlet, broadside, magazine, manuscript, document, letter, microfilm, sound
recording, audiovisual material, magnetic or other tape, electronic data
processing record or other documentary, written or printed material
regardless of physical form or characteristics, or any part thereof,
belonging to, or on loan to, or otherwise in the custody of a library
facility.



      PREMISES OF A LIBRARY FACILITY. The interior of a building,
structure or other enclosure in which a library facility is located and in
which the library facility keeps library material.



   (B)   Library theft. A person commits the offense of library theft
when he or she:



      (1)   Knowingly and intentionally removes any library material
from the premises of a library facility without authority to do so;



      (2)   Knowingly and intentionally conceals any library
material upon his or her person or among his or her belongings while still in
the premises of a library facility, and in such a manner that the library
material is not visible through ordinary observation, although there may be
some notice of its presence, and removes such library material beyond the
last point in the premises of that library facility at which library material
may be borrowed in accordance with procedures established by that library
facility for the borrowing of the library materials;



      (3)   With the intent to deceive, borrows or attempts to
borrow, any library material from a library facility by:



         (a)   Use of a library card issued to another without
the other’s consent;



         (b)   Use of a library card knowing that it is revoked,
cancelled or expired; and/or



         (c)   Use of a library card knowing that it is falsely
made, counterfeit or materially altered.



      (4)   Borrows from a library facility library material which
has an aggregate value of $50 or more, pursuant to an agreement with or
procedure established by the library facility for the return of such library
material, and usually without good cause fails to return the library material
so borrowed in accordance with such agreement or procedure, and further
willfully without good cause fails to return such library material within 30
days after receiving written notice by certified mail from the library
facility demanding the return of such library material.



   (C)   Mutilation or vandalism of library materials. A person commits
mutilation or vandalism of library materials when he or she knowingly tears,
marks on, maliciously renders imperfect or otherwise damages or destroys
library materials.



(1994 Code, § 131.04)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.05  TRESPASS TO LAND.



   No person shall enter upon the land or into a building other than a
residence, or any part thereof, of another after receiving, prior to the
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that an entry is forbidden, or
remain upon the land or in a building other than a residence of another after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart. A person is deemed to
have received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning above if
he or she has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a
printed or written notice forbidding an entry has been conspicuously posted
or exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.



(1994 Code, § 131.05)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.06  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   No person shall willfully break, deface, destroy or otherwise injure
any property of any other person.



(1994 Code, § 131.06)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.07  DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Knowingly damage any city property without the city’s
consent;



   (B)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage city
property without the city’s consent;



   (C)   Knowingly start a fire on city land without the consent of the
city; and/or



   (D)   Knowingly deposit on city land or in a city building any stink
bomb or any offensive-smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere with
the use by the city of its lands or buildings.



(1994 Code, § 131.07)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.08  DAMAGE OF FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS OR EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper
with, destroy or deface any fire hydrant, fire hose, fire engine or other
public or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to
such equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper
authorization.



(1994 Code, § 131.08)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.09  PARENTS’ RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The parent or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor who
resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for actual damages
for the willful or malicious acts of such minor which causes damage to
property of the city or any other person.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LEGAL GUARDIAN. Any person appointed guardian or given custody of
a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include the person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act.



      MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11, but is not yet 19
years of age.



(1994 Code, § 131.09)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)



§ 131.10  UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO, TELEVISION OR TELEPHONE
OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wantonly operate or
cause to be operated, any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any
kind whatsoever within the city, the operation of which device shall cause
interference with radio or television reception within the city or
interference with telephone transmissions.



(1994 Code, § 131.10)  (Ord. 00-03, passed 2-14-2000)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person knowingly operating a citizens’ band radio within
the city which causes interference with radio and television reception or
general transmission of the general public, per § 131.10 of this chapter, 
shall be deemed to create a nuisance and, should such person be found guilty
of said provision, such may be punished by a fine of not less than $75, nor
more than $750, for each violation of this provision.



(1994 Code, § 131.10)  (Ord. 00-03, passed 2-14-2000)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



Section



General Offenses Against Public Order



   132.01   Disorderly conduct



   132.02   Curfew



   132.03   Unlawful assemblages



   132.04   Consumption of alcoholic beverage or possession of
containers with broken seals prohibited in public



   132.05   Assault; battery; fighting in public



   132.06   Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug related
activity



Truancy and School Day Curfew Provisions



   132.20   Definitions



   132.21   School day curfew restrictions



   132.22   Truancy restrictions



   132.23   Enforcement



 



   132.99   Penalty



GENERAL OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



§ 132.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent,
offensive or disorderly conduct which tends to cause a breach of the peace or
which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger or
imminent threat of violence by threatening, challenging to fight, fighting,
making of a loud noise, shouting, yelling or by using obscene or profane
language.



   (B)   No person on public property or on private property within 300
feet of a school located within the city shall conduct himself or herself in
such a manner as to cause a breach of the peace or threaten public safety by:



      (1)   Willfully making any noise or diversion which disturbs
or tends to disturb the order of a school assembly, session or class thereof;



      (2)   Obstructing the free passage to pedestrians or flow of
traffic of motor vehicles; and



      (3)   Obstructing or interfering with any person lawfully
seeking access to school property.



(1994 Code, § 132.01)  (Ord. 417, passed 2-10-1992)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.02  CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 17 to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at
the following times:



      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



      (2)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and



      (3)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and
6:00 a.m. on the following day.



   (B)   It shall be a defense to a violation under this section that
the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



      (1)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian
or other responsible companion at least 18 years of age, approved by said
parent or legal guardian;



      (2)   Engaged in a business or occupation in which the laws of
the state authorize a person under the age of 17 to perform;



      (3)   Participating in, going to or returning from:



         (a)   A school-sanctioned activity;



         (b)   A religious event;



         (c)   An emergency involving the protection of a person
or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;



         (d)   An activity involving the exercise of the
child’s rights protected under the First Amendment to the Constitution of
the United States, the Constitution of the state, or both, such as freedom of
speech, free exercise of religion or right of assembly; or



         (e)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training or other
care under the supervision of one or more adults.



      (4)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a
location outside the state to another location outside the state.



   (C)   (1)   Before taking any enforcement action with respect to
an alleged violation prohibited under this section, the law enforcement
official shall inquire as to the apparent offender’s age and reason for
being in the public place.



      (2)   The official shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under the provisions of this section unless said official reasonably
believes an offense has occurred and that based upon any response and other
circumstances, no defense as set forth in division (B) is present.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other
person to knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to
violate this section.



(1994 Code, § 132.02)  (Ord. 05-01, passed 1-24-2005)  Penalty, see §
132.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to impose curfew, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5



§ 132.03  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES.



   It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any
disorderly crowd or any crowd gathered together for an unlawful purpose.



(1994 Code, § 132.03)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE OR POSSESSION OF CONTAINERS
WITH BROKEN SEALS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to partake or consume any alcoholic
liquor, as defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934, being 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et
seq., of the state, as amended, or possess or carry any alcoholic liquor,
except in the original package, container, bottle or can with the seal
unbroken or bottle or can unopened, on any public place, street or sidewalk
in the city or on any private property open to the general public over which
the city is authorized by contract to regulate the conduct of pedestrians and
traffic thereon.



(1994 Code, § 132.04)  (Ord. 235-A, passed 7-17-1972; Ord. 386, passed
12-26-1989)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  ASSAULT; BATTERY; FIGHTING IN PUBLIC.



   (A)   Assault.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault.



      (2)   Any person commits an assault when, without lawful
authority, he or she knowingly engages in conduct which places another in
reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.



   (B)   Battery.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery.



      (2)   A person commits a battery if he or she knowingly
without legal justification by any means causes bodily harm to an individual
or makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.



   (C)   Fighting in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to
fight in any public place within the city.



(1994 Code, § 132.05)  (Ord. 13-01, passed 1-14-2013)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.06  LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY.



   (A)   No person shall loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open
to the public or near any public or private place in a manner and under
circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity
contrary to any of the provisions of 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.



   (B)   Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such purpose is manifested are:



      (1)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or
seller. For purposes of this section, a KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR
OR SELLER is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer,
been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the
use, possession or sale of any controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS
570/401 et seq., or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of
the provisions of such chapter or  substantially similar laws of any
political subdivision of the state or of any other state; or a person who
displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as
“needle tracks”, burned or calloused thumb and index fingers,
underweight, nervous and excited behavior;



      (2)   Such person is currently subject to a court order
prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area;



      (3)   Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a
reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged
in an unlawful drug-related activity, including, by way of example only, such
person acting as a “lookout” or hailing or stopping cars;



      (4)   Such person is physically identified by the officer as a
member of a “gang” or association which has as its purpose illegal drug
activity;



      (5)   Such person transfers small objects or packages in a
furtive fashion;



      (6)   Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to
conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer;



      (7)   Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object
which reasonably could be involved in any unlawful drug-related activity;



      (8)   Such person possesses any instrument, article or thing
whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of
controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires,
chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades or other cutting
tools;



      (9)   The area involved is by public repute known to be an
area of unlawful drug use and trafficking;



      (10)   The premises involved are known to the defendant to
have been reported to law enforcement as a place of drug activity pursuant to
720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.; and/or



      (11)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful
drug user, possessor or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding
warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity.



   (C)   No person shall occupy, loiter or remain in any building,
apartment, store, automobile, boat, boat-house, airplane or other place of
any description whatsoever where controlled substances, hypodermic syringes,
needles or other instruments or implements are sold, dispensed, furnished,
given away, stored or kept illegally, with the intent to unlawfully use or
possess such substance, implements or instruments.



(1994 Code, § 132.06)  (Ord. 418, passed 2-10-1992; Ord. 94-015, passed
12-5-1994)  Penalty, see § 132.99



TRUANCY AND SCHOOL DAY CURFEW PROVISIONS



§ 132.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMUNITY SERVICE. A penalty requiring that an offender convicted of a
relatively minor crime do unpaid work that is beneficial to the community.



   COURT. The Twentieth Judicial Court, held at Sparta City Hall, Sparta,
Illinois.



   CUSTODIAN. Any of the following:



      (1)   A person who under court order is the custodian of the
person of a minor;



      (2)   A public or private agency with which the court has
placed a minor; or



      (3)   A  person acting in the role of a parent by reason of a
private agreement, arrangement, custom or habit.



   EMERGENCY.



      (1)   An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action.



      (2)   The term includes, but is not limited to, fire, natural
disaster, automobile accident, medical emergency or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.



   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business to which the
public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
entertainment.



   GUARDIAN. Any of the following:



      (1)   A parent;



      (2)   A person who under court order is the guardian of the
person of a minor; or



      (3)   A public or private agency with which the court has
placed a minor.



   MINOR. A person who in under 18 years of age.



   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent
of another person.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Streets, highways, public ways, sidewalks; and



      (2)   The common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.



   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. The parent, guardian or custodian having the care
and custody of a minor.



   SCHOOL DAY CURFEW HOURS. The period of time during the day when school
is in session.



   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   TRUANCY CURFEW HOURS. The period of the day when the school the minor
would normally attend is in session.



   TRUANCY REVIEW BOARD. An agency or entity established by any school
district or any federal, state or local governmental entity recognized by the
city and/or the court as an agency, which provides service to improve
education, performance and/or attendance.



   TRUANT. A child subject to compulsory school attendance and who is
absent without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion
thereof.



   TRUANT OFFICER. Any officer, appointee, employee or other agent of any
school district or any federal, state or local governmental entity or any
agency thereof performing the duties of a truant officer under the state’s
Compulsory Attendance Statute (105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.).



(1994 Code, § 132.20)  (Ord. 07-05, passed 6-11-2007)



§ 132.21  SCHOOL DAY CURFEW RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or custodian of a
minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, to allow the minor to
be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours.



   (C)   It is a defense to a violation under divisions (A) and (B)
above that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



      (1)   Accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian or
custodian;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child’s
parent, guardian or custodian;



      (3)   Participating in, going to or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment;



         (b)   A school-sanctioned activity;



         (c)   An emergency involving the protection of a person
or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;



         (d)   A religious event;



         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the
child’s rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or the Constitution of the state, or both, such as freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or



         (f)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training or other
care under the supervision of one or more adults.



      (4)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a
location outside the state to another location outside the state.



(1994 Code, § 132.21)  (Ord. 07-05, passed 6-11-2007)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.22  TRUANCY RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory
education or to compulsory continuation education by statute or court order
to be absent without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or
portion thereof.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, custodian or guardian of a
minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, to allow the minor to
be absent without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or
portion thereof.



   (C)   It is a defense to a violation under divisions (A) and (B)
above if the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



      (1)   Accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian or
custodian;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child’s
parent, guardian or custodian;



      (3)   Participating in, going to or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment;



         (b)   A school-sanctioned activity;



         (c)   An emergency involving the protection of a person
or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;



         (d)   A religious event;



         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the
child’s rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or the Constitution of the state, or both, such as freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or



         (f)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training or other
care under the supervision of one or more adults.



      (4)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a
location outside the state to another location outside the state.



(1994 Code, § 132.22)  (Ord. 07-05, passed 6-11-2007)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.23  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Every member of the Police Department, while on duty, is
hereby authorized to temporarily detain any minor alleged to be in violation
of the provisions of this subchapter (regardless of whether a citation is
immediately issued) until the parent, custodian or guardian of the minor
shall take him or her into custody, but such officer shall immediately upon
taking custody of the minor reasonably attempt to communicate with the
parent, custodian or guardian of the minor unless division (E) below is
applicable. A parent, custodian or guardian must take custody of the minor
within one hour of the time of notice or be subject to a charge of $25 per
hour as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Before taking any enforcement action, a police officer shall
ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest unless the officer
reasonably believes an offense has occurred and that, based on any response
and other circumstances, no defense contained in division (C) below or §
132.21(C)(3) is present.



   (C)   (1)   A citation issued hereunder shall be in writing and
shall:



         (a)   State the name of the person being cited and the
person’s address if known;



         (b)   Set forth the specific section of this subchapter
that was violated, the date, time and location of the violation and a brief
description of the violation; and



         (c)   Be signed by the issuing police officer, truant
officer or complaining party.



      (2)   In each instance where a citation is issued to a minor
for a violation of this subchapter a minor’s parent, custodian or guardian
shall be provided a copy of the citation notifying the parent, custodian or
guardian of the charge made against the minor.



   (D)    A minor cited for a violation under this subchapter must
attend a court hearing on the citation and must be accompanied at the hearing
by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the
legal care and custody of the minor. If any such person fails to attend any
court hearing with the minor, and unless the interest of justice would
otherwise be served, the court may continue the hearing and shall issue a
notice or a rule to show cause to the person directing that said person to
appear at the continued hearing with the minor. Failure of the person to
thereafter appear shall subject said person to sanctions for contempt of
court as determined by the court.



   (E)   Every member of the Police Department while on duty is hereby
authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of §
132.22 of this subchapter, regardless of whether a citation is issued and to
deliver and surrender the minor to the lawful authorities of the school that
the minor would normally attend.



(1994 Code, § 132.23)  (Ord. 07-05, passed 6-11-2007)



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who so absents himself or herself without said
permission shall be guilty of the offense of truancy, per §§ 132.20 through
132.23 of this chapter, and shall be subject to the penalty set forth below:



      (1)   Upon the first conviction, the payment of a fine in an
amount not to exceed $75, in addition to court cost;



      (2)   Upon the second conviction within a one-year period, the
payment of a fine of not less that $150, in addition to court costs;



      (3)   Upon the third conviction within a one-year period, the
payment of a fine of not less than $200, in addition to court costs;



      (4)   In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to divisions
(B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) above, the minor, parents, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having legal care or custody of the minor may be ordered
to pay all costs associated with §§ 132.20 through 132.23 of this chapter;
and



      (5)   In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to divisions
(B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) above, the minor, parents, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having legal care or custody of the minor may be ordered
to fulfill community service hours as directed by the court.



(1994 Code, § 132.24)  (Ord. 07-05, passed 6-11-2007)



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



Section



General Provisions



   133.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter or
correctional institution employee



   133.02   Interference with officers or city employees



   133.03   Refusing to aid an officer



   133.04   Tampering with public notice



Ethics Code



   133.15   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 133.01  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER OR
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance
by one known to the person to be a peace officer, firefighter or correctional
institution employee of any authorized act within his or her official
capacity.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE shall mean any person employed to supervise and control
inmates incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm, reformatory, prison,
jail, house of correction, police detention area, half-way house or other
institution or place for the incarceration or custody of persons under
sentence for offenses or awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under
arrest for an offense, a violation of probation, a violation of parole, a
violation of aftercare release, a violation of mandatory supervised release
or awaiting a bail setting hearing or preliminary hearing. FIREFIGHTER means
any individual, either as an employee or volunteer, of a regularly
constituted fire department of a municipality or fire protection district who
performs fire fighting duties, including, but not limited to, the fire chief,
assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver, ladder person, hose person,
pipe person, and any other member of a regularly constituted fire department.
FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal to conduct arson investigations.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if
a person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to
be a firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence,
building or other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.



(720 ILCS 5/31-l)  (1994 Code, § 133.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.02  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS OR CITY EMPLOYEES.



   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or
employee of the city while engaged in the duties of his or her office.



(1994 Code, § 133.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.03  REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.



   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to
aid a person known by him or her to be a police officer in:



   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to
apprehend; or



   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.



(720 ILCS 5/31-8)  (1994 Code, § 133.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.04  TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.



   (A)   A person commits tampering with public notice when he or she
knowingly and without lawful authority alters, destroys, defaces, removes or
conceals any public notice posted according to law, during the time for which
the notice was to remain posted.



   (B)   Tampering with public notice is a petty offense.



(720 ILCS 5/32-9)  (1994 Code, § 133.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ETHICS CODE



§ 133.15  STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.



   (A)   The regulations of  5 ILCS 430/5-15 and 5 ILCS 430/10-10 
through 10-40 of the state’s Officials and Employees Ethics Act, being 5
ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to the Act) are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to
the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.



   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or employee of the city,
is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the city under the Act is hereby prohibited.



   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.



   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and
EMPLOYEE shall be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).



   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violation of the
Act.



   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify
existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers
and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies
are less restrictive than this section; however, the provisions of this
section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(A).



   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the city.



   (I)   If the state’s Supreme Court declares the Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of
the date that the state’s Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not
subject to any further appeals or rehearing. This section shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city if
the Act is found unconstitutional by the state’s Supreme Court.



   (J)   If the state’s Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found to
be unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city.



(1994 Code, § 133.05)  (Ord. 04-06, passed 5-10-2004)



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   134.01   Public indecency



   134.02   Obscenity



   134.03   Public urination



   134.04   Harmful material



§ 134.01  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any
of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:



      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct; or



      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse
or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.



   (B)   Breast feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.



   (C)   PUBLIC PLACE, for purposes of this section, means any place
where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.



(720 ILCS 5/11-30)  (1994 Code, § 134.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.02  OBSCENITY.



   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content
thereof, he or she:



      (1)   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to
sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of the obscene;



      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other
performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it
obscene;



      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available
anything obscene;



      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene
exhibition of his or her body for gain;



      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or
material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of
the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or



      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material
represented or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is
obscene.



   (B)   “Obscene” defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE
if:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the
prurient interest;



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and



      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.



      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary
adults; except that, it shall be judged with reference to children or other
specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the
material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed
for or directed to such an audience.



      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section,
evidence shall be admissible to show:



         (a)   The character of the audience for which the
material was designed or to which it was directed;



         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would
be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it
would probably have on the behavior of such people;



         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or
other merits of the material or absence thereof;



         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the
material in the state;



         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof,
in advertising or other promotion of the material; and



         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or
disseminator.



   (D)   Permissive inference. The trier of fact may infer an intent to
disseminate from the creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold,
engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for
reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of
obscene material.



   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to
obscenity that the dissemination:



      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates
other than children under 18 years of age; and/or



      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or
other special justification for possession of such material.



   (F)   Forfeiture of property. A person who has been convicted
previously of the offense of obscenity and who is convicted of a second or
subsequent offense of obscenity is subject to the property forfeiture
provisions set forth in 720 ILCS 5/11-20(g) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
of 1963.



(720 ILCS 5/11-20)  (1994 Code, § 134.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.03  PUBLIC URINATION.



   It is unlawful for any person to perform an act of urination in a
public place. PUBLIC PLACE, for purposes of this section, means any place
where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.



(1994 Code, § 134.03)  (Ord. 95-002, passed 2-13-1995)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 134.04  HARMFUL MATERIAL.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.



      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, when, taken as a whole, it:



         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient interest in
sex of minors;



         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in
the adult community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors; and



         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value for minors.



      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject
matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would
have disclosed the contents.



      MATERIAL.



         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film,
video game, computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any
such representation or image which is stored electronically; or



         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or recorded audio of any sort.



      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.



      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below
the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one
clothed for sexual gratification or stimulation.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or
physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor
when he or she:



      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, exhibits to,
depicts to or gives away to a minor, knowing that the minor is under the age
of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s
true age:



         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct
or sado-masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or
sado-masochistic abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;



         (b)   A motion picture, show or other presentation which
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to
minors; or



         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where
there is exhibited or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other
presentation.



      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or
to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation, knowing
that the minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise
reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s true age.



   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an
affirmative defense:



      (1)   The minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon
by the accused;



      (2)   The defendant was in a parental or guardianship
relationship with the minor or  that the minor was accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian;



      (3)   The defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with
and serving the educational purpose of such organization;



      (4)   The act charged was committed in aid of legitimate
scientific or educational purposes; or



      (5)   An advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his or her employees or agents, as where the order or
request for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone,
Internet or similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful
material to the child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of
transport, which advertisement contained the following statement, or a
substantially similar statement, and that the defendant required the
purchaser to certify that he or she was not under the age of 18 and that the
purchaser falsely stated that he or she was not under the age of 18:



 

   NOTICE

It  is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase the matter
advertised. Any  person under the age of 18 that falsely states that he or
she is not under the age of 18 for  the purpose of obtaining the material
advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor under the laws of the State.

 



 



   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material
shall be judged with  reference to average children of the same general age
of the child to whom such material was  sold, lent, distributed or given,
unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the  circumstances of its
dissemination or distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible
groups, in which case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged
with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.



   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section
is a Class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony.



   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 who falsely states, either
orally or in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or who
presents or offers to any person any evidence of age  and identity that is
false or not actually his or her own with the intent of ordering, obtaining,
viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful
material is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.



   (G)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to or
sends, or causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or
exhibits any harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. If that person utilized a computer web
camera, cellular telephone or any other type of device to manufacture the
harmful material, then each offense is a Class 4 felony.



   (H)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service
providers and providers of information services, including, but not limited
to, Internet service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable
under this section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of
the transmission, storage or caching of electronic communications or messages
of others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services or information services used by others in
violation of this section.



(720 ILCS 5/11-21)  (1994 Code, § 134.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



Litter



   135.001   Definitions



   135.002   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions



   135.003   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited



   135.004   Accumulation of litter prohibited



   135.005   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from
motor vehicle



   135.006   Receptacles required in public areas



   135.007   Power of court to order removal of litter



Upholstered Furniture



   135.020   Use of upholstered furniture in outdoor locations
prohibited



Nitrous Oxide



   135.035   Nitrous oxide (N2O)



MDPV Prohibited



   135.050   MDPV prohibited



Soliciting by Pedestrians



   135.065   Pedestrians soliciting rides, business or contributions



Drug Paraphernalia



   135.080   Title



   135.081   Definitions



   135.082   Possession of drug paraphernalia



   135.083   Exemptions



   135.084   Possession of cannabis or controlled substance



Public Nuisances



   135.095   Definition; general prohibitions



Nuisance Parties



   135.110   Definitions



   135.111   Duty to control premises



   135.112   Order to cease and disperse



 



   135.999   Penalty



LITTER



§ 135.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER
may include, but is not limited to: any garbage, trash, refuse, cigarettes,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging
construction material, abandoned vehicle (as defined in 625 ILCS 5), motor
vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or
offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any person or
create a traffic hazard; potentially infectious medical waste as defined in
415 ILCS 5/3.360, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature,
which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.



(415 ILCS 105/3)



   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in Ch. 70 of this code of ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 136.01)



§ 135.002  DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.



   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of
litter upon any public or private property in the city, or upon or into any
river, lake, pond or other stream or body of water in the city unless:



   (A)   The property has been designated by the city or any of its
agencies for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that
property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
state’s Pollution Control Board;



   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container
intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the
deposit of litter;



   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the
owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a
public nuisance or a fire hazard;



   (D)   The person is acting pursuant to special cleanup days
established by the Board of Trustees; and/or



   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of any litter, including, but not limited to, potentially infectious
medical waste as defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.360, when the emergency situation no
longer exists.



(415 ILCS 105/4, 8)  (1994 Code, § 136.02)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.003  DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or
body of water in the city, except as permitted under § 135.002(A) through
(E) of this chapter; nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or
rubbish from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site
to and deposit the material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.



(415 ILCS 105/5, 8)  (1994 Code, § 136.03)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.004  ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which
the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of
another person.



(415 ILCS 105/6, 8)  (1994 Code, § 136.04)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.005  PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.



   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated § 135.003 of this chapter, but
that presumption may be rebutted.



(415 ILCS 105/9)  (1994 Code, § 136.05)



§ 135.006  RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.



   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this chapter,
the owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the
public as a place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation or
as a public way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the
deposit of litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the
needs of the numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC
FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to, commercially
operated parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service
stations, business parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat
launching areas, industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations,
piers, beaches and bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in
movies and shopping malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR
ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION OR AS A PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to,
any property that is publicly owned or operated for any of the purposes
stated in the definition in this division (B) for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE
PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS, but excludes state highway
rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.



(415 ILCS 105/10)  (1994 Code, § 136.06)  Penalty, see § 135.999



§ 135.007  POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.



   The penalties prescribed in this chapter are in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities which may be
otherwise imposed or conferred by a court.



(415 ILCS 105/8)  (1994 Code, § 136.07)



UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE



§ 135.020  USE OF UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE IN OUTDOOR LOCATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Upholstered or other furniture designed or manufactured
primarily for indoor use shall not be used or allowed to remain:



      (1)   On unenclosed exterior porches or balconies; and/or



      (2)   In an open area on private property exposed to outdoor
weather conditions.



   (B)   It shall not be a defense to said prohibition that such
furniture is covered by plastic cover, or other tarpaulin, canvas or sheeting.



   (C)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Wood, metal or plastic furniture;



      (2)   Outdoor patio furniture with weather-resistant cushions;
and/or



      (3)   Upholstered furniture designated for prepaid pickup or
delivery by public or private haulers;  provided that, such remain outdoors
for a period not to exceed 72 hours.



(1994 Code, § 136.10)  (Ord. 05-13, passed 12-27-2005)  Penalty, see §
135.999



NITROUS OXIDE



§ 135.035  NITROUS OXIDE (N2O).



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NITROUS OXIDE. A colorless, non-flammable gas, (N2O), used as an
anesthetic and in aerosols.



      SMALL NITROUS OXIDE CARTRIDGE. Any cartridge containing less than
20 ounces of compressed nitrous oxide (N2O).



   (B)   Unlawful sale or distribution prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, corporation or association to sell, offer for sale,
distribute or give away any small N2O cartridge, balloon or other container;
except that, the foregoing provision shall not apply to wholesalers, jobbers
and manufacturers who use nitrous oxide (N2O) in the normal course of their
business to manufacture other lawful items.



   (C)   Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale or
otherwise introduce into his or her respiratory system nitrous oxide (N2O),
except under the direct care and supervision of a licensed physician or
dentist.



(1994 Code, § 136.20)  (Ord. 95-010, passed 6-12-1995)  Penalty, see §
135.999



MDPV PROHIBITED



§ 135.050  MDPV PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city by prohibiting the use, possession,
distribution or delivery of any substance containing MDPV, as hereinafter
defined, it being the specific finding of the city that such substances have
a dangerous effect upon anyone using and/or ingesting said substances and no
medicinal or beneficial purposes.



   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DELIVER. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer from one
person to another of MDPV, whether or not there is an agency relationship,
and includes a sale.



      DISTRIBUTE. To deliver other than by administering or dispensing
MDPV.



      MDPV. Includes any material, compound, mixture or preparation
containing any quantity of the following substances having a stimulant effect
on the central nervous system, including their salts, isomers and salts of
isomers of 3.4 Methylenedioxypyrovalerone, Methylone, Mephedrone,
4-Methoiymethcathinone; 4-Fluormethcathinone and 3-Fluoromethcathinone.



      POSSESS. With the knowledge of the presence and nature of a
substance, either actually or constructively in control of a substance. A
person has actual POSSESSION if he or she has the substance on his or her
person or within easy reach or convenient control. A person who, although not
in actual POSSESSION, has the power and intention at a given time to exercise
dominion or control over the substance either directly or through another
person or persons is in constructive possession of it.



      USE. The partaking, inhaling, smoking, consumption, ingestion or
injection of MDPV.



   (C)   General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to
use, possess, distribute or deliver any substance containing MDPV, as defined
in division (B) above.



(1994 Code, § 136.25)  (Ord. 11-4a, passed 7-25-2011)  Penalty, see §
135.999



SOLICITING BY PEDESTRIANS



§ 135.065  PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS OR CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle within the city.



   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of
soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle within the
city.



   (C)   No person shall stand on the highway for the purpose of
soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, except when the
soliciting agency shall be:



      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General of the state as a
charitable organization as provided by 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.;



      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity;



      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during
the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence
of the soliciting agent; and



      (4)   Required to utilize persons at least 16 years of age or
older wearing a high visibility vest.



   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked on or about to be parked on a highway.



(1994 Code, § 136.30)  (Ord. 2001-12, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
135.999



DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



§ 135.080  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be entitled the “City of Sparta Drug
Paraphernalia Control Ordinance”.



(1994 Code, § 136.40)  (Ord. 2002-17, passed 12-23-2002)



§ 135.081  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANNABIS. The meaning ascribed to it in the state’s Cannabis Control
Act, being 720 ILCS 550/3, as if that definition were incorporated herein.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, being 720 ILCS 570/102, as if that definition were
incorporated herein.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in
violation of the state’s Cannabis Control Act, being 720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq., or the state’s Controlled Substances Act, being 720 ILCS 570/100 et
seq. It includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance;



      (2)   Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a
controlled substance;



      (3)   Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private
home use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity
of cannabis or controlled substances;



      (4)   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for
cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;



      (5)   Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body including, where applicable, the following items:



         (a)   Water pipes;



         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



         (e)   Carburetor pipes;



         (f)   Electric pipes;



         (g)   Air-driven pipes;



         (h)   Chillums;



         (i)   Bongs; and



         (j)   Ice pipes or chillers.



      (6)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the
seller, is for use in violation of 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS 570/1
et seq.



(1994 Code, § 136.41)  (Ord. 2002-17, passed 12-23-2002)



§ 135.082  POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia
with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing
cannabis or a controlled substance for that use, is guilty of violation of
this subchapter.



   (B)   In determining intent under division (A) above, the trier of
fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled
substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia.



(1994 Code, § 136.42)  (Ord. 2002-17, passed 12-23-2002)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.083  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding,
packaging, labeling or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an
incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.



   (B)   (1)   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily
used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful
substance.



      (2)   Items exempt under this section include, but are not
limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes and
cigarette-rolling papers.



   (C)   (1)   Items listed in § 135.081 of this chapter which are
marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered
completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose
prohibited by this subchapter.



      (2)   In determining whether or not a particular item is
exempt under this section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to
all other logically relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   The general, usual, customary and historical use
to which the item involved has been put;



         (b)   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or
customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or
engineering of the device upon its functioning;



         (c)   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery
of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be
put;



         (d)   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of
the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;



         (e)   Any national or local advertising concerning the
design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which
such advertising occurs;



         (f)   The manner, place and circumstances in which the
item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale
or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;



         (g)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the
object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; and



         (h)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.



(1994 Code, § 136.43)  (Ord. 2002-17, passed 12-23-2002)



§ 135.084  POSSESSION OF CANNABIS OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, distribute or
deliver any cannabis or controlled substance, as defined in this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 136.44)  (Ord. 2002-17, passed 12-23-2002)  Penalty, see §
135.999



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 135.095  DEFINITION; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   A PUBLIC NUISANCE is:



   (A)   To cause or allow the carcass of an animal or offal, filth or
a noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place to
the prejudice of others;



   (B)   To throw or deposit offal or other offensive matter or the
carcass of a dead animal in a watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or common
sewer, street or public highway;



   (C)   To corrupt or render unwholesome in impure the water of a
spring, river, stream, pond or lake to the injury or prejudice of others;



   (D)   To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of
navigable river or waters;



   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways,
streets, alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying places;



   (F)   To carry on the business of manufacturing gunpowder,
nitroglycerine or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or grinding
the materials for those substances, in a building within 100 yards of a
valuable building erected at the time the business is commenced;



   (G)   To establish powder magazines near incorporated towns, at a
point different from that appointed according to law by the corporate
authorities of the town, or within 100 yards of an occupied dwelling house;



   (H)   To erect, continue or use a building or other place for the
exercise of a trade, employment or manufacture that, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals or of the public;



   (I)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the
wares or occupation on or affixing them to fences or other private property,
or on rocks or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner or, if
in the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities;



   (J)   To permit a well drilled for oil, gas, salt water disposal or
any other purpose in connection with the production of oil and gas to remain
unplugged after the well is no longer used for the purpose for which it was
drilled;



   (K)   To construct or operate a salt water pit or oil field refuse
pit, commonly called a “burn out pit”, so that salt water, brine or oil
field refuse or other waste liquids may escape from the pit in a manner,
except by the evaporation of the salt water or brine or by burning of the oil
field waste or refuse;



   (L)   To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery, and materials
to remain around an oil or gas well, or to fail to fill holes, cellars, slush
pits and other excavations made in connection with the well or to restore the
surface of the lands surrounding the well to its condition before the
drilling of the well, upon the abandonment of the oil or gas well;



   (M)   To permit salt water, oil, gas or other wastes from a well
drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to the surface, or
into a mine or coal seam, or into an underground fresh water supply, or from
one underground stratum or another;



   (N)   To harass, intimidate or threaten a person who is about to
sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property or is
about to buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real
property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person’s
attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers
to a person’s sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real property;



   (O)   To store, dump or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse,
garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage cans or other
containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents,
nuisance birds or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious or
dangerous to the health of individuals or the public;



   (P)   To create a condition, through the improper maintenance of a
swimming pool or wading pool, or by causing an action that alters the
condition of a natural body of water, so that it harbors mosquitoes, flies or
other animal pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health
of individuals or the public; and



   (Q)   To operate a tanning facility without a valid permit under the
Tanning Facility Permit Act, being 210 ILCS 145/1 et seq..



(1994 Code, § 136.50)  (Ord. 08-05, passed 8-25-2008)  Penalty, see §
135.999



NUISANCE PARTIES



§ 135.110  DEFINITIONS.



   A NUISANCE PARTY is defined as a social gathering or party which is
conducted on premises within the city and which, by reason of the conduct of
the persons in attendance, results in any one or more of the following
conditions or events occurring at the site of the said party or social
gathering, or on neighboring public or private property: disorderly conduct;
illegal open container; outdoor urination or defecation in a public place;
unlawful sale, furnishing, dispensing or consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor; sale or furnishing of beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage
person; possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor by an
underage person; illegal use of a controlled substance; public indecency;
unlawful deposit of litter or refuse; the damage or destruction of property
without the consent of the property owner; unlawful pedestrian or vehicle
traffic; standing or parking of vehicles that obstructs the free flow of
traffic on the public streets and sidewalks or that impedes the ability to
render emergency services; unlawfully loud noise; or any other conduct or
condition that threatens injury, inconvenience or alarm to persons or damage
to property which is hereby declared to be an unlawful public nuisance.



(1994 Code, § 136.60)  (Ord. 08-04, passed 8-25-2008)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.111  DUTY TO CONTROL PREMISES.



   Any person who is an owner, occupant, tenant or otherwise has rightful
possession or possessory control, individually or jointly with others, of any
premises, who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites or permits a social
gathering or party on said premises which is or becomes a nuisance party, as
defined in § 135.110 of this chapter, and which nuisance is either the
intentional result of, or within the reasonable expectations of, the person
or persons having such possessory control is deemed to be in violation of
this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 136.61)  (Ord. 08-04, passed 8-25-2008)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.112  ORDER TO CEASE AND DISPERSE.



   (A)   A party or social gathering that is or becomes a nuisance
party, as defined in § 135.110 of this chapter, shall cease upon the order
of the Police Chief, or the Police Chief’s designee; and persons not
residing therein at the site of such social gathering or party shall leave
the premises immediately.



   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such an
order shall be guilty of a violation of this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 136.62)  (Ord. 08-04, passed 8-25-2008)  Penalty, see §
135.999



§ 135.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 135.002 of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.



      (2)   An individual convicted of violating § 135.002 of this
chapter by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the
agency having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site
where the offense occurred, as provided in § 50 of the state’s
Adopt-A-Highway Act, being 605 ILCS 120/50.



(415 ILCS 105/4, 8)  (1994 Code, § 136.02)



   (C)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 135.003 of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.



      (2)   An individual convicted of violating § 135.003 of this
chapter by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the
agency having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site
where the offense occurred, as provided in § 50 of the state’s
Adopt-A-Highway Act.



      (3)   A mandatory minimum fine of $50 must be imposed against
any person who is convicted of violating § 135.003 of this chapter.



(415 ILCS 105/5, 8)  (1994 Code, § 136.03)



   (D)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 135.004 of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.



(415 ILCS 105/6, 8)  (1994 Code, § 136.04)



   (E)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in
§ 135.006 of this chapter, the owner or person in control of the property
shall be fined $100 for violating this section. If the owner or person in
control of the property has placed litter receptacles on his or her property,
but the number or size of the receptacles has proved inadequate to meet the
needs of the numbers of people coming on or using his or her property as
indicated by the condition and appearance of that property, and the owner or
person in control has failed to provide sufficient or adequate receptacles
within ten days after being made aware of that fact by written notice from
the police, he or she shall be fined $25 for each receptacle not so provided
and maintained.



(415 ILCS 105/10)  (1994 Code, § 136.06)



   (F)   Any person or entity violating § 135.050 of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $750, plus court costs expended
by the city to enforce this provision.



(1994 Code, § 136.25)



   (G)   Violation of § 135.082 of this chapter for which the court
shall impose a fine of $750.



(1994 Code, § 136.42)



   (H)   Any person or entity who violates or aids and abets in the
violations of § 135.095 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250,
nor more than $750. Upon conviction, in addition to the fine set forth above,
the court may order that the public nuisance be abated by the city at the
expense of the defendant.



   (I)   Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violations of
§§ 135.110, 135.111 and 135.112 of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $250, nor more than $750.



(1994 Code, § 136.99)



(Ord. 2002-17, passed 12-23-2002; Ord. 08-04, passed 8-25-2008; Ord. 08-05,
passed 8-25-2008; Ord. 11-4a, passed 7-25-2011)



CHAPTER 136:  WEAPONS



Section



Deadly Weapons



   136.01   Unlawful use of weapons



   136.02   Exemptions



   136.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition



   136.04   Confiscation and disposition of weapons



   136.05   Casting, throwing or propelling missiles prohibited



Statutory reference:



   Firearms and ammunition registration, 430 ILCS 65



DEADLY WEAPONS



§ 136.01  UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly:



      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry any
bludgeon, black-jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or
other knuckle weapon regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any
knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that
opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other
device in the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device
that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring,
elastic material or compressed gas, but which shall not be deemed to include
crossbows, common or compound bows and/or underwater spearguns in accordance
with 720 ILCS 5/24-1(e)(1). Nor shall the prohibition of the sale,
manufacture, purchase, possession, or carrying of any knife, commonly
referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, apply to a person who possesses a currently valid
Firearm Owner's Identification Card previously issued in his or her name by
the Department of State Police, or to a person or an entity engaged in the
business of selling or manufacturing switchblade knives, in accordance with
720 ILCS 5/24-1(e)(2);



      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully
against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto,
broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;



      (3)   Carry on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a
tear gas gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or
substance, other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or
substance designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years
of age or older;



      (4)   Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or
about his or her person, except when on his or her land or in his or her own
abode, legal dwelling or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the
legal dwelling of another person as an invitee with that person’s
permission, any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm; except
that, this division (A)(4) does not apply to or affect transportation of
weapons that meet one of the following conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued
a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card; or



         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the
Firearm Concealed Carry Act, being 430 ILCS 66/1 et seq., by a person who has
been issued a currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.



      (5)   Set a spring gun;



      (6)   Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed,
used or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm;



      (7)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries:



         (a)   A machine gun, which shall be defined for the
purposes of this division (A)(7)(a) as any weapon, which shoots, is designed
to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one
shot without manually reloading by a single function of the trigger,
including the frame or receiver of any such weapon, or sells, manufactures,
purchases, possesses or carries any combination of parts designed or intended
for use in converting any weapon into a machine gun, or any combination or
parts from which a machine gun can be assembled if such parts are in the
possession or under the control of a person;



         (b)   Any rifle having one or more barrels less than 16
inches in length or a shotgun having one or more barrels less than 18 inches
in length or any weapon made from a rifle or shotgun, whether by alteration,
modification or otherwise, if such a weapon as modified has an overall length
of less than 26 inches; and/or



         (c)   Any bomb, bomb-shell, grenade, bottle or other
container containing an explosive substance of over one-quarter ounce for
like purposes, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails or artillery projectiles.



      (8)   (a)   Carries or possesses any firearm, stun gun or
taser or other deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell
intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering held pursuant to a license
issued by any governmental body or any public gathering at which an admission
is charged, excluding a place where a showing, demonstration or lecture
involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted;



         (b)   This division (A)(8) does not apply to any auction
or raffle of a firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a
governmental body, nor does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety
training courses;



      (9)   Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his or
her person any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or firearm or ballistic
knife, when he or she is hooded, robed or masked in such manner as to conceal
his or her identity;



      (10)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person,
upon any public street, alley or other public lands within the corporate
limits of the city, except when an invitee thereon or therein, for the
purpose of the display of such weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or
except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode, legal dwelling or
fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling of another
person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any pistol, revolver,
stun gun or taser or other firearm; except that, this division (A)(10) does
not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the
following conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued
a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card; or



         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance wit the
Firearm Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid
license under th Firearm Concealed Carry Act.



      (11)   Sells, manufactures, or purchases any explosive bullet.
EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge
which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon contact
with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case
having a projectile affixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the
rear end thereof, with the propellant contained in the tube between the
projectile and the cap.



   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A), means:



      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a
length of wire and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current
capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to
render him or her incapable of normal functioning; or



      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing
worn by a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting the person’s
nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal
functioning.



(720 ILCS 5/24-1)  (1994 Code, § 137.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Silencers on guns; machine guns; possession of weapon while hooded,
robed and/or masked; or possession of weapons on school or university grounds
(all of which are felonies), see 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6), (7), (9) and (c)(2),
respectively



§ 136.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Section 136.01(A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(8) and (A)(10) of this
chapter does not apply to or affect any of the following:



      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in
assisting the officer;



      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons,
penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the detention of persons
accused or convicted of an offense, while in the performance of their
official duty, or while commuting between their homes and place of employment;



      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the
United States or the state’s National Guard or the Reserve Officers
Training Corps, while in the performance of their official duty;



      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public
utility to perform police functions or guards of armored car companies while
actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or
commuting between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while
actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment;



      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors,
private detectives or private alarm contractors or employed by an agency
certified by the Department of Professional Regulation if their duties
include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et
seq., while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their
employment or commuting between their homes and places of employment;
provided that, the commuting is accomplished within one hour from departure
from home or place of employment, as the case may be. Persons exempted under
this division (A)(5) shall be required to have completed a course of study in
firearms handling and training approved and supervised by the Department of
Professional Regulation as prescribed by 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq. prior to
becoming eligible for this exemption. The Department of Professional
Regulation shall provide suitable documentation demonstrating the successful
completion of the prescribed firearms training. Such documentation shall be
carried at all times when such persons are in possession of a concealable
weapon;



      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or
industrial operation as a security guard for the protection of persons
employed and private property related to that commercial or industrial
operation while actually engaged in the performance of their duty or
traveling between sites or properties belonging to the employer, and who, as
a security guard, is a member of a security force of at least five persons
registered with the Department of Professional Regulation; provided that, the
security guard has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and
supervised by the state’s Department of Professional Regulation consisting
of not less than 40 hours of training which shall include theory of law
enforcement, liability for acts and the handling of weapons. A person shall
be considered to be in compliance with this section who has completed the
required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 20 hours of required
firearm training and who has been issued a firearm authorization card by the
state’s Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal
of firearm authorization cards issued under the provisions of this section
shall be the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of 225 ILCS
447/5-5 et seq. Such firearm authorization card shall be carried by the
security guard at all times when he is in possession of a concealable weapon;



      (7)   Agents and investigators of the state’s Legislative
Investigating Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons
specified in § 136.01(A)(3) of this chapter while on duty in the course of
any investigation for the Commission;



      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution for the
protection of other employees and property related to that financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by the financial institution; provided
that, any person so employed has successfully completed a course of study, as
approved by and supervised by the state’s Department of Professional
Regulation, consisting of not less than 40 hours of training which includes
theory of law enforcement, liability for acts and the handling of weapons. A
person shall be considered to be eligible for this exemption who has
completed the required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 20
hours of required firearm training and who has been issued a firearm
authorization card by the state’s Department of Professional Regulation.
Conditions for renewal of firearm authorization cards issued under the
provisions of this section shall be the same as for those issued under the
provisions of 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq. Such firearm authorization card shall
be carried by the person so trained at all times when such person is in
possession of a concealable weapon. For purposes of this division (A)(8),
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association, credit
union or company providing armored car services;



      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive
an armored car while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties;



         (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace
officers pursuant to 20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.;



         (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State’s
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor authorized by the Board of Governors of the
Office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons
pursuant to 725 ILCS 210/1 et seq.;



         (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State’s
Attorney under 55 ILCS 5/3-9005;



         (13)   Court security officers while in the performance
of their official duties, or while commuting between their homes and places
of employment, with the consent of the Sheriff; and/or



         (14)   Manufacture, transportation or sale of weapons to
persons authorized under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(13) above to possess
those weapons.



   (B)   Section 136.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase,
possession or carrying of a black-jack or slung-shot by a police officer.



   (C)   Section 136.01(A)(4) does not apply to any owner, manager or
authorized employee of any place specified in that division or to any law
enforcement officer.



   (D)   Section 136.01(A)(6) does not apply to:



      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the
United States or the state’s National Guard, while in the performance of
their official duty;



      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military
ordnance;



      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics,
or specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance;



      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly or possession of
explosive bullets by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal
government, in connection with the supply of those organizations and persons
exempted by division (D)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside
the state, or the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or
person exempted in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or
leased by an exempted manufacturer; and



      (5)   Persons licensed under federal law to manufacture any
device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in
silencing the report of any firearm, firearms or ammunition for those
firearms equipped with those devices, and actually engaged in the business of
manufacturing those devices, firearms, or ammunition, but only with respect
to activities that are within the lawful scope of that business, such as the
manufacture, transportation, or testing of those devices, firearms or
ammunition. This exemption does not authorize the general private possession
of any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in
silencing the report of any firearm, but only such possession and activities
as are within the lawful scope of a licensed manufacturing business described
in this section. During transportation, those devices shall be detached from
any weapon or not immediately accessible.



   (E)   Section 136.01(A)(4) and (A)(10) do not apply to or affect any
of the following: persons who are not prohibited by the laws of the state,
the state of their domicile or the United States from obtaining, possessing
or using a firearm participating in a sanctioned competitive shooting event,
at the site where the sanctioned competitive shooting event is being held,
including sight-in or practice conducted in conjunction with said event; all
in compliance with 430 ILCS 65/3(a).



   (F)   (1)   An information or indictment based upon a violation
of any provision of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions
contained in this subchapter.



      (2)   The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an
exemption.



   (G)   (1)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to
or affect the transportation, carrying or possession of any pistol or
revolver, stun gun, taser or other firearm consigned to a common carrier
operating under license with the state or the federal government where such
transportation, carrying or possession is incident to the lawful
transportation in which the common carrier is engaged.



      (2)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to or
affect the transportation, carrying  or possession of any pistol, revolver,
stun gun, taser or other firearm not the subject of and regulated by 720 ILCS
5/24-1(a)(7) or division (B) above, which is unloaded and enclosed in a case,
firearm carrying box, shipping box or other container by the possessor of a
valid firearm owner’s identification card.



(1994 Code, § 137.02)  (Ord. 04-13, passed 12-6-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see 720 ILCS 5/24-2



§ 136.03  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of
firearms or firearm ammunition when:



      (1)   He or she is under 18 years of age and has in his or her
possession any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;



      (2)   He or she is under 21 years of age, has been convicted
of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent and has
any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession; 



      (3)   He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his or her possession;



      (4)   He or she has been a patient in a mental institution
within the past five years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his
or her possession. For purposes of this division (A)(4), the following
definitions shall apply.



         MENTAL INSTITUTION. Any hospital, institution, clinic,
evaluation facility, mental health center, or part thereof, which is used
primarily for the care or treatment of persons with mental illness.



         PATIENT IN A MENTAL INSTITUTION. The person was admitted,
either voluntarily or involuntarily, to a mental institution for mental
health treatment, unless the treatment was voluntary and solely for an
alcohol abuse disorder and no other secondary substance abuse disorder or
mental illness.



      (5)   He or she is a person with an intellectual disability
and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession; or



      (6)   He or she has in his or her possession any explosive
bullet. For the purposes of this division (A)(6), EXPLOSIVE BULLET  means
the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries
an explosive charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human
or an animal. CARTRIDGE  means a tubular metal case having a projectile
fixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof with
the propellent contained in the tube between the projectile and the cap.



   (B)   (1)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns,
and firearm ammunition is punishable under § 130.99 of this code of
ordinances.



      (2)   Unlawful possession of handguns is a felony punishable
under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18
years of age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a
firearm such as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon
established public or private target ranges or hunting, trapping or fishing
in accordance with the Wildlife Code, being 520 ILCS 5/1 et seq. or the Fish
and Aquatic Life Code.



(720 ILCS 5/24-3.1)  (1994 Code, § 137.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 136.04  CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.



   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed
by the offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for
further disposition consistent with state law.



(720 ILCS 5/24-6)  (1994 Code, § 137.05)



§ 136.05  CASTING, THROWING OR PROPELLING MISSILES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile across any
street, alley or public place.



(1994 Code, § 137.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   ELECTRICAL CODE



      152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      153.   PLUMBING CODE



      154.   SUBDIVISION CODE



      155.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Fire limits established



   150.002   Limitations on construction and repairs within fire limits



   150.003   Removal of structure for failure to obtain permit or
failure to comply with law



   150.004   Dangerous buildings to be abated as a nuisance



   150.005   Occupancy inspection requirements; owner occupied and
commercial properties



   150.006   Occupancy inspection fees



Landlord Supervision of Rental Properties



   150.020   Definitions



   150.021   Substantiated complaints; hearing; penalty



   150.022   Bond forfeiture; extension



   150.023   Hearing Officer; qualifications



Adoption of Codes



   150.035   Building Code adopted by reference



   150.036   Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference



   150.037   Residential Building Code adopted by reference



   150.038   Mechanical Code adopted by reference



   150.039   Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference



Building Permits



   150.050   Permit required for construction or alterations



   150.051   Application; submission of plans



   150.052   Estimated cost to be submitted with application; estimated
fee; final adjustments



   150.053   Fee; determination



   150.054   Referral of the application and plans to Code Enforcement
Officer and approval thereof



   150.055   Review of permit denial by Council



   150.056   Variance from approved plans; approval required; estimated
fee to reflect modification of plans



Construction Operations



   150.070   Use of streets for storage of materials; permit required;
application



   150.071   Noise produced during night operations



   150.072   Special permit from Council required for use or removal of
sidewalks; cash deposit



   150.073   Duty of care to persons and property; safety devices



Moving Buildings



   150.085   Permit required; application; action by the Council



   150.086   Insurance required; amount; terms



   150.087   Issuance of permit; daily fee



   150.088   Warning signs; light and safety devices



   150.089   Public utility wires



Demolition of Buildings



   150.100   Permit required; application



   150.101   Completion of demolition by city



   150.102   Compliance with provisions required



Code Enforcement Officer



   150.115   Office created; appointment



   150.116   Compensation



   150.117   Duties and authorities



   150.118   Methods of enforcement



   150.119   Violation of codes



   150.120   Deputy Code Enforcement Officers



   150.121   Code Enforcement Officer to serve under Commissioner of
Public Health and Safety



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.



   There are hereby established fire limits in the city, which shall
include all that portion of the city bounded as follows: beginning at the
intersection of the centerlines of College Street and North Vine Street;
thence west along the centerline of College Street to its intersection with
the centerline of North Market Street; thence south along the centerline of
North Market Street to its intersection with the centerline of Main Street;
thence west along the centerline of West Main Street to its intersection with
the centerline of James Street; thence south along the center of James Street
to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of the Missouri-Illinois
Railroad Company; thence northeast along the north right-of-way line of the
Missouri-Illinois Railroad Company to its intersection with the centerline of
Vine Street; thence north along the centerline of Vine Street to its
intersection with the centerline of College Street, being the point of
beginning.



(1994 Code, § 150.01)  (Ord. 408, passed 9-9-1991)



§ 150.002  LIMITATIONS ON CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or erect any building or
structure within the fire limits except in conformity with the provision of
the International Building Code (2006), as now in force or as may hereafter
be amended or supplemented upon the adoption of the amendment or supplement
by the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to repair any existing frame building
within the fire limits after the building has been damaged by 50% or more of
its value. Any existing frame building within the fire limits may be brick
veneered.



(1994 Code, § 150.02)  (Ord. 378, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 408, passed
9-9-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.003  REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE FOR FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT OR FAILURE TO
COMPLY WITH LAW.



   Any structure erected without a permit required by this chapter first
having been obtained or any structure which fails to conform with the
requirements of the Building Code shall be removed.



(1994 Code, § 150.03)  (Ord. 408, passed 9-9-1991)



§ 150.004  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS TO BE ABATED AS A NUISANCE.



   Any building or structure which is dangerous because of its condition,
either as a fire or health hazard or because of the imminent danger of
collapse of the building or any part thereof, shall be abated as provided by
state law.



(1994 Code, § 150.04)  (Ord. 408, passed 9-9-1991)



§ 150.005  OCCUPANCY INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS; OWNER OCCUPIED AND COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES.



   (A)   Any change of occupancy of any dwelling or commercial property
shall require an inspection of the building and improvements on such premises
to determine that it is in a fit condition for occupancy. The criteria for a
finding of fitness shall be based upon the International Property Maintenance
Code (2006).



   (B)   Owners of such dwelling or commercial property shall be
obligated to notify the city not less than 72 hours prior to a change of
occupancy of each such property. Such notification may be made to the office
of the City Clerk or Code Enforcement Officer.



   (C)   No  utility services, including water or electrical services,
shall be connected for service until approved by the Code  Enforcement
Officer (or designee) as meeting substantially all requirements of the
Property Maintenance Code.



   (D)   Failure of any owner of any property to notify the City Code
Enforcement Officer of a change in occupancy shall result in a fine of not
less than $500. No utility service shall be authorized at such property until
payment of said fine has been fully satisfied.



(1994 Code, § 150.005)  (Ord. 95-003, passed 2-13-1995; Ord. 13-06, passed
8-12-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.006  OCCUPANCY INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   All fees for occupancy inspections as required by this chapter
shall be established from time to time by the Commissioner of Public Health
and Safety with the advice and consent of the City Council, and shall be paid
to the City Clerk.



   (B)   The fees are intended to defray the administrative costs
connected with the process of occupancy inspections.



   (C)   Such shall not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising
device.



(1994 Code, § 150.06)  (Ord. 13-06, passed 8-12-2013)



LANDLORD SUPERVISION OF RENTAL PROPERTIES



§ 150.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HEARING OFFICER. The City Attorney or a licensed attorney of the state
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.



   LANDLORD. The person or legal entity which owns or purports to own any
building in which there is rented or offered for rent housing space for
living or dwelling under either a written or oral lease.



   SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT. Any offense designated under Title XIII,
General Offenses, of the code of ordinances of the city or the Illinois
Criminal Code which has been substantiated by prosecution in any court of
competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that, criminal activity or local
ordinance violations occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises that
are directly related to domestic violence or sexual violence shall not be
considered a SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT.



(1994 Code, § 150.10)  (Ord. 15-10, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 15-11, passed
9-28-2015)



§ 150.021  SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINTS; HEARING; PENALTY.



   (A)   If in any one year, three substantiated complaints, as defined
herein, occur on or in proximity to any rental premises and attributable to
the acts or incitements of any of the tenants of said premises, the Code
Enforcement Officer may institute proceedings to require the landlord of such
rental premises to post a bond against the consequences of future incidents
of the same character.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designate shall
cause to be served on the landlord, in person or by certified mail return
receipt requested, mailed to the address appearing on the tax records of such
property, notice advising of the institution of such proceedings, together
with the particulars of the substantiated complaint or complaints upon which
the instant proceedings are based, and the time and place at which the
hearing will be held in the matter. Such hearing shall not be held prior to
30 days from the date upon which the notice is served or mailed.



   (C)   At the hearing convened pursuant to division (B) above, the
Hearing Officer shall receive all competent evidence proffered by the
landlord in contradiction or mitigation thereof, and said landlord shall
otherwise show cause why a bond should not be required with respect to said
rental premises.



   (D)   Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the
judgment of the Hearing Officer, after due consideration of the nature and
extent of the offenses and substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based. The amount of the bond shall be adequate in
consideration of the likelihood of subsequent offenses to occur and to make
reparation for:



      (1)   Damages likely to be caused to public or private
property and damages resulting from the neighboring resident’s rights to
fair use and quiet enjoyment of the premises;



      (2)   Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be
levied for such offenses; and



      (3)   Compensating the municipality for the cost of repressing
and prosecuting such incidents of disorderly behavior.



   (E)   No bond shall be in an amount less than $500, nor more than
$5,000. The city may enforce such a bond by filing for injunctive relief
prohibiting the landlord from making or renewing any lease of the affected
premises for residential purposes until such a bond or equivalent security in
satisfactory form and amount has been deposited with the city.



   (F)   Any bond or other security required pursuant to this section
shall remain in force for a period of four years. Upon the lapse of the
four-year period, the landlord shall be entitled to the discharge of the
bond, unless prior thereto further proceedings leading to a forfeiture or
partial forfeiture of the bond or other security shall have been held
pursuant to § 150.022 of this chapter, in which case the security shall be
renewed in an amount and for a period as specified by the Hearing Officer. A
transfer of ownership or control the property shall not void the requirement
of security imposed under the section. However, the Hearing Officer upon good
cause shown may shorten the period for which security is required in his or
her discretion.



(1994 Code, § 150.11)  (Ord. 15-10, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 150.022  BOND FORFEITURE; EXTENSION.



   (A)   If, during the period for which a landlord is required to give
security pursuant to § 150.021 of this chapter, a substantiated complaint is
recorded against the property in question, the Code Enforcement Officer may
institute proceedings against the landlord for forfeiture or partial
forfeiture of the security as well as an extension of the period for which
security is required and for an increase in the amount of security.



   (B)   Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be
determined by the Hearing Officer in accordance with the amount deemed
necessary to provide for the compensatory purposes as set forth above. The
decision of the Hearing Officer in such circumstances shall be enforceable in
the same manner as otherwise is provided herein.



(1994 Code, § 150.12)  (Ord. 15-10, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 150.023  HEARING OFFICER; QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Hearing Officer shall be the City Attorney or a licensed attorney
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The
Hearing Officer shall not be an owner of any rental property located within
the city, nor hold any interest in the assets of the city’s profits arising
from the ownership or lease of such rental property.



(1994 Code, § 150.13)  (Ord. 15-10, passed 9-14-2015)



ADOPTION OF CODES



§ 150.035  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The International Building Code (2006) including appendix
thereto, is hereby adopted by reference as the building code of the city.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of the International Building Code (2006), are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section.



   (B)   If any provisions of the International Building Code (2006)
adopted are in conflict with the laws of the state, state law shall prevail;
any and other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the city in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.



   (C)   At least three copies of the International Building Code
(2006), including appendix thereto, have been on file for more than 30 days
prior to the adoption of this Building Code for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided, and shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 150.15)  (Ord. 137, passed 7-27-1964; Ord. 346, passed
5-13-1985; Ord. 365, passed 11-9-1987; Ord. 408, passed 9-9-1991; Ord. 96-06,
passed 5-13-1996; Ord. 2001-07, passed 7-23-2001; Ord. 2003-6, passed
8-11-2003; Ord. 09-05, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 150.036  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The International Property Maintenance Code (2006) is hereby
adopted by reference as the maintenance code of the city for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Property
Maintenance Code (2006), are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set forth in this section.



   (B)   If any provisions of the International Property Maintenance
Code (2006) adopted are in conflict with the laws of the state, state law
shall prevail; any and other applicable provisions of this code or other
ordinances or parts of ordinances of the city in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.



   (C)   At least three copies of the International Property
Maintenance Code (2006) have been on file for more than 30 days prior to the
adoption of this building code for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided, and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 150.16)  (Ord. 408, passed 9-9-1991; Ord. 94-003, passed
5-23-1994; Ord. 96-07, passed 5-13-1996; Ord. 2001-08, passed 7-23-2001; Ord.
2003-6, passed 8-11-2003; Ord. 09-05, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 150.037  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   (1)   The International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings (2006) is hereby adopted by reference as the residential
building code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided.



      (2)   Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings (2006) are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set forth in this section.



   (B)   If any provisions of the International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings (2006) adopted are in conflict with the laws of
the state, state law shall prevail; any and other applicable provisions of
this code or other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the city in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.



   (C)   At least three copies of the International Residential Code
for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (2006) have been on file for more than 30
days prior to the adoption of this building code for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 150.17)  (Ord. 2001-09, passed 7-23-2001; Ord. 2003-6, passed
8-11-2003; Ord. 09-05, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 150.038  MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The International Mechanical Code (2006) is hereby adopted by
reference as the mechanical code of the city for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code (2006)
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth
in this section.



   (B)   If any provisions of the International Mechanical Code (2006)
adopted are in conflict with the laws of the state, state law shall prevail;
any and other applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances or parts
of ordinances of the city in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.



   (C)   At least three copies of the International Mechanical Code
(2006) have been on file for more than 30 days prior to the adoption of this
Building Code for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided,
and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 150.18)  (Ord. 2001-10, passed 7-23-2001; Ord. 05-09, passed
7-25-2005; Ord. 09-05, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 150.039  ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Illinois Energy Conservation Code, current edition, as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as the energy conservation code of
the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the Illinois Energy Conservation Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this section.



   (B)   The Illinois Energy Conservation Code (2012) is available for
use and examination by the public online at
http://www.ilga.gov/commission/jcar/admincode/071/07100600sections.html.



(1994 Code, § 150.19)  (Ord. 05-09, passed 7-25-2005; Ord. 09-05, passed
9-14-2009; Ord. 15-04, passed 6-8-2015)



BUILDING PERMITS



§ 150.050  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to construct or alter (where the alteration
involves the life safety or structural change):



   (A)   Any building greater than 100 square feet of floor area; or



   (B)   Any structure in the city, including fences, without having
first secured a permit therefor.



(1994 Code, § 150.25)  (Ord. 87, passed 8-8-1955; Ord. 95-011, passed
6-12-1995; Ord. 96-11, passed 7-8-1996; Ord. 04-12, passed 10-12-2004) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.051  APPLICATION; SUBMISSION OF PLANS.



   Applications for a permit required by this subchapter, including the
submission of the plans for the proposed building or alteration, shall be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be made in conformance
with Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning, containing the zoning
provisions of the city and restrictive covenants of any subdivision plat, if
any, and in compliance with the state’s Architecture Practice Act, being
225 ILCS 305/1 et seq., and other relevant statutes of the state.



(1994 Code, § 150.26)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 96-11, passed
7-8-1996)



§ 150.052  ESTIMATED COST TO BE SUBMITTED WITH APPLICATION; ESTIMATED FEE;
FINAL ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   Each application for a permit required by this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a statement of the estimated cost of the proposed
construction or alteration, verified by the signature of the contractor if
the work is to be done under contract or, if not to be done under contract,
verified by the signature of the owner.



   (B)   An estimated permit fee, based upon the estimated cost shall
be paid at the time the application for the permit is filed. Should the
permit not be granted, the estimated fee shall be returned.



   (C)   Should the permit be granted, then within 15 days following
the completion of the construction or alteration, a statement of the complete
cost thereof, verified by the signature of the contractor, should the work be
done under contract or, if otherwise, by the owner, shall be filed with the
City Clerk and the actual fee shall then be determined, and any overpayment
shall then be refunded or the balance due on the fee, above the estimated
fee, shall be paid.



(1994 Code, § 150.27)  (Ord. 87, passed 8-8-1955)



§ 150.053  FEE; DETERMINATION.



   The fee for a permit required by this subchapter shall be based upon
the cost of the proposed structure. All permit fees shall be established by
the City Council by resolution and shall be paid to the City Clerk. The fees
are intended to defray the administrative costs connected with the processing
of the permit. Such shall not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising
device.



(1994 Code, § 150.28)  (Ord. 87, passed 8-8-1955; Ord. 137, passed
7-27-1964; Ord. 432, passed 3-8-1993)



§ 150.054  REFERRAL OF THE APPLICATION AND PLANS TO CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER AND APPROVAL THEREOF.



   An application for a permit required by this subchapter, together with
the plan submitted, shall be referred to the Code Enforcement Officer, who
shall examine them to determine whether the proposed operations will comply
with the provisions of this chapter, Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances,
Zoning, and other ordinances of the city relating thereto. Upon a
determination of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, Ch. 155 of
this code of ordinances, Zoning, and any other ordinances, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall approve the application and issue a building permit
therefor. No permit shall be issued, except after the payment of the fee
prescribed in this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 150.29)  (Ord. 87, passed 8-8-1955; Ord. 354, passed
6-23-1986; Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.055  REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   If the application for a permit required by this subchapter is
denied by the Code Enforcement Officer, the denial shall be reviewed by the
City Council upon request by the applicant.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall present his or her reasons
for denial in writing to the City Council and may appear at the City Council
meeting wherein the application is being considered and present his or her
reasons verbally.



   (C)   The applicant may also appear in person for the purpose of
presenting further data or answering questions concerning his or her
application.



   (D)   The City Council may either affirm the denial of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer or approve the plans and
application and order the issuance of a building permit therefor.



   (E)   No permit shall be issued, except after the payment of the fee
prescribed in this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 150.30)  (Ord. 87, passed 8-8-1955; Ord. 354, passed
6-23-1986; Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.056  VARIANCE FROM APPROVED PLANS; APPROVAL REQUIRED; ESTIMATED FEE
TO REFLECT MODIFICATION OF PLANS.



   It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the approved plans and
specifications, unless amended plans and specifications showing the proposed
modifications or variations are first filed with the City Clerk and are
approved in the same manner in which the original plans and specifications
were approved. If the variation involves an increase in the total cost of the
work, the additional fee shall be calculated and paid in the manner provided
by § 150.053 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 150.31)  (Ord. 87, passed 8-8-1955)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS



§ 150.070  USE OF STREETS FOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS; PERMIT REQUIRED;
APPLICATION.



   (A)   The use of the streets for the storage of materials in the
process of construction or alteration of a building may be granted where the
use does not interfere with traffic or reduce the usable width of the roadway
to less than 18 feet. No portion of a street, other than that directly
abutting the premises on which the work is being done, shall be used for the
storage of materials, except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises abutting on the portion proposed to be used.



   (B)   Any person seeking to make use of a street for the storage of
materials during construction operations shall file an application with the
City Clerk for a permit, together with proof of financial responsibility
adequate to protect the city, to be approved by the City Council, to
indemnify the city for any loss or damage which may be incurred by the city
by reason of the use and occupation of the street.



(1994 Code, § 150.40)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.071  NOISE PRODUCED DURING NIGHT OPERATIONS.



   No construction or alterations shall be carried on in the nighttime if
the operations are accompanied by loud noises.



(1994 Code, § 150.41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.072  SPECIAL PERMIT FROM COUNCIL REQUIRED FOR USE OR REMOVAL OF
SIDEWALKS; CASH DEPOSIT.



   (A)   No sidewalks shall be obstructed in the course of building
construction or alteration without a special permit from City Council and
wherever the removal of a sidewalk is required in such work, a special permit
from City Council shall be obtained.



   (B)   As a prerequisite to the sidewalk removal permit required by
division (A) above, the person seeking the permit shall make a cash deposit
with the City Clerk, in an amount directed by City Council, which deposit
shall guarantee that the applicant for the permit shall return the sidewalk
to as good a condition as it was before its removal.



(1994 Code, § 150.42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.073  DUTY OF CARE TO PERSONS AND PROPERTY; SAFETY DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person doing any construction,
altering or wrecking work in the city to do the same with proper care for the
safety of persons and property.



   (B)   Warnings, barricades and lights shall be maintained wherever
necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic and temporary roofs
over sidewalks shall be constructed where there is danger from falling
articles or materials to pedestrians.



(1994 Code, § 150.43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MOVING BUILDINGS



§ 150.085  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall move any building on, through or over
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way in the city without first
securing a permit therefor from the City Clerk.



      (2)   However, the moving of portable buildings, being
structures designed to be transported and that are without a foundation,
shall be exempt from this subchapter.



   (B)   Application for a permit required by this section shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state the proposed route and the
number of days it is intended that the building should occupy any portion of
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.



   (C)   (1)   Upon filing of an application for a permit required
by this section, the City Clerk will refer the application to the Building
Inspector, who shall examine the application with reference to whether the
proposed building movement complies with the provisions of this chapter and
other ordinances of the city relating to buildings.



      (2)   Upon completion of his or her examination of the
application and other investigations, if necessary, the Building Inspector
shall make his or her recommendations concerning the proposed movement to
City Council.



   (D)   (1)   Upon receipt of the Building Inspector’s
recommendations relative to the application for a permit required by this
section, City Council shall determine whether or not the permit applied for
shall be issued.



      (2)   The permit shall not be issued if City Council is of the
opinion that the building to be moved, at the new location, would seriously
increase the fire risk to surrounding buildings.



(1994 Code, § 150.55)  (Ord. 137, passed 7-27-1964)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.086  INSURANCE REQUIRED; AMOUNT; TERMS.



   No permit required by this subchapter shall be issued unless the
applicant therefor shall first file with the City Clerk a certificate of
insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, showing that the applicant is indemnified against liability for
injuries occasioned to any one person by one accident, in the amount of
$1,000,000; for injuries occasioned to any number of persons more than one in
one accident, in the amount of $3,000,000; and for damage to the property of
another in the amount of $100,000.



(1994 Code, § 150.56)



§ 150.087  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; DAILY FEE.



   (A)   Upon the approval of the intended building movement by City
Council, a fee of $100 for two days or fraction thereof that it is intended
that the building shall occupy any portion of any public way or place shall
be paid to the City Clerk and a permit shall be issued.



   (B)   An additional payment of $200 for each day or fraction thereof
over and above the time stated on the permit during which the building shall
occupy any public way or place shall be paid to the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 150.57)



§ 150.088  WARNING SIGNS; LIGHT AND SAFETY DEVICES.



   (A)   Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure
which is being moved, warnings to that effect shall be posted by the
contractor so as to keep vehicles and persons from entering that portion of
the street which is blocked.



   (B)   The person moving any building through the streets shall keep
warning signs and lanterns or lights at night on the building so as to guard
against any person or vehicle from colliding with the building.



(1994 Code, § 150.58)



§ 150.089  PUBLIC UTILITY WIRES.



   Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with the wires or cables of
a public utility in moving a building, the terms of any special franchise
ordinance governing the utility shall apply and the bond specified therein
shall be given.



(1994 Code, § 150.59)



DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.100  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall remove, destroy, wreck or demolish any
building or structure in the city without first securing a permit therefor
from the city, as hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   Application for a permit required by this section shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state the legal description of
the real estate on which the building or structure is situated, the street
address of the property and the type of building or structure to be
demolished, the interest of the applicant therein, the date the demolition is
to commence, the estimated date of completion and any other information as
may be from time to time required by the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (C)   (1)   Upon filing of an application for a permit required
by this section, the City Clerk will refer the application to the Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall examine the application and investigate the
site.



      (2)   Upon completion of his or her examination of the
application and investigations relative thereto, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall make recommendations concerning the proposed demolition to the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



   (D)   Upon receipt of the Code Enforcement Officer’s
recommendations relative to the application for a permit required by this
section, the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall determine whether
or not the permit applied for shall be issued.



   (E)   (1)   The applicant shall commence demolition of the
building or structure for which the permit is issued within 30 days of the
approval of the application by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



      (2)   Demolition of the building or structure shall be
completed within 90 days after commencement thereof.



   (F)   (1)   All depressions or basements under any building or
structure for which a permit is issued for demolition shall be filled to the
same level as the existing grade or landscape.



      (2)   (a)   All depressions and basements shall be filled
with clay and compacted.



         (b)   However, with the approval thereof and under the
supervision of the Code Enforcement Officer, broken concrete may be used as a
fill below three feet of grade or landscape where the concrete basement floor
is broken up to prevent the pooling of water and the broken concrete or rock
foundation is covered with sand which shall be flooded in with water to
prevent unfilled pockets.



      (3)   (a)   An existing basement foundation or other
foundation may be used for new construction provided approval thereof for the
purpose has been granted by the Building Inspector and a building permit has
been issued for the new construction by city prior to the time the demolition
is required to be completed.



         (b)   The Building Inspector shall only permit an
existing basement foundation or other foundation to be used for new
construction which satisfies all building code requirements for test loads
and other criteria as set forth in the code.



      (4)   Unless an existing basement foundation or other
foundation is to be used for new construction, all that portion of the
basement walls, foundations and other supporting structures shall be removed
to a point three feet below grade or landscape.



      (5)   (a)   Where any building or structure proposed to be
removed or demolished was constructed upon a concrete slab or a concrete slab
is adjacent thereto, the concrete slab shall be removed at the time of
demolition of the building or structure unless satisfactory evidence is
presented to City Council of a future intended use for the slab in conformity
with all building codes and zoning regulations of the city.



         (b)   The burden of producing satisfactory evidence of
the intended future use shall be on the applicant.



   (G)   Any building or structure which is damaged by explosion, fire,
flood, wind or other act of God to the extent of 50% or more of its fair
market value immediately prior to damage shall be removed or demolished
within 90 days of damage.



   (H)   A fee of $25 for the demolition of each building or structure
to be demolished shall accompany the filing of an application for a permit
therefor.



(1994 Code, § 150.70)  (Ord. 227, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 370, passed
4-25-1988; Ord. 96-03, passed 3-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.101  COMPLETION OF DEMOLITION BY CITY.



   In the event the demolition of any building or structure for which a
permit for demolition is issued by city pursuant to § 150.100 of this
chapter is not completed within the time required under the provisions of
this subchapter, the city may cause the demolition to be completed at the
expense of the applicant or the owner thereof and any costs or expenses
incurred by the city in completing the demolition thereof shall constitute a
lien against the real estate whereon the building or structure was situated;
notice thereof shall be given by the city filing the same in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of the county.



(1994 Code, § 150.71)  (Ord. 227, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 96-03, passed
3-11-1996)



§ 150.102  COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.



   Any person receiving a permit under the provisions of this subchapter
shall comply with all the provisions of §§ 150.070 through 150.073 of this
chapter, to the extent the provisions are applicable to the demolition of
buildings and with the laws of the state and other provisions of this code of
ordinances, relating to the demolition of buildings.



(1994 Code, § 150.72)  (Ord. 227, passed 4-17-1972)



CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER



§ 150.115  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the Office of Code Enforcement Officer, who
shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, subject
to the approval of the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 150.85)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.116  COMPENSATION.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive the compensation as from
time to time shall be authorized by the City Council.



(1994 Code, § 150.86)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.117  DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the following ordinances:
the Building Code, the zoning regulations and any other zoning ordinances of
the city, the Property Maintenance Code, all provisions of this chapter and
all code and other ordinance provisions of the city relating to the
maintenance of rental housing, owner-occupied housing and commercial
properties.



(1994 Code, § 150.87)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991; Ord. 95-003, passed
2-13-1995)



§ 150.118  METHODS OF ENFORCEMENT.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive copies of all applications
for building permits, lot splits, subdivision plat approval, zoning
variances, zoning amendments and all other matters relating to building,
housing, planning and zoning. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
empowered to make the inspections as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of this chapter on buildings, the Building Code, the zoning
regulations and other zoning ordinances of the city, the Housing Code, the
city plan and all code and ordinance provisions of the city relating to
buildings. He or she is further authorized to make any test or examination of
materials or methods to be used in construction for the purpose of seeing if
they comply with the codes or ordinances. No building permit shall be issued
without approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. All other permits and
applications referred to the Code Enforcement Officer are referred for the
purpose of comment by the officer. If the Officer does not comment within
seven working days of the receipt of any application, action shall be taken
on the application without comment from the Code Enforcement Officer;
provided that, this sentence shall not apply to building permits.



(1994 Code, § 150.88)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.119  VIOLATION OF CODES.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall take steps to cause the correction
of any violation of any code under the officer’s jurisdiction. These steps
may include warnings, a written direction to correct a matter, filing of
charges for ordinance violation or filing with the assistance of the City
Attorney other court actions to enforce the code.



(1994 Code, § 150.89)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.120  DEPUTY CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   If the City Council provides for the hiring of deputies to the officer,
the officer shall hire Deputy Code Enforcement Officers to assist with the
work of the Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not delegate to any
deputy the duty to appoint other deputies and the officer shall not delegate
to any deputy the authority to decide when any litigation, other than an
ordinance violation, shall be filed with the assistance of the City Attorney.



(1994 Code, § 150.90)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



§ 150.121  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TO SERVE UNDER COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC
HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve under the direct supervision
of the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



(1994 Code, § 150.91)  (Ord. 394, passed 3-11-1991)



CHAPTER 151:  ELECTRICAL CODE



Section



   151.01   Electrical Code adopted; conflict with other laws; filing



§ 151.01  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS; FILING.



   (A)   The National Electrical Code, most current edition, as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by
reference as the electrical code of the city.



   (B)   If any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code, most
current edition, adopted are in conflict with the laws of the state or any
ordinance of the city, or provision thereof, the state law or the ordinance
or provision thereof shall prevail.



   (C)   At least three copies of the National Electrical Code, most
current edition, have been on file for more than 30 days prior to the
adoption of this incorporation by reference, now are, and shall be kept on
file, in the office of the City Clerk.



(1994 Code, § 151.01)  (Ord. 136, passed 7-27-1964; Ord. 259, passed
7-14-1975; Ord. 345, passed 5-13-1985; Ord. 366, passed 11-9-1987)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Statutory authorization; purpose



   152.02   Criteria for Inspector approval



   152.03   Definitions



   152.04   Disclaimer of liability



   152.05   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.06   Variances



Permits



   152.20   Development permit required; application



Flood Hazard Reduction



   152.35   Base flood elevation



   152.36   Preventing increased damages



   152.37   Protection of buildings



   152.38   Other development requirements



 



   152.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
city by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-9 and 11-31-2, in order to
accomplish the following purposes:



   (A)   To prevent unwise development from increasing the flood or
drainage hazards to others;



   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood drainage;



   (C)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;



   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating flood blight areas;



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the city; and



   (G)   To provide for the orderly growth and development (pursuant to
the city’s Comprehensive Plan) of an environment that is especially
sensitive to changes from human activity.



(1994 Code, § 152.01)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.02  CRITERIA FOR INSPECTOR APPROVAL.



   (A)   All new development proposals in the special flood hazard
areas shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   The Building Inspector’s review is to ensure the following:



      (1)   New development will not change the flow of flood or
other surface drainage waters so that other properties become more
susceptible to damage;



      (2)   New developments will not create special hazards or
nuisances when flooded; and



      (3)   New buildings and major improvements to existing
buildings will not be subject to damage by the base flood.



(1994 Code, § 152.02)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in § 152.35 of
this chapter.



   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank in order
that the tanks will be constructed to the same flood damage protection
standards. The term includes a manufactured home or prefabricated building
which is affixed on a permanent site and connected to the required utilities.
The term shall also include travel trailers or recreational vehicles
installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to real estate, including:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building
or an addition to a building valued at more than $1,000;



      (2)   Installing a mobile home on a site or preparing a site
for a manufactured home;



      (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities or facilities,
construction of roads, bridges or similar projects valued at more than $1,000;



      (4)   Construction or erection of levees, walls or fences;



      (5)   Filling, dredging, grading, excavating or other
non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface;



      (6)   Storage of materials; or



      (7)   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation or the
runoff or surface waters from any source.



   FLOODWAY. The portion of the SFHA required to store and convey the base
flood. If not prohibited, building or placing obstructions in a FLOODWAY will
increase flood damages to other properties.



   FPE or FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood
(plus one foot) at any given location in the SFHA.



   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the city that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of
the city are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
with the effective date of 8-24-1984.



(1994 Code, § 152.03)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983; Ord. 338, passed
5-14-1984)



§ 152.04  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.



   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by
human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that development
either inside or outside of the SFHA will be free from flooding or damage.



   (C)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city
or any officer of employee thereof for any flood damage that results from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



(1994 Code, § 152.04)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.05  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(1994 Code, § 152.05)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.06  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on
a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the
applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to
City Council.



   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA;



      (2)   A substantial economic hardship would result if the
variance were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or
safety or creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads,
utilities or other public facilities; and



      (6)   The provisions of § 152.20(D) of this chapter can still
be met.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of § 152.37 of this chapter that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:



      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of
these risks and that he or she will acknowledge in writing that he or she
assumes the risk and liability.



   (D)   A variance from the requirements of § 152.37 of this chapter
may be granted to permit a wet flood-proofed building, that is, a building to
be intentionally flooded during a flood; provided:



      (1)   No part of a building below the FPE may be subject to
flood damage;



      (2)   The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:



         (a)   Of materials resistant to flood damage;



         (b)   Items declared “property not covered” by a
standard flood insurance policy of the National Flood Insurance Program; or



         (c)   Readily moveable to place of protection during a
flood; provided, there will be personnel available and adequate warning.



      (3)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that
violates the conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. The Building Inspector shall inform the applicant that any
alteration is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



   (E)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site
or building documented as worthy of preservation by the state’s Department
of Conservation may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of division (B) above.



(1994 Code, § 152.06)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



PERMITS



§ 152.20  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall commence any
development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the
Building Inspector.



      (2)   The Building Inspector shall not issue a development
permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and, in
those parts of the site that are below the base flood elevation, the
following:



      (1)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling;



      (2)   The direction of flow of surface drainage and flood
flows;



      (3)   The location of all watercourses and drainage facilities;



      (4)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings; and



      (5)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all buildings subject to the requirements of § 152.37 of this chapter.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Building Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land higher than the base flood
elevation is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements
of this chapter.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall inform the applicant of any and
all other local, state and federal permits that may be required for this type
of development activity. The development permit will only be issued on the
condition that the other specified permits are obtained. The Building
Inspector shall not issue a use permit/certificate of use or occupancy unless
all required permits have been obtained.



(1994 Code, § 152.15)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 152.35  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood
according to the best data available to the state’s Water Survey’s
Floodplain Information Repository. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, he or she may finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the state’s
Water Survey.



   (B)   The base flood elevation for each of the SFHAs delineated as
an “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, with the effective date of
8-24-1984, shall be the 100-year flood depth calculated according to the
formulas presented in Depth & Frequency of Floods in Illinois, published by
the U.S. Geological Survey, 1976.



(1994 Code, § 152.25)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.36  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   (A)   No proposed development in the SFHA shall increase the base
flood elevation unless:



      (1)   It is determined by the city’s Building Inspector that
the total cumulative effect on the proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base
flood elevation more than one foot for the affected hydraulic reach of the
stream and will not increase flood damages or potential flood damages;



      (2)   A permit has been issued by the state’s Department of
Transportation, Division of Water Resources, pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/23, or a
waiver of the permit has been obtained; and



      (3)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees), the city shall submit sufficient data to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to revise the regulatory flood maps and profiles.



   (B)   For development proposals located in flood fringe, AO Zone or
AH Zone, identified as such on an SFHA map or in a lakefront floodplain,
ponding area, area of sheet flow or other SFHA not subject to overbank
flooding from an identified channel, the requirement of division (A) above
shall not apply.



   (C)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless the materials are
stored in a storage tank or flood-proofed building constructed according to
the requirements of § 152.37(B)(3) of this chapter.



   (D)   New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste
disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above
ground openings located below the FPE are water-tight.



(1994 Code, § 152.26)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.37  PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of § 152.36
of this chapter, all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected
from flood damage below the FPE. This building protection requirement applies
to the following situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building valued at
more than $1,000;



      (2)   Improvements made to an existing building that increase
the first floor area by more than 20%;



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building
that are valued at or more than 50% of the value of the building before the
damage occurred; and



      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a site or new
manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement
does not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it formerly
lawfully occupied.



   (B)   This building protection requirement may be met by any one of
the following methods.



      (1)   A building may be constructed on permanent landfill in
accordance with the following.



         (a)   The area to be filled shall be cleared of all
standing trees, brush, down timber, trash and other growth or objects
unsuitable for use as foundation material.



         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
one foot deep before compaction.



         (c)   The surface of the fill shall be at or above the
FPE. The fill shall extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the
building before sloping below the FPE. The bottom of the lowest floor,
including joists, if any, and all utility meters shall be located at or above
the FPE.



         (d)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulk-heading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical.



         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



         (f)   The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of
the as-built elevation of the lowest floor of the building.



      (2)   A building may be elevated in accordance with the
following.



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
stilts, piles, walls, crawl spaces or other foundation that is permanently
open to flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures.



         (b)   All electrical, plumbing, ventilating, heating and
air conditioning equipment, related ductwork and utility meters shall be
located at or above the flood protection election beneath the lowest elevated
floor of an elevated residential building.



         (c)   All elevated residential buildings shall have
permanent openings no more than one foot above grade; all walls and floor
must not be subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood.



         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored, shaped and aligned so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic
forces such as current, waves and floating debris. All manufactured homes in
the SFHA shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or laterals movement
by providing over-the-top and frame ties to around anchors. Specific
requirements shall be that:



            1.   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the
four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long
requiring one additional tie per side;



            2.   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the
home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and
manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per
side;



            3.   All components of the anchoring system be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and



            4.   Any additions to the manufactured home be
similarly anchored.



         (e)   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage. The bottom of the lowest floor or
joists, if any, and all utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE.



         (f)   The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of
the building elevation of the lowest floor.



         (g)   No area below the FPE shall be used for storage of
items or materials subject to flood damage unless the items or materials are
declared property not covered by a standard flood insurance policy of the
National Flood Insurance Program.



         (h)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE
that violates the requirements of this division (B)(2) shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall inform the applicant
that any alteration is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



         (i)   No manufactured home may be placed on a new site
located within an identified floodway.



      (3)   A non-residential building may be flood-proofed in
accordance with the following.



         (a)   A registered professional engineer shall certify
that the building has been designed so that below the FPE, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice.



         (b)   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



         (c)   The Building Inspector shall maintain the
Engineer’s certificate and record of the as-built elevation to which the
building was flood-proofed.



(1994 Code, § 152.27)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



§ 152.38  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land
management, use and development.



   (B)   The City Council shall not approve any annexation agreement or
plat or subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless the agreement
or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Building
Inspector shall obtain the best available SFHA maps and data for the
unincorporated areas.



   (C)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit
developments (PUDs) shall meet the requirements of §§ 152.36 and 152.37 of
this chapter. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks
and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes
in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS
205/2).



   (D)   Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks
and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall display the following flood data:



      (1)   The boundary of the SFHA;



      (2)   The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available SFHA
maps;



      (3)   Easements of lands dedicated to the city for access for
channel maintenance purposes; and



      (4)   The FPE for each building site. Where the base flood
elevation is not available from an existing study filed with the state’s
Water Survey, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the FPE and
submitting it to the state’s Water Survey for review and approval as best
available elevation data.



   (E)   Plans for the development activities to be undertaken by the
city in the SFHA shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector to ensure that
they comply with this chapter. Except as exempted by law, no other local
government shall commence any development activity in the SFHA without first
obtaining a development permit from the Building Inspector.



   (F)   The City Council shall take the following into consideration
when preparing or revising the Comprehensive Plan, community development
program, housing assistance plan and other land use or development programs:



      (1)   Preserving SFHA land for open space uses such as farming
or recreation;



      (2)   Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings;



      (3)   Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plans, natural
gas storage and other critical or especially hazardous facilities from
locating in the SFHA;



      (4)   Identifying the elevations of the base flood and past
flood at entrances to public buildings, on street signs or other prominent
locations; and



      (5)   Other flood hazard mitigation or floodplain management
activities that could help accomplish the purposes of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 152.28)  (Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983; Ord. 409, passed
9-9-1991)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The Building Inspector may determine, upon due investigation,
that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist and after the
owner fails after ten days notice to correct his or her property, the city
may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this chapter or make any other order as the court sees
necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 152.98)



   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $75, nor more than $750. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith
shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(1994 Code, § 152.99)



(Ord. 323, passed 3-28-1983)



CHAPTER 153:  PLUMBING CODE



Section



   153.01   Plumbing Code adopted by reference; filing



   153.02   Food waste disposal units



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; FILING.



   (A)   The Illinois State Plumbing Code, most current edition, as
amended, published by the state’s Department of Public Health, Division of
Sanitary Engineering, is hereby adopted by reference as the Plumbing Code of
the city.



   (B)   The 2014 edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code is available
for use and examination by the public online at plumbcode.com.



(1994 Code, § 153.01)  (Ord. 135, passed 7-27-1964; Ord. 367, passed
11-9-1987; Ord. 15-03, passed 6-8-2015)



§ 153.02  FOOD WASTE DISPOSAL UNITS.



   (A)   Food waste disposal units required.



      (1)   New structures erected after the passage and publication
of this section, arranged or intended to be used for purposes which cause,
result in, produce or develop food wastes in the direct preparation of food,
occupancies such as dwellings, restaurants, hotels, boarding houses,
hospitals and similar occupancies, shall provide and use approved food and
waste disposal equipment for such purposes within the premises thereof.



      (2)   Existing structures converted or altered to the uses as
described above need not meet the requirements as set forth herein unless the
structure is provided with a new kitchen. The kitchen only shall be provided
with a food disposal unit.



   (B)   Food waste grinder units; separate connections. Domestic and
commercial food waste disposal units shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois Plumbing Code § 890.710, being 77 IAC § 890.710.



(1994 Code, § 153.02)  (Ord. 383, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 15-03, passed
6-8-2015)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
153.02 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750,
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1994 Code, § 153.99)  (Ord. 383, passed 3-27-1989; Ord. 15-03, passed
6-8-2015)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION CODE



Section



General Provisions



   154.001   Short title



   154.002   Jurisdiction



   154.003   Interpretation



   154.004   Interpretation of terms



   154.005   Definitions



   154.006   Instances when plats not required



Plats and Plans



   154.020   Preliminary plats



   154.021   Improvement plans



   154.022   Assurance for completion of required improvements



   154.023   Final plats



   154.024   Maintenance of improvements



   154.025   Vacation of plats



Design and Improvement Standards



   154.040   Application of provisions



   154.041   Suitability for development



   154.042   Lot requirements



   154.043   Reference monuments



   154.044   Street design standards



   154.045   Street improvement standards



   154.046   Blocks



   154.047   Sidewalks



   154.048   Street lights



   154.049   Street name signs



   154.050   Utilities



   154.051   Water facilities



   154.052   Sanitary sewers



   154.053   Drainage and storm sewers



   154.054   General guidelines



   154.055   Design criteria



   154.056   Plan requirements



   154.057   Construction alternatives



   154.058   Inspection, maintenance and acceptance by city



Planned Unit Development (PUD)



   154.070   Intent and purpose



   154.071   Compliance with ordinances generally required



   154.072   Districts where allowed



   154.073   Permissible deviation from ordinance requirements



   154.074   Preliminary planned unit development plans



   154.075   Application, information required



   154.076   Advisory report (PUD development plan), criteria considered



   154.077   Public hearing by Zoning Board of Appeals



   154.078   Decision by Mayor and City Council



   154.079   Final development plans



   154.080   Filing information required



   154.081   Advisory report (final PUD development plan)



   154.082   Action by Mayor and City Council



   154.083   Changes in approved plans



   154.084   Failure to begin development



Administration and Enforcement



   154.095   Code Enforcement Officer



   154.096   Subdivision variances



   154.097   Amendments



   154.098   Schedule of fees



   154.099   Liability; defense by City Attorney



 



   154.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be entitled the “Land Subdivision and Development
Code of the City of Sparta”.



(1994 Code, § 154.01)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.002  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all planned development
units whether residential, commercial or otherwise in nature and to any other
developments whether a plat is required or not, it being the intention that
this chapter apply to all types of development within the corporate limits of
the city.



(1994 Code, § 154.02)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.003  INTERPRETATION.



   Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in favor
of the city, and every regulation set forth herein shall be considered the
minimum requirement for the promotion of the public health, safety and
welfare.



(1994 Code, § 154.03)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.004  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS.



   In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter,
the following rules shall be observed.



   (A)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in § 154.005
of this chapter; terms not defined in § 154.005 of this chapter shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Ch. 155 of this code of
ordinances; if any term is not defined either in § 154.005 of this chapter
or in Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, the term shall have its standard
English dictionary meaning.



   (B)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include
the feminine and neuter genders.



   (C)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.



   (D)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and vice versa.



   (E)   (1)   The word SHALL is mandatory.



      (2)   The word MAY is discretionary.



   (F)   The term CITY (when used alone or in conjunction with another
word or words) shall mean the City of Sparta, Illinois.



   (G)   Captions (such as, titles of sections, divisions and the like)
are intended merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the
substantive application of the provisions set forth thereunder.



   (H)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all
divisions within that section; but a reference to a particular division
designates only that division.



   (I)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of
specific terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly
limited.



(1994 Code, § 154.04)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.005  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The Code Enforcement Officer or other official appointed
by the Mayor and the City Council to administer this chapter.



   ALLEY. A narrow service way providing a secondary public means of
access to abutting properties, and not more than 20 feet wide.



   AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter, properly
effected in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.



   AREA, BUILDING. The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings
exclusive of unenclosed patios, terraces and steps.



   AREA GROSS. The entire area within the lot lines of the property
proposed for subdivision/ development, including any areas to be
dedicated/reserved for street and alley rights-of-way and for public uses.



   AREA, NET. The entire area within the boundary lines of the territory
proposed for subdivision, less the area to be dedicated for street and alley
rights-of-way and public use.



   ARTERIAL STREET. A street designed or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with
intersections at grade, and on which traffic-control devices are used to
expedite the safe movement of through traffic.



   BARRIER, NATURAL or ARTIFICIAL. Any street, highway, river, pond,
canal, railroad, levee, embankment or screening by a fence or hedge.



   BLOCK. The property abutting on one side of a street between the two
nearest intersection streets or other natural barriers.



   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for
the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels
or property. When separated by party walls, each portion of the BUILDING
shall be considered a separate structure.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street line at a distance
regulated by the front yard requirements set upon in this chapter.



   CATCH BASIN. A receptacle, located where a street gutter opens into a
storm sewer, designed to retain matter that would not easily pass through the
storm sewer.



   CENTERLINE.



      (1)   The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform
width;



      (2)   The original centerline, where a right-of-way has been
widened irregularly; and



      (3)   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.



   CENTERLINE OFFSET. The distance between the centerlines of two roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both parallel
streets intersect.



   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision planned and constructed so as to
group housing units into relatively dense patterns while providing a unified
network of open space and wooded areas, and meeting the requirements of this
chapter and Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning.



   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.



   COMMON LAND. The land set aside for open space or recreational use for
the owners of the lots of a subdivision, which land is conveyed by the
developer in fee simple absolute title by warrant to trustees, whose trust
indenture shall provide that the COMMON LAND be used for the sole benefit,
use and enjoyment of the lot owners present and future. No lot owner shall
have the right to convey his or her interest in the COMMON LAND, except as an
incident of the ownership of a regularly platted lot.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City
Council to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the
city. The city’s Comprehensive Plan may include, but is not limited to,
plans and programs regarding the location, character and extent of highways,
bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential,
commercial or industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities and the like.



   CROSS-SLOPE. The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way
rather than in the direction traffic moves on the right-of-way.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor local street having only one outlet for
vehicular traffic and having the other end permanently terminated by a
turn-around for vehicles; the term may also be used to refer solely to the
turn-around.



   CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL. The rim forming the edge of a street, plus
the channel for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as
a single facility.



   DEAD-END STREET. A street having only one end open for vehicular
traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a turn-around for
vehicles.



   DEDICATE. To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land
or improvement to the city or other appropriate government entity without
compensation.



   DENSITY GROSS. The total number of dwelling units divided by the total
project area, expressed as gross dwelling units per acre.



   DENSITY, NET. The total number of dwelling units divided by the net
acreage. See definition of AREA, NET.



   DESIGN. The arrangement of uses on the land and the arrangement of
easements, lots and rights-of-way, including specifications of materials,
alignment, grade and width of these elements.



   DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a
tract of land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation
therefor.



   DIMENSIONS. Refers to both lot depth and lot width.



   DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the territory of the city wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots and uses under the terms of Ch. 155 of this code of
ordinances, Zoning.



   DRAINAGEWAY. A watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek or ditch which
carries water runoff or which is fed by street or building gutters or by
storm water sewers, or which serves the purpose of draining water from the
lands adjacent to the watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek or ditch.



   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or
a person of the use of land for limited and specifically named purpose.



   ESCROW DEPOSIT. A deposit in cash or other approved securities to
assure the completion of improvements within a subdivision.



   FILING DATE. The date that the applicant has filed the last item of
required data or information with the City Clerk and has paid the necessary
fees for review by the Plan Commission.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. All land subject to periodic inundation from
overflow of natural waterways.



   FRONTAGE. All the property abutting on one side of a road, street or
place between two intersecting roads or places (crossing or terminating) or
if the road, street or place is dead ended, then all of the property abutting
on one side between an intersecting road, street or place and the dead end of
the road, street or place.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. A minor street fronting an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.



   GRADE. The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed
as a percentage. Synonym for SLOPE.



   HILLSIDE AREA. An area with an average slope of 20% or more.



   IMPROVEMENT. Site grading, street work and utilities (including water,
sewer, electric, gas, storm water, telephone and cable television) to be
installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on land to be used for
public or private streets, and easements or other purposes as are necessary
for the general use of lot owners in the subdivision. Including the
furnishing of all materials, equipment, work and services such as
engineering, staking and supervision, necessary to construct all the
IMPROVEMENTS required in §§ 154.040 through 154.058 of this chapter or any
other IMPROVEMENTS that may be provided by the subdivider. All of the
materials, equipment and services shall be provided at the subdivider’s
cost and expense, although he or she may enter into a contract with the
individuals and firms to complete the IMPROVEMENTS, and the IMPROVEMENTS
shall be subject to the final approval of the City Council.



   IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for earth moving and for the structures and facilities
to be installed both in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.



   INLET. A receptacle, located where surface and/or ground water can run
to by gravity to be received by the storm sewer.



   INTERSECTION. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way
(generally streets) meet.



   LAND USE PLAN. The comprehensive long-range plan for the desirable use
of land, the purpose of the plan being, among other things, to serve as a
guide to the zoning and progressive subdividing and use of undeveloped land.



   LOCAL STREET. A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic,
and for access to abutting property, and on which the speed limit is low and
the traffic volume minimal.



   LOT. A parcel, tract or area of land accessible by means of a road,
street or place. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or
plat which is recorded in the office of the county’s Recorder, or it may
include parts of or a combination of the parcels when adjacent to the other
and used as one.



   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and
rear lines of a lot, exclusive of any land designated for street right-of-way.



   LOT, BUTT. A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner
lots.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two or
more intersecting streets or roads.



   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line, measured in the general direction of the side lot
lines.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, the line abutting a
road, street or place; and, in the case of a corner lot, the line of the
narrowest portion of the lot abutting a road, place or street.



   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line most nearly parallel to and most remote
from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than front or rear lot line. A
corner side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a street side
lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is called
an interior side lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of
subdivision recorded with the county’s Recorder of Deeds in accordance with
state law.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.



   LOT, WIDTH. The dimension of a lot, measured between side lot lines on
the building setback line.



   MAINTENANCE BOND. A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved
by the city, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed
improvements for the one-year period following their dedication.



   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A combination of maps, drawings, site plans,
charts and supportive narrative material that portrays total development to
be achieved in the overall project area; which provides sufficient detailed
information to both illustrate and described the intended character and
configuration of development to be accomplished.



   METES AND BOUNDS. A description of real property which is not described
by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting
at a known point and description of the lines forming the boundaries of the
property or delineates a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by
describing lines or portions thereof.



   OFFICIAL MAP. A graphic statement of the existing and proposed capital
improvements planned by the city which require the acquisition of land, such
as streets, drainage systems, parks and the like.



   OWNER. A person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the
same under these regulations.



   PARKING LANE. An auxiliary lane of a street and primarily used for
vehicular parking.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts
across a block to facilitate safe pedestrian access to adjacent streets and
properties.



   PERFORMANCE BOND. A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by
the city, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within, or
in conjunction with, a subdivision.



   PERSON. Any agent, individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, syndicate or trust.



   PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the city.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A comprehensively planned development
containing residential, commercial, industrial or other land uses on an area
of land under continuing unified control. A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT may
contain a single type of land use or combination of land uses; provided that,
the development is reviewed, evaluated and approved by the city and satisfies
the requirements contained herein.



   PLANS. All of the drawings including plats, cross-sections, profiles,
working details and specifications, which the subdivider prepares or has
prepared to show the character, extent and details of improvements required
in this chapter and which plans shall conform to any requirements of the Plan
Commission as to scale and details for submittal to the approval officials of
the city for consideration, approval or disapproval.



   PLAT, FINAL. The final engineering and architectural maps, drawings and
supporting material indicating the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision
which, if approved, may be filed with the county’s Recorder of Deeds.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. Preliminary engineering and architectural maps,
drawings and supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a
subdivision.



   PROJECT AREA. The territory intended to be subdivided or developed, and
portrayed and defined in the preliminary and final plats.



   RESERVE. To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its
acquisition by the city or other appropriate government entity for public
purposes.



   RESERVE STRIP. A narrow strip of land between a public street and
adjacent lots which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or property
deed as land over which vehicular travel is not permitted.



   RESUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION.



   REVERSE CURVE. A curve in a street heading in approximately the
opposite direction from the curve immediately preceding it so as to form as
S-shape.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY (R.O.W.), PUBLIC. A strip of land which the
owner/subdivider has dedicated to the city or other appropriate government
entity for streets, alleys and other public improvements; sometimes
abbreviated as R.O.W.



   ROADBED. The graded portion of a street upon which the base course,
surface course, shoulders and median are constructed.



   ROADWAY. The entire improved portion of the street, including
shoulders, parking lanes, travel way, curbs and gutter.



   SETBACK LINE. A line that is usually parallel to the front, side or
rear lot line establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front,
side or rear yard.



   SIDEWALK. A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards
of this section, generally abutting or near the curb line of the street.



   SLOPE. The degree of inclination of site or right-of-way expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for GRADE.



   SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The county’s Soil and Water
Conservation District.



   STREET or ROAD. A public or private way which affords the principal
means of access to abutting properties.



   STREET, AREA SERVICE HIGHWAY. Area service highways interconnect
collectors and land access streets with the principal system and vice versa,
brings all developed areas within a reasonable distance of principal streets,
connects and provides direct access to major traffic generators, provides
secondary service to smaller communities, may provide access to abutting
property and have a medium volume design capacity and travel speeds.



   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A short, land-access street, having only one end
open for vehicular traffic, and the other permanently terminated by a
turn-around for vehicles.



   STREET, DEAD-END. Land access streets similar to cul-de-sacs; except
that, they provide no turn-around circle at their closed end, and are not
permitted in any proposed subdivision.



   STREET, LAND ACCESS. Land access streets provide access to abutting
properties, have a relatively short travel distance and have a low volume
design capacity and travel speeds.



   STREET, LOOPED. Land access streets having two open ends, each end
generally connecting with the same street, no other streets intersecting
between its ends and property fronts on both sides of the street.



   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS or SERVICE ROAD. A land access street parallel
and adjacent to area service highways providing access to abutting properties.



   STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected, that use of which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having location on the
ground. The term STRUCTURE shall include billboards and signs.



   STUB or BUTT STREET. A street that is temporarily terminated, but that
is planned for future continuation.



   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing
to divide land in a manner that constitutes a SUBDIVISION, as defined in this
section.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   The division of land into two or more lots or parcels
for the purpose of either immediate or future sale, rental or building
development or use(s) other than agricultural use or production; and



      (2)   Establishment or dedication of a public street or alley
through a tract of land regardless of size. The term SUBDIVISION shall also
include all resubdivisions of land or lots.



   TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area of
land.



   TRAVELWAY. The portion of a street used for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.



   VACATE. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or
subdivision, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the county’s
Recorder of Deeds.



   VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION. A relaxation in the strict application of the
design and improvement standards set forth in this chapter.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and
similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the
front lot line and the building line.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line unoccupied other
than by accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the required
space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and similar
structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of the principal building.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the principal building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard or from the front lot line where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard is
measured horizontally, at 90 degrees with the side lot line, from the nearest
part of the principal building.



   ZONING CODE.Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning.



(1994 Code, § 154.05)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.006  INSTANCES WHEN PLATS NOT REQUIRED.



   The provisions of these regulations do not apply and no plat is
required in any of the following instances:



   (A)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of
five acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or
easements of access;



   (B)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;



   (C)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining and contiguous land;



   (D)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use
as a right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;



   (E)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyance relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;



   (F)   Conveyance made to correct description in prior conveyances;



   (G)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following
the division into no more than two parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land recorded on or before 7-17-1959 and not involving any new streets or
easements of access;



   (H)   The conveyance of land owed by a railroad or other public
utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access; and



   (I)   The sale of a single lot of less than five acres from a larger
tract when a survey is made by a registered surveyor. However, this exemption
shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same larger tract
of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the larger
tract existing as of 10-1-1973.



(1994 Code, § 154.06)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



PLATS AND PLANS



§ 154.020  PRELIMINARY PLATS.



   (A)   General procedure.



      (1)   Before preparing a proposed plat for an area, the owner,
developer or his, her or their representatives should have a pre-application
meeting with the Plan Commission to determine applicable ordinance,
regulations and  standards.



      (2)   After all preapplication meetings, the subdivider should
then prepare the preliminary plat containing a substantial amount of data for
review.



      (3)   The preliminary plat shall be received with filing fees
by the City Clerk’s office, who, in turn, will forward the same to the Plan
Commission for its review.



      (4)   Following its review (as well as comments from other
appropriate agencies when required), the Plan Commission shall forward its
recommendation(s) to the City Council which may approve, disapprove or
approve with modifications the preliminary plat.



   (B)   Filing procedure.



      (1)   Except as specifically provided otherwise below, all
persons who propose to subdivide any land located within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the city shall file six copies of the preliminary plat of the
subdivision with the City Clerk.



      (2)   One copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data
shall be filed with the county’s Soil and Water Conservation District. The
county’s Soil and Water Conservation District shall have not more than 30
days to submit any comments to the Administrator.



(70 ILCS 405/22.02a)



      (3)   Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and
only a portion of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval,
nonetheless, a master development plan of the entire tract shall be submitted.



      (4)   All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon
in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and the applicable provisions set forth
herein.



      (5)   Exception. The provision of this section shall not apply
to:



         (a)   Minor subdivisions, as defined herein; or



         (b)   Land that is specifically exempted from the
state’s Plat Act as now or hereafter amended.



(765 ILCS 205/1(b))



   (C)   Information required. Every preliminary plat shall be prepared
by a state registered land surveyor at any scale from one inch equals 20 feet
through one inch equals 100 feet; provided, the resultant drawing does not
exceed 36 inches square:



      (1)   Small key map showing the relation of the proposed
subdivision to section or U.S. survey lines and to platted subdivisions and
dedicated roads within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision;



      (2)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not the
owner) and registered professional engineer;



      (3)   Proposed name of the subdivision;



      (4)   Zoning district classification of the tract to be
subdivided and of the adjacent land;



      (5)   North arrow, graphic scale and date of map;



      (6)   The gross and net acreage area of the proposed
subdivision, the acreage of streets and of any areas reserved for the common
use of the property owners within the subdivision and/or for public use;



      (7)   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision;



      (8)   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings,
angles and references to known land lines;



      (9)   Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by
two-foot contour data for land having slopes of 0 to 4%, five-foot contour
data for land having slopes between 4 to 12% and ten-foot contour data for
land having slopes of 12% or more;



      (10)   Any proposed alteration, adjustment or change in the
elevation or topography of any area;



      (11)   Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding
areas, natural drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools
and the like;



      (12)   Streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of
the proposed subdivision; showing the names and including street right-of-way
and paving widths; approximate gradients; types and widths of pavement,
curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, planting strips and other pertinent data,
including classification of all existing or proposed streets as to function
as collector, major, minor or county road;



      (13)   A copy of the results of any tests made to ascertain
subsurface rock and soil conditions and the water table;



      (14)   Locations, widths and purposes of all existing and
proposed easements;



      (15)   A copy of the description of all proposed deed
restrictions and covenants;



      (16)   Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and
storm sewers;



      (17)   Locations, types and approximate sizes of all other
existing and proposed utilities;



      (18)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions;



      (19)   Locations, dimensions and areas of all parcels to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds and other public
purposes; and



      (20)   Locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or
existing lots within the subdivision; and



      (21)   Information as defined in division (D)(2)(c) below.



   (D)   Plan Commission action.



      (1)   The Plan Commission shall either approve or disapprove
the application for preliminary plat approval within 60 days from the date of
the application or the filing of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless the Plan Commission and the subdivider
mutually agree to extend this time limit. If the Plan Commission disapproves
the preliminary plat, it shall furnish to the applicant within the 60-day
period a written statement specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat
fails to conform to this chapter and/or the Official Map. If the Plan
Commission approves the preliminary plat, it shall inform the City Council
that action can be taken at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.



      (2)   The Plan Commission shall give notice of its
consideration of any preliminary plat and allow the opportunity to be heard
to the following person(s) or groups during its preliminary review time span:



         (a)   Any person requesting notification of the meeting;



         (b)   Any property owner whose property is contiguous to
the property, including property across the streets, railroads, creeks and
similar barriers; the information shall be provided by the applicant to the
City Clerk’s office when filing the plat; and



         (c)   Any governmental or taxing body which requests
notification of the meeting.



   (E)   Review by City Council; time constraints.



      (1)   The City Council shall review the preliminary plat,
along with the Plan Commission recommendations, and approve, disapprove or
approve subject to certain conditions and/or modifications the preliminary
plat within 30 days after its next regularly scheduled meeting following
receipt of the written Plan Commission recommendations, unless variances from
the requirements of Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances, Zoning, are needed,
in which case, the Council’s 30 days commence the day after the Board of
Appeals hearing is held, as required by the Ch. 155 of this code of
ordinances, Zoning.



      (2)   If the City Council rejects the preliminary plat, a
resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply with
this chapter and/or the Official Map. The City Clerk shall attach a certified
copy of the Council’s resolution of approval or disapproval to the
preliminary plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by
the Clerk, one copy shall be filed with the Administrator and one copy shall
be sent to the subdivider by return receipt mail.



   (F)   Rights and privileges of subdivider. Preliminary plat approval
shall confer the following rights and privileges upon the subdivider:



      (1)   The preliminary plat will remain in effect for a
one-year period from the day the City Council approves the same. The
applicant may, during this period, submit all or part or parts of the
preliminary plat for final approval. In the event that the subdivision is
being developed in stages, the applicant may, by written mutual agreement
with the City Council, have final approval of the last part of the plat
delayed for a period not to exceed five years from the date of the
preliminary plat approval. Any part of a subdivision which is being developed
in stages shall contain a tract of land at least one block in area or five
gross acres;



      (2)   The general terms and conditions under which the
preliminary plat approval was granted will not be changed for final approval;
and



      (3)   The applicant may also proceed with any detailed
improvement plans required for all facilities or utilities intended to be
provided. Actual construction of the facilities and improvements may commence
prior to final plat approval if the detailed improvement plans have been
recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council; provided
that, the facilities and improvements will be inspected throughout
construction, and final plat approval be contingent in part upon acceptable
compliance to city improvement and facilities standards. If the applicant
does not submit the improvement plans prior to the submission of the final
plat, then he or she shall submit the improvement plans to the City Clerk’s
office at the time that the final plat is submitted.



(1994 Code, § 154.15)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.021  IMPROVEMENT PLANS.



   (A)   General. After the City Council has approved the preliminary
plat, but prior to the submission of the final plat, the developer shall
furnish six copies of the plans and specifications for all improvements to be
installed within or in conjunction with the proposed development to the City
Clerk, pay all associated filing fees before review by the City Engineer.
These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by the registered
professional engineer responsible for their preparation. Until the City
Engineer certifies in writing that the proposed improvements conform to
generally accepted engineering practices and to the standards in this chapter:



      (1)   The Administrator shall not issue any building permit to
allow construction of the improvements; and



      (2)   The City Council shall not act upon the application for
final plat approval.



   (B)   Information required. Improvements plans shall consist of
black or blue line prints not larger than 36 inches square. These plans and
the related specifications shall provide all of the following information:



      (1)   Topography of the tract, both before and after
development at the same scale as the approved preliminary plat;



      (2)   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines
of all streets;



      (3)   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all
streets;



      (4)   Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements
including curbs/gutters, catch basins and inlets;



      (5)   Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks and
driveway aprons;



      (6)   Locations, sizes and invert elevations of all existing
and proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers and fire hydrants, showing
connections to any existing or proposed utility systems;



      (7)   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric and
other utilities;



      (8)   Locations of street lighting standards and street signs;



      (9)   One or more benchmarks, when requested by Engineer, in
or near the subdivision, to which the subdivision is referenced; the identity
and elevation shall be based on sea level data;



      (10)   All proposed measures to control erosion and
sedimentation;



      (11)   High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or
within the tract;



      (12)   Any other information as the City Engineer may
reasonably require to perform his or her duties under this section; and



      (13)   Existing and proposed survey monuments on street plans
or on the proposed final plat as required by this chapter.



   (C)   Inspections required. The subdivider/developer shall notify
the Administrator and the Building Inspector of both the start and completion
of construction.



      (1)   The Building Inspector shall inspect the improvements
while they are under construction. If he or she or his or her designated
deputy determines that such are being built in violation of this chapter, he
or she shall request that the Administrator promptly issue a stop order.



      (2)   The Building Inspector and City Engineer shall inspect
improvements upon their completion. The municipality shall not accept any
completed improvement until the Building Inspector and Engineer have stated
in writing that it complies with this chapter.



   (D)   Filing “as-built” records.



      (1)   The subdivider/developer shall file with the
Administrator a set of reproducible cloth- or polyester-base film positives
showing the as-built details and any deviations from the approved plans upon
the completion of improvements, or when 50% of the building permits have been
issued in a given plat.



      (2)   The subdivider/developer shall pay the costs to add
water, sewer, street and storm water improvements to the overall city map(s),
street, sewer, water, storm water.



      (3)   If the Administrator finds the as-builts to be
unacceptable, building permits shall be discontinued until the time as the
information is acceptable.



(1994 Code, § 154.16)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.022  ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall not approve any final plat of
subdivision (and, hence, the final plat shall not be entitled to recording)
until:



      (1)   All improvements required in the improvements plan have
been completed by the subdivider/developer at his or her expense, inspected
by the Building Inspector and Engineer and dedicated to the municipality or
other appropriate entity; or



      (2)   In accordance with the divisions below, the
subdivider/developer has provided the city with legal assurance to guarantee
the satisfactory completion and dedication of all required improvements.



   (B)   Forms of assurance.



      (1)   At the option of the City Council, the required legal
assurance may be either a performance bond or an escrow deposit.



      (2)   Every performance bond shall be reviewed by the City
Attorney, and posted with the City Clerk.



      (3)   Any funds to be held in escrow shall be deposited with
the City Clerk.



   (C)   Amount of bond or deposit. The amount of the performance bond
or escrow deposit shall be equal to the City Engineer’s opinion of probable
costs of constructing the uncompleted portion of the required improvements,
plus all required inspection fees. Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:



      (1)   Cash;



      (2)   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a
lending institution guaranteeing to the city the availability of the escrow
funds from time to time upon demand; or



      (3)   Certificates of deposit, treasury bills or other readily
negotiable instruments approved by the City Clerk and made payable to the
city.



   (D)   Eligible sureties. No person shall be eligible to act as a
surety unless the same has been approved by the City Clerk. The Clerk shall
conduct or cause to be conducted spot audits of all sureties. Any surety who
fails to perform shall be ineligible for two years thereafter to act as
surety for any subdivision improvement within the city’s jurisdiction.



   (E)   Term of assurance; extension.



      (1)   The initial term of any performance bond or escrow
agreement shall not exceed two years.



      (2)   If all the required improvements have not been completed
by the end of the two-year period, the Planning Commission, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may either extend the bond/escrow agreement
for one year only, or may proceed as per division (G) below.



   (F)   Release of bond/escrow deposit.



      (1)   The City Clerk may release up to 90% of the amount of
the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization
from the Building Inspector. The amount which the Building Inspector
authorizes to be released shall be equal to the value of improvements
actually completed in accordance with approved plans.



      (2)   The balance of the amount of the performance/escrow
deposit shall not be released by the City Clerk until:



         (a)   The Building Inspector has certified to the
Administrator in writing that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed; and



         (b)   The improvements have been accepted by and
dedicated to the city or other appropriate entity.



   (G)   Failure to complete improvements. If all the required
improvements have not been completed by the end of the two-year period (or
three-year period, in the case of an extension), the Administrator, with the
assistance of the City Attorney, may:



      (1)   Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to
the city an equal amount to the cost of completing the required improvements
or the amount of the bond not theretofore released, whichever is less;



      (2)   Order the City Clerk to retain all escrowed funds needed
to complete the required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of
the funds to the subdivider/developer; or



      (3)   Require the subdivider/developer to submit a new
performance bond/escrow deposit in an amount sufficient to cover any increase
in the cost of constructing the required improvements.



(1994 Code, § 154.17)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.023  FINAL PLATS.



   The City Council shall not approve any final plat unless it determines
that it is in compliance with all pertinent requirements of this chapter
including those set forth below.



   (A)   Filing, time limits.



      (1)   The subdivider of every subdivision, whether major or
minor, but excluding land specifically exempted from the state’s Plat Act
as now or hereafter amended (765 ILCS 205/(b)), who desires final plat
approval shall file six copies of the final plat and supporting data with the
City Clerk and pay all associated filing fees not later than one year after
preliminary plat approval has been granted. However, with the consent of the
City Council, the subdivider may delay application for final approval of
part(s) of the tract shown on the preliminary plat for successive one-year
periods. No subdivision plat or replat shall be filed for record or recorded
in the office of the county’s Recorder of Deeds unless and until the
approval of the city is endorsed thereon. No lot shall be sold for the
subdivision plat or replat until it has been approved by the City Council and
filed for record in the office of the county’s Recorder of Deeds as
required by state statutes.



      (2)   For official filings, the subdivider shall file the
approved final plat with the county’s Recorder of Deeds within 60 days
after the City Council has approved the same and the Mayor has affixed his or
her signature thereto. One copy of the final plat shall be given to the City
Clerk’s office by the subdivider bearing the official stamp of the County
Recorder attesting its recording within 20 days of the action.



   (B)   Information required. Every final plat shall be prepared by a
land surveyor on new linen tracing cloth- or polyester-base film with
water-proof black ink at a scale not greater than 100 feet equals one inch;
provided that, the resultant drawing shall not exceed 36 inches square. The
final plat and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the following
information:



      (1)   North arrow, graphic scale and date;



      (2)   Name of subdivider, subdivision, identification of the
portion of the public land survey in which the subdivision is located;



      (3)   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal
description of the tract, and the included area of the subdivision to the
nearest 1/100 of an acre;



      (4)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or
angles which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure
of not more than one foot in 10,000 feet;



      (5)   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a
foot;



      (6)   Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land
within 300 feet, by record name, plat book and page number;



      (7)   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting
the boundaries of the subdivision;



      (8)   Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way,
easements, lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles or bearings and curve
data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles;



      (9)   Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;



      (10)   Purpose of any existing or proposed easement(s);



      (11)   Number of each lot, lot dimensions and (in a separate
list) lot areas;



      (12)   Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots,
are reserved;



      (13)   Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;



      (14)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land
and become covenants in the deeds of lots;



      (15)   Certification of dedication of all public areas;



      (16)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest
established official monument; reference corners shall be accurately
described on the final plat;



      (17)   Reference to known and permanent monuments and
benchmarks from which future surveys may be made together with elevations of
any benchmarks; and the surveyor must, at the time of making his or her
survey, establish permanent monuments (set in a manner that they will not be
removed by frost) which mark the external boundaries of the tract to be
divided or subdivided and must designate upon the plat the locations where
they may be found; and



      (18)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and
lot markers.



   (C)   Certificates required. As required by state law (765 ILCS
205/2; 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8), the following certificates shall be executed on
the final plat:



 

   Owners Certificate

 

We,                                     , the owners of  
                      (description)                   
      , have caused the said tract to be surveyed and subdivided in the
manner shown, and said subdivision is to be hereinafter known as        
                            . All rights-of-way and easements
shown hereon are hereby dedicated to the use of the public forever including
the release and waiver of the right of homestead under the homestead
exemption laws of the state.

 

Dated this               day of                          
                              ,                     .

 

                                                   
        (SEAL)

 

                                                   
        (SEAL)

 



 

   Notary Public’s Certificate

 

STATE OF ILLINOIS      )

          )     ss.

County of Randolph   )

 

I,                                                  
                    , a notary public, in and for said county, in
the state aforesaid, do hereby certify that                      
            (owners)                                 
  are personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are
subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and that they appeared before me this
day in person and acknowledged that they signed and sealed the same as their
free and voluntary act, for the uses and purposes therein set forth,
including the release and waiver of right of homestead.

 

Given under my hand and notarial seal this                 day of  
                                    , A.D.          
    .

 

                                                   
     

               Notary Public

 



 

   Surveyor’s Certificate

 

I,                                       , an Illinois
Registered Land Surveyor, do hereby certify that this plat is a correct
representation of a survey made under my direct supervision at the request of
                          for the purpose of subdividing the
tract into lots as shown.

 

                                                   
     

      Land Surveyor

 

                                                   
     

      Illinois Registration Number

 

                                                   
     

      Date

 



 

   County Clerk’s Certificate

 

I,                                                  
                      , County Clerk of Randolph County, Illinois,
do hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the
real estate included within this plat.

 

                                                   
     

               County Clerk

 

                                                   
     

               Date



 

   Certificate of City Council

 

I,                                                  
                , Mayor of the City of Sparta, do hereby certify that
the plat shown herein was duly presented to the City Council and approved at
a meeting of same held on           (date)              .

 

                                                   
     

               Mayor

 

                                                   
     

               City Clerk



 

   Flood Hazard Certificate

 

We, the undersigned, do hereby certify that no part of this plat to be
recorded is situated within five hundred (500) feet of any surface drain or
watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640) acres or
more, or, if this plat is within five hundred (500) feet of any surface drain
or watercourse, we hereby certify that this plat has been reviewed by the
Illinois Department of Transportation Division of Water Resources and their
report is on file with the Randolph County Recorder of Deeds.

 

               By:                            
                               

                  Owner(s)

 

               By:                            
                               

                  Illinois Land Surveyor

 

                                             
                             

                  Illinois Registration Number

 

                                             
                             

                  Date

 



 



   (D)   Administrative review, advisory report. Within 30 days from
the date of application for final plat approval, the Building Inspector and
the Administrator shall review the final plat (and supporting data), and
shall each advise the City Council in writing whether it substantially
conforms to the approved preliminary plat and improvement plans. A copy of
their advisory report shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission may prepare an addendum to the report (should it so desire), and
forward same to the City Council.



   (E)   Action by City Council.



      (1)   The City Council shall either approve or disapprove the
application for final plat approval by resolution within 60 days from the
date of the application or the filing of the last item of required supporting
data, whichever date is later, unless the City Council and the subdivider
mutually agree to extend this time limit. The City Council shall not approve
any final plat unless:



         (a)   The final plat substantially conforms to the
approved preliminary plat;



         (b)   The final plat manifests substantial compliance
with the design and improvements standards of this chapter, Ch. 155 of this
code of ordinances, Zoning, and the Official Map;



         (c)   To City Council’s knowledge and belief, the
final plat complies with all pertinent requirements of state law; and



         (d)   Either of the following has been met all required
improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted and dedicated; or the
subdivider/developer has posted a performance bond or deposited funds in
escrow to guarantee the satisfactory completion and dedication of all
required improvements.



      (2)   If the City Council disapproves the final plat, its
resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the
above conditions for approval.



      (3)   The City Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the
Council’s resolution of approval or disapproval to the final plat. One copy
of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the City Clerk, one copy
shall be filed with the Administrator and one copy shall be given to the
subdivider.



   (F)   Changes in approved final plats. Once a final plat is approved
by the City Council, it shall not thereafter be modified. However, minor
changes may be made upon written application to the Administrator. Major
changes require the filing of a new final plat and complete re-review.



(1994 Code, § 154.18)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.024  MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The subdivider/developer shall maintain all the improvements
in the subdivision until they have been accepted by and dedicated to the city
or other appropriate entity.



   (B)   Prior to dedication, the subdivider/developer shall post a
maintenance bond with the City Clerk in the form approved by the City
Attorney. The bond shall be in the amount determined by the Building
Inspector to be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the
required improvements for a period of one year from the date of their
acceptance and dedication. If, at any time during the one-year period, the
improvements are found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at
the subdivider/developer’s expense. If the subdivider/developer fails or
refuses to pay the costs within 90 days after demand is made upon him or her
by the Building Inspector, the city shall use the maintenance bond to make
the necessary repairs/replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds
the bond amount, the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At
the end of the one-year period, the maintenance bond shall be released.



(1994 Code, § 154.19)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.025  VACATION OF PLATS.



   In accordance with state law (765 ILCS 205/6, 7, 8), any plat or part
thereof may be vacated by the owner of the tract, at any time before the sale
of any lot therein, by a written vacation instrument to which a copy of the
plat is attached. If there are public service facilities in any street, other
public way or easement shown on the plat, the instrument shall reserve to the
city or other public entity or public utility owning the facilities, the
property, rights-of-way and easements necessary for continuing public service
by means of those facilities and for maintaining or reconstructing the same.
The vacation instrument shall be approved by the City Council in the same
manner as plats of subdivision and shall also be approved by the county’s
Superintendent of Highways, the Highway Commissioner of the appropriate
township, the District Engineer of the state’s Department of Public Works
and Buildings and the public utilities. In the case of platted tracts wherein
any lots have been sold, the written vacation instrument must also be signed
by all the owners of lots in the tracts.



(1994 Code, § 154.20)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS



§ 154.040  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No land within the subdivision and development jurisdiction of
the city shall be subdivided or developed, except in compliance with the
regulations of this subchapter and the applicable provisions of state law
(see 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8; 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.). No lot in any subdivision
shall be conveyed until:



      (1)   The final plat of the subdivision has been approved by
the City Council and recorded in the office of the county’s Recorder of
Deeds; and



      (2)   The portion of the subdivision in which the lot is
located has been improved in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter or until a performance bond or other security has been posted to
assure the completion of the improvements.



   (B)   The Administrator shall not issue a building permit for any
lot conveyed in violation of this section.



(1994 Code, § 154.30)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.041  SUITABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT.



   Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage,
rough topography, adverse soil conditions or other features which will be
harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
development and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed
unless the subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve
the problems caused by the adverse land conditions.



(1994 Code, § 154.31)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.042  LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot
area and dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which the
subdivision is located; land that is under water or reserved for street
improvements shall not be included for purposes of these minimum
requirements. Every corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit
compliance with the district’s front setback requirements on every side of
the lot that faces a street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots
to avoid the creation of unbuildable parcels. All lots shall contain adequate
space for required off-street parking and loading.



   (B)   Land shall be subdivided in a way that each lot abuts a street
meeting the requirements of § 154.044 of this chapter. All side lot lines
shall be at right angles to straight street right-of-way lines or radial to
curved street right-of-way lines, except where a deviation from this rule is
necessary for a more appropriate street and lot design.



(1994 Code, § 154.32)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.043  REFERENCE MONUMENTS.



   Stone or reinforced concrete reference monuments, set in the ground in
a manner that they will not be moved by frost, shall be placed in the field
in accordance with the Plat Act, as now or hereafter amended (765 ILCS
205/1). All lot corners shall be marked by one-half-inch iron pins not less
than 24 inches long. These pins shall be driven into the ground deep enough
that they do not protrude above the ground surface more than one-half-inch.



(1994 Code, § 154.33)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.044  STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.



   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed
street system indicated in the municipal Comprehensive Plan, and shall meet
the specifications set forth in Table 154.044, Street Design Specifications
of this section.



   (A)   Right-of-way and pavement widths. Every right-of-way
established for subdivision purposes is to be separate and distinct from the
lots or parcels adjoining the right-of-way and not included within the
dimensions or areas of the lots or parcels. All rights-of-way shall be
dedicated to the public by the developer. The minimum pavement widths shall
be as noted in Table 154.044 , Street Design Specifications, of this section.



   (B)   Topographical considerations. Grades of street shall conform
as closely as possible to the natural topography, but shall not exceed the
maximum grade nor be less than the minimum grade indicated in the Table
154.044 , Street Design Specifications. All streets shall be arranged so that
as many as possible of the building sites are at or above street grade.



   (C)   Through traffic discouraged. Marginal access and local streets
shall be laid out so as to discourage use by through traffic. The rigid
rectangular gridiron street pattern shall be avoided, and the use of
curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged to
effect a more desirable street layout.



   (D)   Limited access to arterials. Where a development abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Plan Commission may
recommend to the City Council that access to the arterial street be limited
by one of the following means:



      (1)   By subdividing lots so as to back onto the arterial
street and front onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled
with the installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip
along the rear lot lines of the lots;



      (2)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short loops
entered from and generally at right angles to the arterial street, with the
rear lot lines at the termini of the streets backing onto the arterial
street; or



      (3)   A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a
planting strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.



 

Table 154.044 Street Design Specifications


 
Maximum Number of Dwelling Units/Net Acreage
 
Permitted On-Street Parking
 
Required R.O.W. (ft.)
 
Minimum Pavement Width (ft.)
 
Maximum Gradient (%)
 
Minimum Gradient (%)




Commercial and Industrial Street Classification


Collector
 
 
Both sides
 
60
 
42
 
10
 
1.0


None
 
80
 
44
 
8
 
1.0


Local
 
 
None
 
60
 
26
 
10
 
1.0


One side
 
60
 
34
 
10
 
1.0


Residential Street Classification


Collector*
 
Over 250 dwelling units served
 
None
 
70
 
28
 
6
 
1.0


Local
 
2.0 - 4.50
 
Both sides
 
45
 
30
 
6
 
1.0


Local Collector
 
4.50 and greater
 
Both sides
 
50
 
34
 
6
 
1.0


Marginal access
 
To 1.99
 
None
 
40
 
20
 
6
 
1.3


NOTES TO TABLE:

* Parking lane width, add 10 feet.




 



   (E)   Dead end streets.



      (1)   Temporary stub streets. Streets shall be so arranged to
provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties
when the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic,
effective fire and police protection and efficient provision of utilities,
and where the continuation comports with the city’s Official Map. If the
adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must dead-end temporarily,
the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line, and no strip that
would prevent connections with future streets shall be reserved. A temporary
turnabout shall be provided at the terminus of any temporary dead-end street.



      (2)   Permanent dead-end streets.



         (a)   For greater convenience to traffic and more
effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be
limited to 500 feet in length.



         (b)   The terminus of a permanent dead-end street shall
not be closer than 50 feet to the boundary of an adjacent tract. A cul-de-sac
turnaround, having a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and a minimum
pavement radius of 42 feet, shall be provided at the end of every permanent
dead-end street.



   (F)   Intersections.



      (1)   Only two streets. Not more than two streets shall
intersect at any one point.



      (2)   Right angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to
intersect as nearly as possible at right angles; in no case shall two streets
intersect at an angle of less than 75 degrees. An oblique street shall be
curved approaching an intersection and shall be approximately at right angles
with the intersection for at least 100 feet therefrom.



      (3)   Proper alignment. Proposed new intersections along one
side of an existing street shall, whenever practicable, coincide with any
existing intersections on the opposite side of the street. Street jogs with
centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted, except where
the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either
intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be
at least 800 feet apart.



      (4)   Curb radii. To permit safe vehicular movements at
corners, the minimum curb radius at the intersection of two streets shall be
20 feet and the minimum radius at the back of the curb shall be 32 feet.



      (5)   Flat grade. Intersections shall be designed with a flat
grade wherever practical. In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than
3% slope for a distance of 50 feet from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street shall be provided at the approach to an intersection.



      (6)   Maximum cross-slope. The cross-slopes on all streets,
including intersections, shall not exceed 3%.



      (7)   Adequate sight-lines. Where any street intersection will
involve earth banks or existing vegetation on the triangular area, the
developer shall cut the ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in
connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent
necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.



   (G)   Reverse curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on local collector and collector streets.



   (H)   Improvements to existing streets. Whenever any development
abuts an existing street that is narrower than the standards indicated in the
Table 154.044 , Street Design Specifications, the subdivider shall dedicate
sufficient right-of-way on the side abutting the development to permit
compliance with those standards. The developer shall improve the street to
the standards imposed at § 154.045 of this chapter, and pay one-half the
cost of the improvements.



   (I)   When excess right-of-way required. Right-of-way width in
excess of the standards set forth in the Table 154.044 , Street Design
Specifications, shall be required where:



      (1)   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to
provide adequate earth slopes; or



      (2)   Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width
is needed to construct overpasses, underpasses and approaches thereto.



(1994 Code, § 154.34)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.045  STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   General. All streets and alleys shall be improved solely at
the expense of the developer in accordance with the requirements set forth
herein. Existing streets that adjoin the development on one side only will be
improved to meet the current street standards, and this cost will be shared
equally between the city and the developer. Existing streets that join the
development on both sides shall be improved at the developer’s expense. The
extent of the improvement of existing streets will be determined by the city
and the developer during improvement plan approval process.



   (B)   Pavement structures. All streets and alleys shall be paved
across the entire surface width specified in § 154.044(A) of this chapter.
The structural composition of the pavement shall conform to the minimum
requirements set forth in Table 154.045 of this section. Design requirements
for both rigid and flexible pavements are set forth hereinafter.



      (1)   Flexible pavements. Flexible pavements are to be
constructed as multi-layered structures combining hot mix bituminous
concrete/bituminous base/crushed stone base/subbase. Each layer of material
is to be constructed in lifts not to exceed the maximum lift thickness
(compacted) specified in Table 154.045. The minimum width of any single pass
for any lift/layer of bituminous mixture shall be ten feet. There are
alternate designs for either deep-strength asphalt or bituminous concrete on
a crushed stone base/subbase.



      (2)   Rigid pavements. Rigid pavements are specified as either
reinforced or unreinforced portland cement concrete to be constructed either
on the earth subgrade or on a crushed stone subbase or underlayment.
Alternate designs are shown for two of the seven street classifications. The
underlayment is to be one-fourth inch thick fabric, such as “Bidim” or
“Petromat” or equal.



         (a)   1.   Contraction joints are to be provided at
the spacings shown in Table 154.045 for each of the various alternates. These
transverse joints are to be sawed joints that are one-eighth-inch to
one-fourth-inch wide with a depth equal to one-fourth of the pavement
thickness. Sawed construction joints are to be sawed within 24 hours of
placement on the concrete. All contraction joints are to be doweled with the
exception of the alleys and land access residential streets. Dowel sizes and
spacing shall comply with the following requirements:



 

Pavement Thickness
 
Minimum Dowel Diameter
 
Maximum Dowel  Diameter
 
Minimum Dowel Spacing


6
 
5/8
 
12
 
12


7
 
3/4
 
15
 
15


8
 
1
 
15
 
12



 



            2.   The dowel units are to be smooth, plain round
bars placed at mid-height of the pavement with an expansion cap on one end.
The bars, or assemblies, shall be placed so that the bars are parallel to the
centerline and to the pavement surface and shall be treated to prevent
bonding of the concrete.



         (b)   Longitudinal joints. Longitudinal joints shall be
constructed no closer than eight feet and no farther apart than 15 feet. The
longitudinal joints may be either constructions joints or sawed joints. In
either case, there shall be transverse #4 reformed tie bars, 30 inches long,
spaced at 30-inch centers along all longitudinal joints. This includes the
joint between the pavement and curb/gutter if the curb/gutter is not
constructed integral with the pavement. As an option to tie bars, either a
half-round or trapezoidal performed keyway meeting the following dimensions
may be used on longitudinal joints excluding the gutter joint:



 

Table 154.045 Minimum Requirements for Structural Composition of Pavements


Street Classification
 
Flexible Pavements
 
Rigid Pavements


Alt. #1
 
Alt. #2
 
Alt. #1
 
Alt. #2




Collector commercial and industrial
 
6 BAM

2-1/2 I-11 Bind.

1-1/2 I-11 Surf.
 
8 Cr. St.

4 BAM

1-1/2 I-11 Bind.

1-1/2 I-11 Surf.
 
7 SRPCC (40 Dowel Jts.)

4 Cr. St./UL
 

 

—


Collector residential
 
4 BAM

2-1/2 I-11 Bind.

2 I-11 Surf.
 
8 Cr. St.

3 BAM

1-1/2 I-11 Surf.
 
6 SRPCC (40 Dowel Jts.)
 
6 PCC

4 Cr. St./UL (15 Dowel Jts.)


Local commercial and industrial
 
4 BAM

2 I-11 Bind.

1-1/2 I-11 Surf.
 
8 Cr. St.

3 BAM

2 I-11 Surf.
 
6 SRPCC (40 Dowel Jts.)
 
6 PCC

4 Cr. St./UL (15 Dowel Jts.)


Local residential
 
5 BAM

2 I-11 Surf.
 
8 Cr. St.

2 I-11 Bind.

1-1/2 I-11 Surf.
 
6 PCC (15 Plain Jts.)
 

—


Marginal land access residential
 
4 BAM

2 I-11 Surf.
 
8 Cr. St.

1-1/2 I-11 Bind.

1-1/2 I-111 Surf.
 
6 PCC (15 Plain Jts.)
 

—


Note: Equivalent pavements in addition to those shown above shall be
determined by the City Engineer. Should the total pavement thickness exceed
eight inches the granular base/subbase shall extend under the curb/gutter.

 

Abbreviations:

 

   Cr. St.   = Crushed Stone

   BAM   = Bituminous Aggregate Mixture

   UL      = Underlayment

   PCC      = Unreinforced Portland Cement Concrete

   SRPCC   = Standard Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete

 

Maximum lift thicknesses:

 

   Crushed Stone = 8         I-11 Binder = 2-1/2

   BAM = 6            I-11 Surface = 2




 



 

Pavement Thickness
 
Half-Round Diameter
 
Trapezoidal


Edge Ht.
 
Depth
 
Inside Ht.


6
 
2
 
2
 
1
 
1


7
 
2
 
2-1/4
 
1
 
1-1/4


8
 
2-1/2
 
2-1/2
 
1
 
1-1/2


Sawed longitudinal joints shall be sawed within ten days of concrete
placement and prior to any traffic or vehicles traveling on the surface.



 



         (c)   Transverse construction joints.



            1.   Transverse construction joints shall be
constructed at the end of each day’s run or at locations where a “cold”
joint will occur due to a delay or interruption in placement operations. All
transverse construction joints shall be “tied” with #4 reformed bars, 36
inches long, spaced at 12-inch centers.



            2.   Construction joints must be at least five
feet from a contraction joint.



         (d)   Pavement reinforcement.



            1.   Pavement reinforcement shall be used in all
rigid pavements designated as SRPCC in Table 154.045. Reinforcement shall be
welded wire fabric (6 inches × 12 inches) with W 4 wire transversely and W
5.5 wire longitudinally weighing approximately 54 pounds per 100 square feet.
The fabric shall be lapped 12 inches on transverse laps and six inches on
longitudinal laps. Reinforcement shall be placed on the subgrade and
supported by proper chairs and spacers, prior to paving, at the heights
specified below:



 

Pavement Thickness
 
Depth Below Pavement Surface


Minimum
 
Maximum


6
 
2
 
3


7
 
2½
 
3½


8
 
3
 
4



 



            2.   Should the Building Inspector and/or city’s
Engineer determine that the minimal standards are not adequate for a given
condition (such as traffic volume, size of loads, subgrade support, drainage
and the like), the required pavement design shall be determined on the basis
of current pavement design procedures subject to the approval of the Building
Inspector and/or the city’s Engineer.



   (C)   Curb and gutter.



      (1)   All streets, except alleys and collector commercial,
local commercial, arterial or industrial, shall be constructed with vertical
curb and gutter in accordance with the construction methods, materials,
dimensions and specifications.



      (2)   Curb and/or gutter may be constructed either integrally
or separately in conjunction with portland cement concrete pavement. If
constructed separately, the gutter flag shall be tied to PCC pavement with
30-inch long #4 reinforcing bars spaced at 30-inch centers.



   (D)   Maintenance responsibility.



      (1)   Subsequent to completion of street construction by the
subdivider, the Building Inspector and/or Administrator shall make a final
inspection of all streets to ascertain the acceptability of structural
condition, earth slopes, drainage structures and the like. If the inspection
indicates no deficient items, the city shall take formal action to accept the
completed streets for maintenance.



      (2)   Should any item need correction or repair, the
subdivider will be notified in writing of the deficiency. No streets will be
accepted in a subdivision until all streets comply with the city’s
requirements to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector and/or
Administrator.



(1994 Code, § 154.35)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.046  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Block width. Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate
two tiers of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district
regulations; provided that, this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent
to local collector or collector streets, railroads or watercourses.



   (B)   Block length. No block shall be longer than 1,400 feet nor
shorter than 500 feet. Wherever practicable, blocks along collector streets
shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length.



   (C)   Crosswalks. Crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be
required through the center of blocks more than 1,000 feet long where
necessary to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation or other community facilities.



(1994 Code, § 154.36)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.047  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   (1)   Sidewalks shall be required:



         (a)   On the recommendation of the Plan Commission that
sidewalks are needed to ensure public safety; and



         (b)   Along collector streets, near schools and in
shopping areas and similar public places.



      (2)   The requirements of division (A)(1) above shall not be
waived unless the Plan Commission advises the City Council that, in the area
in questions, sidewalks are not needed to ensure public safety and/or that
topographical conditions make the installation of sidewalks impractical.



   (B)   Sidewalk construction standards.



      (1)   Relationship to curb. The street-side edge of every
sidewalk shall either abut the curb or be located at least six feet from the
curb to allow sufficient space for tree planting.



      (2)   Width. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet
wide. Non-residential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide.



      (3)   Thickness of concrete. All sidewalks shall be
constructed of concrete at least four inches thick; except that, across
driveways the thickness shall be increased to six inches and/or number six
reinforcing mesh shall be used.



      (4)   Grade. No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade
steeper than 6%.



      (5)   Ramps at intersections. When sidewalks are required,
curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be ramped at all intersections so as
to enhance the mobility of handicapped individuals.



(1994 Code, § 154.37)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.048  STREET LIGHTS.



   (A)   Street lights shall be provided at each intersection of
streets (or alleys) within a subdivision and at each cul-de-sac, but in no
event shall there be less than one street light per 400 feet (or portion
thereof) of street frontage between intersections, or between  a  street
intersection and the terminus of a dead-end  street. Additionally, in
multi-family dwelling subdivisions, lighting shall be provided within parking
areas at a minimum rate of one light per 25 parking spaces or any fraction
thereof.



   (B)   Street light system standards.



      (1)   The design and installation of the street light system
in every subdivision shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector and the
appropriate electric utility company.



      (2)   The lighting intensity of each street light shall be
equivalent, at a minimum, to a 175-watt lamp or 6,800 mercury luminaire lamp.
Each street light standard (post) shall be at least 16 feet high.



(1994 Code, § 154.38)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.049  STREET NAME SIGNS.



   Street name signs of the size, height and type approved by the Building
Inspector shall be supplied and placed by the developer at all intersections
within or abutting any subdivision. Street names shall be sufficiently
different in sound and spelling from other street names in the city so as to
avoid confusion. The City Clerk shall maintain a list of existing street
names for reference. A street which is planned as a continuation of an
existing street shall bear the same name.



(1994 Code, § 154.39)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.050  UTILITIES.



   At locations within the subdivision where utilities and drainage
facilities are not to be constructed within public rights-of-way, the
subdivider shall make provision for easements for the installations.
Preliminary plats shall be submitted to the electric, gas and telephone
companies for their input regarding utility easements.



   (A)   Utility easements. Utility easements, not less than 20 feet
wide for sanitary sewers and water mains and not less than 20 feet wide for
gas, electric, telephone and cable television, shall be provided where
necessary. Normally, in the case of abutting lots, an equal amount shall be
taken from each lot. Property owners may (at their own risk) plant shrubbery
or hedges or install fences on the easement areas. Utilities (private and
public), however, in order to have access for repair shall have the election
to destroy the improvements and restore the area only by grading and seeding,
or to have alternate access through the owner’s property.



   (B)   Drainage easements. Adequate easements for storm water
drainage shall be established along any natural drainage channel and in other
locations as may be necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water
from streets, alleys and all other portions of the subdivision. The location
and minimum widths of the easements shall be approved by the city’s
Engineer.



   (C)   Maintenance easements. Maintenance easements of not less than
five feet in width shall be provided along all rear and side lot lines.



(1994 Code, § 154.40)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.051  WATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   An adequate supply of potable water shall be provided to every
platted lot in accordance with the state’s Department of Public Health
regulations. If the public water system is reasonably accessible, each lot
shall be properly connected thereto at the property line. All water
distribution lines shall be at least six inches in diameter.



   (B)   Fire hydrants of the type approved by the Building Inspector
shall be installed in every subdivision as part of the water distribution
system. The distance from any lot to a hydrant, measured along the centerline
of the public right-of-way, shall not be greater than 400 feet.



(1994 Code, § 154.41)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.052  SANITARY SEWERS.



   All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the
regulations of the state’s Department of Public Health and the state’s
Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved by the city.



   (A)   When public system planned. In areas where the public sanitary
sewerage system is not reasonably accessible, but where plans for the
installation of the system have been approved by the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency, sanitary sewers shall be provided in accordance with the
plans and temporarily capped. To serve the subdivision until the time when
connection to the public system becomes practicable, an approved private
central sewage disposal system shall be installed or individual sewage
disposal systems may be used.



   (B)   Alternate methods of disposal. In the event it is not
possible, or feasible, for the subdivider to extend the public sewer system
into the proposed subdivision, for whatever reason, the subdivider has the
right to petition the city to install an alternative method of sewage
disposal. Any petition shall be considered on an individual basis with each
case standing on its own merits. No subdivision shall be approved without the
city’s approval of the method of sewage disposal.



      (1)   Private center sewage systems. Upon specific approval of
the City Council, the subdivider may install a private central sewage system.
The city shall reserve the right to review and approve/reject the detailed
plans for such a system. Approval of the plans by the city shall in no way be
construed as acceptance of the design or operation or maintenance
responsibility for the installation. The installation shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state’s
Environmental Protection Agency, and the state’s Department of Public
Health. The subdivider shall assume perpetual operational and maintenance
responsibilities for the installation unless arrangements to the contrary are
provided for in a formal written agreement between home owners and the
subdivider. Failure of the subdivider to discharge his or her
operational/maintenance responsibilities may result in a fine of $500 per day
for each day a deficiency exists and shall apply to the subdivider.



      (2)   Individual disposal systems. Upon written approval of
the City Council, the subdivider may install individual sewage disposal
systems providing the lot size is in excess of 20,000 square feet. If the
installations are permitted, they shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the applicable  provisions of the requirements and
regulations of the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code (i.e., 225
ILCS 225/1 et seq.) of the state’s Department of Public Health.



(1994 Code, § 154.42)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.053  DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   It is the policy of the city to protect and promote the
public health, safety and general welfare. The criteria for storm water
detention will reduce the possibility of damage to public and private
property, will reduce the erosion on land and creek channels, will assist in
the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards and will preserve
and enhance the environmental quality of the watercourses in the city. This
criteria provides uniform procedures for designing and checking the design of
storm drainage systems.



      (2)   The Plan Commission shall not recommend the approval of
any plat unless, after consultation with the city’s Engineer, it is
determined that the proposed provisions for storm water drainage are
adequate. Drainage improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with
existing and planned drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an
integrated municipal system. The storm water drainage system shall be
separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system.



   (B)   Special definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      DEVELOPMENT. Any activity, including subdivisions, that alters
the surface of the land to create additional impervious surfaces including,
but not limited to, pavement, buildings and structures, except:



         (a)   Additions to, improvements and repair of existing
single-family and duplex dwellings;



         (b)   Construction of any buildings, structures and/or
appurtenance service roads, drives and walks on a site having previously
provided storm water control as part of a larger unit of development
consistent with the original development plan;



         (c)   Remodeling, repair, replacement and improvements
to any existing structure or facility  and appurtenances that does not
increase the impervious area on the site in excess of 10% or add one acre of
impervious area; and



         (d)   Construction of any one new single-family or
duplex dwelling unit, irrespective of the site area on which the same may be
situated.



      EMERGENCY SPILLWAY. A device or devices used to discharge water
under conditions of inflow that exceed the design inflow. The EMERGENCY
SPILLWAY functions primarily to prevent damage to the detention facility that
would permit the sudden release of impounded water. It shall be designed to
handle the runoff from a 100-year storm.



      FREEBOARD. The difference in elevation between the top of a
structure such as a dam or open channel and the maximum design water surface
elevation or high water mark and is an allowance against overtopping by waves
or other transient disturbances.



      IPUSUSESC MANUAL. The abbreviation for the Illinois Procedures
and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual, March
1982.



      PRINCIPAL SPILLWAY. A device such as an inlet, pipe, weir and the
like, to discharge water during operation of the facility under the
conditions of a 15-year or less return frequency of the existing conditions,
before the proposed development.



      PRIVATE DETENTION FACILITY. Any detention facility located on and
controlling discharge from a site wholly owned and controlled by one owner
and not platted for future subdivision of ownership. Also, all facilities
incorporating detention storage of storm water in or on any of the following:



         (a)   Roofs of buildings or structures also used for
other purposes;



         (b)   Paved or surfaced areas also used for other
purposes; or



         (c)   Enclosed underground pipes or structures on
private property when the surface is used for other purposes.



      PUBLIC DETENTION FACILITY. Any detention facility controlling
discharge from a tributary area owned by more than one owner and/or platted
for future subdivision of ownership, except as defined as a “private
detention facility” herein.



      RATIONAL METHOD. An empirical formula for calculating peak rates
of runoff resulting from rainfall.



      TRIBUTARY AREA. All land draining to the point of consideration,
regardless of ownership.



(1994 Code, § 154.43)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.054  GENERAL GUIDELINES.



   (A)   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all development
within the limits of the city. Residential developments having a total area
of less than five acres, and commercial or industrial developments having a
total area of less than two acres, may be granted a waiver by the city in
accordance with this chapter, subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   The city retains the right to require detention storage
in all cases in which the proposed development will generate excess runoff
that adversely affects the carrying capacity of the receiving watercourse.



      (2)   Developments less than two acres with less than 30% of
the area paved and developments generating less that one cubic foot per
second (CFS)/acre increased runoff shall not be required to provide detention
storage, unless condition of division (A)(1) above is applicable.



      (3)   This chapter shall apply for all newly platted areas and
new developments proposed after the date of passage of this chapter. All
developments that have an approved preliminary plan by the Planning and
Zoning Commission at the time of the approval of this chapter will not have
to conform to this chapter.



   (B)   Affidavit of disclosure of property interest. The effective
acreage for a site is not limited to a fractional part of the total. If a
project is developed in phases or small plats, the total acreage of the
project site must be considered. At the time, the owner of any development
submits a preliminary plat or preliminary plan, he or she shall also identify
to the city all contiguous property or property in the watershed that he or
she has interest in.



   (C)   Method of evaluation. The storage capacity and discharge rate
shall be based upon the calculated volume and peak flow of the storm water
runoff, respectively. The calculations for sites having an area of 100 acres
or less shall be made using either the Illinois Manual for Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control method or the Rational Method. If the site is larger
than 100 acres, then the Engineer shall use the Illinois Manual for Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control method or if another method is desired to
be used, the Engineer shall submit a proposed method of evaluation for the
calculations for review and approval. The permitted discharge rate of storm
water runoff shall be determined by calculating the rate of runoff for the
site’s pre- and post-development conditions. The Engineer shall determine
the most critical storm looking at three different time periods: the time of
concentration; a one-hour storm; and a 24-hour storm.



   (D)   Detention of differential runoff. All new developments shall
provide a storm water system that ensures that the rate of flow of storm
water runoff discharged from the site after development does not exceed the
rate of flow of storm water runoff discharged from the site before
development of a 25-year storm, unless given a waiver by the city in
accordance with this chapter. Data shall be submitted for the 15-, 25- and
100-year frequency storm.



   (E)   Flows from upstream areas. Flows from upstream areas outside
the site should be based upon the assumption that those areas are fully
developed under forecast land use patterns. The required storage volume will
be based upon the site only, with flows from upstream areas being bypassed or
discharged via overflow spillways or other devices for the 100-year storm.



   (F)   Facilities in floodplains. If detention storage is provided
within a floodplain, only the net increase in storage volume above that which
naturally existed on the floodplain shall be credited to the development. No
credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation of the base flood at
that location unless compensatory storage is also provided. Where
encroachments in the existing floodplain fill the valley storage areas, an
equal amount of detention volume shall be provided.



   (G)   Land credit for detention facilities. The number of units/lots
shall be based on the total area of the tract to be developed. All areas to
be used as detention facilities shall be included in this total area.



(1994 Code, § 154.44)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.055  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   General requirements. The design shall be accomplished under
the direction of a registered professional engineer. The design shall also be
based on land use in the tributary area as zoned, actually developed or
indicated by an adopted future land use plan, whichever basis produces the
greatest runoff.



   (B)   Other references. Other agencies have criteria and regulations
pertaining to drainage systems which may complement this criteria. When
conflicts are encountered, the most rigorous criteria shall govern.



      (1)   Federal Insurance Agency. Floodplain regulations and
implementing ordinances adopted by municipalities. Drainage systems designed
within the limits of the designated 100-year floodplain on the principal
stream shall be designed to convey the flood as defined by applicable
published floodplain information studies. For areas located in FIA Zone A
outside the detailed study area, the developer shall prepare studies and
calculations establishing the floodplain, elevation and width. These
calculations shall be submitted to the reviewing agency for approval.



      (2)   Illinois Department of Water Resources. Rules and
regulations of dams and reservoirs shall apply to those structures classified
as dams thereunder.



   (C)   Hydraulic considerations for detention storage.



      (1)   (a)   Principal spillways. Shall be designed to meet
the following requirements.



            1.   The principal spillway shall be designed to
function without requiring attendance or operation of any kind or requiring
use of equipment or tools.



            2.   All discharge from the detention facility
when inflow is equal to or less than the 100-year inflow shall be via the
principal spillway(s).



            3.   The design shall allow for discharge of at
least 80% of the detention storage volume within 24 hours after the peak or
center of mass of the inflow has entered the detention basin. On basins less
than 100 acres, this shall not apply.



            4.   The design discharge rate via the spillway
shall continuously increase with increasing head and shall have hydraulic
characteristics similar to weirs, orifices or pipes.



         (b)   Emergency spillways. The emergency spillway shall
be provided to pass a 100-year storm without damaging any property and, where
applicable, designed to the state’s Department of Water Resources Dam
Safety requirements.



         (c)   Outlet works. Shall have an outlet works
consisting of valves, gates, pipes and other devices as necessary to
completely drain the facility in 72 hours or less when required for
maintenance or inspection on normally wet basins.



         (d)   Sediment storage. Shall be designed to provide for
five years of sediment accumulation. All other detention facilities shall
provide storage for two years of sediment accumulation, except for those
using roofs of buildings, paved parking areas or other facilities designed to
preclude the deposition or accumulation of sediment. Sediment storage volume
shall be in addition to the volume required for temporary storage of storm
water to properly size the detention facility on normally wet basins.



         (e)   Erosion control. Principal spillways and outlet
works shall be designed to prevent erosion and if necessary equipped with
energy dissipating devices to slow the water to normal velocity as called out
in the IPSUSESC Manual. Special measures shall be taken by the developer to
not permit sediment from filling the proposed detention basin during all
construction of the proposed development.



         (f)   Public detention facilities. The owner shall
dedicate the detention facility and easements as set forth upon completion of
the one-year warranty period and approval by the city’s Engineer, except:



            1.   When multipurpose wet facilities are planned
or are suitable for use for private aquatic recreation or for aesthetic
enhancement of the owner’s property; or



            2.   When multipurpose dry facilities incorporate
surface recreational improvements.



         (g)   Private detention facilities. Shall be designed
requiring the same criteria as the public detention facilities.



      (2)   The amount of easement shall be equal to the land
occupied by the facility plus a 20-foot wide strip around the perimeter of
the highest elevation attained by the design storage volume, plus an excess
easement 20 feet in width between the facility and public street. This
easement shall be shown as common ground or be dedicated to the trustees of
the subdivision or owner of the property for the purpose of maintenance of
the storm water detention facility.



      (3)   A plan for perpetual maintenance and designating
responsibility for the maintenance shall be provided for its continuing
performance to the standards established by this criteria.



(1994 Code, § 154.45)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.056  PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   The plan requirements shall be:



   (A)   Elevation area capacity curves for the storage facility
including notation of the storage volumes allocated to runoff, and permanent
residual water storage for other uses (wet basins only);



   (B)   Inflow hydrographs (detention volumes for Rational Method) for
the 15-, 25- and 100-year recurrence interval design storms;



   (C)   Stage-discharge rating curves for each spillway and for
combined spillway discharges; and



   (D)   Routing curves for the 15-year and all greater criteria
recurrence interval design storms with time plotted as the abscissa and the
following plotted as ordinates (this division (D) is not required for the
Rational Method):



      (1)   Cumulative inflow volume;



      (2)   Cumulative discharge; and



      (3)   State elevation.



(1994 Code, § 154.46)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.057  CONSTRUCTION ALTERNATIVES.



   (A)   A developer shall build, as part of his or her development, a
detention basin as required by this chapter, unless the following divisions
apply.



   (B)   Developers of adjacent tracts may combine to build one
detention site large enough to meet the requirements of all the tracts of
land with approval of the city. The basin shall be located in the same
drainage basin.



   (C)   On-site detention will be required whenever increased runoff
from the proposed development creates a hazard down stream as determined by
the city’s Engineer.



(1994 Code, § 154.47)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.058  INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE AND ACCEPTANCE BY CITY.



   (A)   Inspection. The developer shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all storm water detention systems constructed within the city.
Through the inspection reports the city’s Engineer shall ensure that the
facilities under construction are being constructed in accordance with the
approved plans for the development.



   (B)   Maintenance.



      (1)   Each owner of the property being developed has the
responsibility and duty to properly operate and maintain any storm water
management system which has not been accepted for maintenance by the city.
The responsibility of maintenance of the system and subdivision projects
shall remain with the developer until the time as the storm water management
system escrow for the development has been released at the end of the
one-year warranty period.



      (2)   Upon release of escrow, the maintenance responsibility
shall be vested in the trustees of the subdivided by virtue of a trust
indenture. Indenture of trusts shall clearly indicated resident
responsibility for maintenance. All the privately-owned maintained systems
shall be subject to periodic inspections by the city’s Engineer or his or
her representative. After an inspection by the city’s Engineer, he or she
determines whether or not the conditions of the privately-owned storm water
detention system are safe and correct.



      (3)   Any cost incurred by the city, as a result of the
city’s Engineer’s actions, shall be attest against the owners of the
system.



   (C)   Acceptance.



      (1)   Upon acceptance by the City Council, the storm water
detention system may be dedicated to the city for perpetual maintenance.



      (2)   Any system shall include adequate perpetual access and
sufficient area for maintenance by the city personnel and vehicles.



(1994 Code, § 154.48)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)



§ 154.070  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This subchapter establishes the requirements and regulations
in order to provide for a planned unit development (PUD).



   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter, Planned Unit Development
(PUD), is to achieve the following objectives:



      (1)   To provide a regulatory mechanism whereby the city can
be assured that upon completion, approved development projects will
substantially conform to the plans or models which constitute the basis for
the city’s issuance of the necessary zoning, subdivision and/or building
permits;



      (2)   To permit the development of wide variety of building
types and other structures and uses within a single comprehensively planned
project;



      (3)   To preserve the natural topography, scenic features,
mature trees and historic structures existing on sites proposed for
development;



      (4)   To encourage innovative site layouts and coordinate
architectural treatment of different building types and other structures and
uses;



      (5)   To ensure the provisions of usable common open space in
planned developments, and to spur installation of various amenities therein;
and



      (6)   To facilitate the economical installation of standard
streets sewers, utilities and other improvements.



(1994 Code, § 154.50)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.071  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES GENERALLY REQUIRED.



   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this subchapter, Planned
Unit Developments (PUDs),  including all buildings and other structures and
uses therein, shall, at a minimum be built in conformity with all applicable
codes and ordinances including this chapter and Ch. 155 of this code of
ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 154.51)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.072  DISTRICTS WHERE ALLOWED.



   Planned unit developments (PUDs) may be built in any zoning district,
but only upon the issuance of a permit by the Mayor and City Council.



(1994 Code, § 154.52)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.073  PERMISSIBLE DEVIATION FROM ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   The planned unit development (PUD) concept is intended to afford to
both the developer and to the city considerable flexibility in formulating
development proposals. Consequently, to the extent indicated in this section,
PUDs may deviate from generally applicable ordinance requirements without a
variation. Any proposed deviation not listed, however, shall require a
variation.



   (A)   Mixed uses. Planned unit developments may include all types of
buildings and other structure and uses approved by the Mayor and City
Council; provided that, in approving such mixed construction and uses, the
Mayor and City Council may attach any conditions necessary to protect the
public welfare.



   (B)   Lot and structure requirements. In all planned unit
developments, the Mayor and City Council may approve any reasonable deviation
from the lot and structure requirements of this chapter and Ch. 155 of this
code of ordinances so long as the different uses within in the planned unit
development are appropriately interrelated and property abutting the planned
unit development is adequately protected from potential adverse impact of the
development. LOT AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS shall include, but not be limited
to, minimum individual lot area, width and depth, minimum setbacks and
maximum structure height.



   (C)   Location of parking/loading spaces. By permission of the Mayor
and City Council, off-street parking and loading spaces in planned unit
developments need not be located in accordance with generally applicable
requirements of this chapter and Ch. 155 of this code or ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 154.53)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.074  PRELIMINARY PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLANS.



   (A)   Every applicant for preliminary planned unit development plan
approval shall comply with the procedural requirements of this section.



   (B)   The required procedures are as follows:



      (1)   Filing of a preliminary planned unit development plan
with the Code Enforcement Officer;



      (2)   Review of the planned unit development plan by the Code
Enforcement Officer;



      (3)   Public hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals;



      (4)   Recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals to the
Mayor and City Council regarding approval or rejection of the planned unit
development plan; and



      (5)   Formal action by Mayor and City Council regarding the
PUD development plan.



(1994 Code, § 154.54)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.075  APPLICATION, INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Every applicant for approval of a preliminary PUD development plan
shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, in narrative and/or graphic
form, the items of information listed below:



   (A)   Legal description of the total site proposed for development;



   (B)   Names and addresses of all owners of property within or
adjacent to the proposed PUD;



   (C)   Statement of the planning objective to be achieved by the PUD
through the particular approach proposed by the applicant, including a
description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale
behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant;



   (D)   Development schedule indicating the approximate date when
construction of the PUD or phases of the PUD can be expected to begin and be
completed;



   (E)   Statement of the applicant’s intentions with regard to the
future sale or lease of all or portions of the PUD site;



   (F)   Date indicating:



      (1)   Total number and type of proposed building units;



      (2)   Gross and net acreage of parcel;



      (3)   Acreage of gross and usable open space; and



      (4)   Area of various uses.



   (G)   Existing site conditions including contours at five-foot
intervals and locations of watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, unique
natural and human-made features and wooded areas;



   (H)   Proposed lot lines and plot designs;



   (I)   Proposed location, size (square foot) and general appearance
of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures and uses;



   (J)   Location and size (acreage or square feet) of all areas and
facilities conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open spaces, public park
and/or recreation areas, linear paths and similar public and semi-public uses;



   (K)   Existing and proposed vehicular circulation system, including
off-street parking and loading area and major points of ingress and egress to
the development (notations of proposed ownership, public or private, should
be included where appropriate);



   (L)   Existing and proposed pedestrian and other specially
identified circulation systems, including their relationship to the vehicular
circulation system and proposed treatments of points of conflict;



   (M)   Existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary and
storm sewers, water, electric, gas, cable and telephone lines;



   (N)   General landscape plan indicating the treatment of both
private and common open spaces and the location of required buffer strips;



   (O)   Enough information on land area adjacent to the proposed PUD
to indicate the relationships between the proposed development and existing
and proposed adjacent areas; and



   (P)   Any additional information required by the city to evaluate
the character and impact of the proposed PUD.



(1994 Code, § 154.54-1)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.076  ADVISORY REPORT (PUD DEVELOPMENT PLAN), CRITERIA CONSIDERED.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall submit to the Zoning Board
of Appeals a written advisory report concerning the acceptance or rejection
of the PUD development plan.



   (B)   In preparing the advisory report, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall consider the following criteria:



      (1)   The extent to which the proposed development is
consistent with the city’s Comprehensive Plan and with the purposes of this
chapter and Ch. 155 of this code of ordinances and all other applicable codes
and ordinances;



      (2)   The extent to which the proposed development deviates
from the regulations that are generally applicable to the property
(including, but not limited to, the use, lot and building regulations of the
district) and the apparent merits (if any) of such deviations; and



      (3)   Whether the proposed design of the PUD makes adequate
provisions for vehicular, pedestrian and other specially identified
circulation, off-street parking and loading, separation of different land
uses, open space park and recreational area and facilities, preservation of
unique natural and human-made features and the like.



(1994 Code, § 154.54-2)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.077  PUBLIC HEARING BY ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   After the Code Enforcement Officer has submitted the advisory
report reference in § 154.076 of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall conduct a public hearing pursuant to the same notice requirements set
forth in § 155.203 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Within 30 days following said public hearing, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall file its report of the hearing and advisory recommendation
with Mayor and City Council accompanied by the advisory report of the Code
Enforcement Officer.



(1994 Code, § 154.54-3)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.078  DECISION BY MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   After the Zoning Board of Appeals has submitted its report of
public hearing and advisory report, the Mayor and City Council by resolution
shall either approve or disapprove the preliminary PUD development plan.



   (B)   The Mayor and City Council shall not approve any preliminary
development plan unless:



      (1)   The City Attorney has stated that all legal documents
(including restrictive covenants) are satisfactory; and



      (2)   The proposed PUD, as evidenced by the development plan,
complies with all provisions of this chapter and Ch. 155 of this code of
ordinances (deviations as permitted under this subchapter shall be allowed
and held to be in compliance).



(1994 Code, § 154.54-4)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.079  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS.



   With respect to the preparation, submission and review of PUD final
development plans, the developer and city shall comply with regulations as
follows in this subchapter.



(1994 Code, § 154.55)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.080  FILING INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Not later than one year after the approval of the preliminary
PUD development plan, the applicant shall file with the office of Code
Enforcement the final PUD development plan for the first phase of the
proposed planned unit development.



   (B)   The final PUD development plan shall contain in final form all
items of information listed in § 154.075 of this chapter, plus the following:



      (1)   Proof that the developer has acquired legal title to all
land within the PUD or has executed a binding agreement with all the owners
of such land thereby giving the developer effective control over its
development;



      (2)   Legal description of each lot to be individually owned
and each parcel to be held in common;



      (3)   Articles of incorporation and bylaws of any and all
property owners association(s) identified;



      (4)   Restrictive covenants and any other legal instruments
required by the City Attorney guaranteeing the proper upkeep and use of the
common open space and park and recreation areas and facilities therein; and



      (5)   Legal instruments dedicating streets and other
improvements to the city or conveying same to an identified property owners
association (as the case may be).



(1994 Code, § 154.55-1)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.081  ADVISORY REPORT (FINAL PUD DEVELOPMENT PLAN).



   (A)   Not later than 60 days after the application for the final PUD
development plan is approved the Code Enforcement Officer, following
consultation with the city’s Engineer and Attorney, shall submit a written
advisory report to the Mayor and City Council.



   (B)   The advisory report shall fully discuss the extent to which
the final PUD development plan conforms to the approved preliminary PUD
development plan and to all other applicable codes and ordinances.



(1994 Code, § 154.55-2)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.082  ACTION BY MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   At its next regularly scheduled meeting following the
submission of the office of Code Enforcement staff’s advisory report, the
Mayor and City Council shall, by resolution, either approve or disapprove the
PUD final development plan.



   (B)   The Mayor and City Council shall not approve any PUD
development plan unless:



      (1)   The developer has posted a performance bond or deposited
funds in escrow in an amount the city’s Engineer deems sufficient to
guarantee the satisfactory completion of all required improvements;



      (2)   The city’s Attorney has rendered a formal opinion that
all legal instruments are satisfactory and lawful; and



      (3)   The proposed planned unit development as evidenced by
the final PUD development plan, complies with all applicable codes and
ordinances and substantially conforms to the approved preliminary PUD
development plan.



(1994 Code, § 154.55-3)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.083  CHANGES IN APPROVED PLANS.



   No changes shall be made to any approved PUD development plan, except
as follows:



   (A)   Minor changes if required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the final PUD, if approved by the
city’s Engineer;



   (B)   All other changes shall require a public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals and a resolution by the Mayor and City Council; and



   (C)   No approved change shall have any effect until it is filed
with the office of Code Enforcement as amended to the recorded copy of the
PUD development plan.



(1994 Code, § 154.56)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 154.084  FAILURE TO BEGIN DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   If a substantial amount of construction has not begun within
the time in the approved construction schedule, the PUD development plan
shall lapse upon written notice to the applicant from the Mayor and City
Council and shall be of no further effect.



   (B)   However, in its discretion and for good cause, the Mayor and
City Council may extend for a reasonable time the period for commencement of
construction. If a PUD development plan lapses pursuant to this section:



      (1)   The PUD permit shall automatically be revoked;



      (2)   Any building permits shall automatically become null and
void; and



      (3)   All regulations applicable before the PUD was approved
shall automatically be in full force and effect.



(1994 Code, § 154.57)  (Ord. 2003-05, passed 7-28-2003)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 154.095  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer, referred to herein as the
Administrator, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and  enforce
the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   This broad responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to,
the following specific duties:



      (1)   To review and forward preliminary plats to the Plan
Commission (see § 154.020 of this chapter);



      (2)   To transmit improvements plans to the city’s Engineer
for his or her review (see § 154.021 of this chapter);



      (3)   To review and forward final plats to the City Council
(see § 154.023(D) of this chapter);



      (4)   To issue stop orders as necessary when the Building
Inspector or city’s Engineer determines that approved improvements are
being constructed in violation of this chapter (see § 154.021(C) of this
chapter);



      (5)   To pursue actions authorized at § 154.022(G) of this
chapter when a developer fails to complete required improvements;



      (6)   To evaluate and pass upon proposed changes in approved
final plats (see § 154.023(F) of this chapter);



      (7)   To review and forward applications for subdivision
variances to the Plan Commission (see § 154.096 of this chapter);



      (8)   To maintain up-to-date records of matters pertaining to
this chapter including, but not limited to, preliminary plats, as-built
records of completed improvements, final plats, variances and amendments (see
§ 154.021(D) of this chapter); and



      (9)   To provide information to subdividers/developers and to
the general public on matters related to this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 154.60)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.096  SUBDIVISION VARIANCES.



   (A)   Application to be filed. Any subdivider/developer desiring a
variance from the requirements of this chapter shall file a written
application therefor with the Administrator at the same time that he or she
files his or her preliminary plat. The application shall fully explain the
grounds for the variance request, and specify the sections of this chapter
which, if strictly applied, would cause great practical difficulties or
hardship. This Administrator shall prepare an advisory report on every
variance application and submit it, together with the completed application,
to the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Review by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall review
the variance application and the Administrator’s comments, perform on-site
review when appropriate, and submit its advisory report to the City Council
together with its recommendation on preliminary plat approval. (See §
154.020(B) of this chapter.)  The Plan Commission’s advisory report shall
be responsive to all the variances standards set forth in division (C) below.



   (C)   Action by City Council, variance standards. At the same
meeting at which action is taken on the application for preliminary plat
approval (see § 154.020(C) of this chapter), the City Council shall decide
by resolution whether to grant or deny the requested subdivision variance. A
copy of its decision, clearly stating the reasons therefor and the exact
terms of any variance granted, shall be attached to both the preliminary and
final plats. The City Council shall not grant any subdivision variance
unless, based upon the information presented to them, it determines that:



      (1)   The proposed variance is consistent with the general
purposes of this chapter;



      (2)   Strict application of the subdivision requirements (see
§§ 154.040 through 154.058 of this chapter) would result in great practical
difficulties or hardship to the applicant, not a mere inconvenience;



      (3)   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from the
subdivision requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship;



      (4)   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar
circumstances not of his or her own making;



      (5)   The peculiar circumstances creating the variance request
are not applicable to other tracts and, therefore, that a variance would be a
more appropriate remedy than a code amendment; and



      (6)   The variance, if granted, will not materially frustrate
implementation of the municipal Comprehensive Plan including the Official Map.



(1994 Code, § 154.61)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.097  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Amendments to this chapter may be proposed by the
Administrator, any member of the City Council, any Plan Commission member or
any party in interest.



      (2)   Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed
form in the Administrator’s office.



      (3)   The Administrator shall promptly transmit each proposal,
together with any comments or recommendations he or she may wish to make, to
the Plan Commission for a public hearing.



   (B)   Public hearing, notice. The Plan Commission shall hold a
public hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after the
proposal is submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may
appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing, and the nature of
the proposed amendment shall be given not more than 30 days, nor less than 15
days, before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city.



   (C)   Advisory report, action by City Council. Within a reasonable
time after the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall submit an advisory
report to the City Council. The City Council shall act on the proposed
amendment at its next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of
this report. Without another public hearing, the City Council may either pass
or reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Plan Commission
for further consideration.



(1994 Code, § 154.62)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.098  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   All fees, including fees under this chapter, shall be established from
time to time by the City Council by resolution and shall be paid to the City
Clerk. The fees are intended to defray the administrative costs connected
with the processing/conducting of the listed permits/procedures; they do not
constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device.



(1994 Code, § 154.63)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.099  LIABILITY; DEFENSE BY CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance,
no officer, Council member, agent or employee of the city shall render
himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any required or permitted in the discharge
of his or her duties under this chapter.



   (B)   Any suit brought against any officer, Council member, agent or
employee of the city, as a result of any required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the
city’s Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.



(1994 Code, § 154.64)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50, nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day that the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained
in this section shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful action
that may be necessary to secure compliance with this code.



(1994 Code, § 154.99)  (Ord. 434, passed 4-26-1993)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   155.001   Short title



   155.002   Application of regulations



   155.003   Rules of construction of language



   155.004   Definitions



   155.005   Additional height, area and yard regulations



District Boundaries; Zoning Map



   155.020   Use districts established



   155.021   Zoning map; amendments to; annexation of land



   155.022   Interpretation of district boundaries



   155.023   Vacated areas



Agricultural District Regulations



   155.035   A-1 Agricultural District



Residential Districts Regulations



   155.050   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District



   155.051   R-2 One-Family Dwelling District



   155.052   R-3 One-Family Dwelling District



   155.053   R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District



   155.054   R-5 Multi-Family Dwelling District



Business Districts Regulations



   155.065   B-1 Central Business District



   155.066   B-2 Highway Business District



Industrial Districts Regulations



   155.080   I-1 Light Industrial District



Special District Regulations



   155.095   S-1 Floodplain and Drainageway District



   155.096   S-2 Slope District



   155.097   S-3 Airport District



   155.098   S-4 Historical Building District



Special Uses



   155.110   Compliance with regulations



   155.111   Procedure; hearing; fee



   155.112   Table of special use exceptions and requirements



   155.113   Revocation of permit



Off-Street Parking and Loading



   155.125   Procedure



   155.126   Extent of control



   155.127   Existing off-street parking and loading spaces



   155.128   Schedule of requirements



   155.129   Use of off-street parking facilities



   155.130   Joint parking facilities



   155.131   Joint parking spaces



   155.132   Control of off-site facilities



   155.133   Permitted districts for accessory parking



   155.134   Non-residential parking in residential districts



   155.135   Design and maintenance



   155.136   Location of parking areas



   155.137   Schedule of off-street parking requirements



   155.138   Off-street loading and unloading space



   155.139   Design



Street Signs and Graphics



   155.150   Regulations of street signs and graphics



   155.151   Signs in certain districts



   155.152   Administration and enforcement of signs and graphics



Non-Conforming Uses and Buildings



   155.165   Existing non-conforming uses and buildings



   155.166   When use becomes non-conforming through changes in zoning
requirements



   155.167   Non-conforming use of land as trailer court



   155.168   Discontinued use of non-agricultural building not to be
reestablished



   155.169   What constitutes abandonment



   155.170   Existing non-agricultural building or structure



   155.171   Restoration of damaged buildings



   155.172   Non-agricultural building under construction



   155.173   Junk or automobile wrecking yard



   155.174   Lots smaller than permitted in use district; conformance
required



Board of Appeals



   155.185   Establishment of Board; composition; term; Chairperson



   155.186   Board to adopt rules and regulations



   155.187   Meetings



   155.188   Powers of Board



   155.189   Procedure for appeals



Administration and Enforcement



   155.200   Building Inspector to enforce provisions



   155.201   Building permit



   155.202   Certificate of occupancy



   155.203   Amendments



   155.204   Interpretation of provisions



 



   155.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be entitled “Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Sparta”.



(1994 Code, § 155.001)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.002  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the
corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Nothing contained in these regulations shall impose
restrictions with respect to land used or to be used for agricultural
purposes or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair, alteration,
remodeling or extension of buildings or structures used or to be used for
agricultural purposes upon the land, except buildings or structures for
agricultural purposes shall conform to building or setback lines, and a
permit with respect to land used for agricultural purposes and buildings
thereon may be required, but without charge therefor.



   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided:



      (1)   No building or land shall, after this chapter is passed,
be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved
or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located;



      (2)   No building shall after this chapter is passed, be
erected or altered to exceed the height; to accommodate or house a greater
number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or to have a
narrower or smaller rear yard, front yard, side yard, inner or outer court
than is specified herein for the district in which the building is located;



      (3)   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street
parking, or unloading space about any building required for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of the standards in this chapter shall be
included as part of a yard, open space, off-street parking or unloading space
similarly required for another building, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter;



      (4)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be
more than one main building on one lot, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter; and/or



      (5)   No parcel of land described by metes and bounds or any
lot shall hereafter be created which does not conform and meet the
requirements of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.002)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 425, passed
11-23-1992)



§ 155.003  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following rules of construction
shall apply to the text, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   (A)   The particular shall control the general.



   (B)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.



   (C)   The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary. The word
MAY is permissive.



   (D)   Words used in the present term shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (E)   The phrase USED FOR includes ARRANGED FOR, DESIGNED FOR,
INTENDED FOR, MAINTAINED FOR and OCCUPIED FOR.



(1994 Code, § 155.003)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING. A use customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use and located on the same lot with the principal use. An
ACCESSORY BUILDING is a building separate from the principal building located
on the same lot. A trailer shall not be considered permissible as an
ACCESSORY BUILDING. An ACCESSORY USE includes, but is not limited to, the
following:



      (1)   A children’s playhouse, garden house and private
greenhouse;



      (2)   A civil defense shelter for not more than two families;



      (3)   A garage, attached or detached from principal building,
shed or building for domestic storage;



      (4)   Incinerators incidental to residential use;



      (5)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the
same lot with any retail service or business use, unless the storage is
excluded by the district regulations;



      (6)   A non-paying guesthouse or rooms for guests within an
ACCESSORY BUILDING; provided, the facilities are used for the occasional
housing of guests of occupants of the principal building and not for
permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units; or



      (7)   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and
unloading facilities.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or
for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-operated
means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment
or section devoted to the sales or display of such materials; or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from
the establishment’s premises or any other factors showing the
establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which:



      (1)   Features topless dancers, strippers, “go-go”
dancers, male or female impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion show;



      (2)   Features entertainers who display specified anatomical
areas; or



      (3)   Features entertainers who by reason of their appearance
or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or
are engaged in explicit simulation of, specified sexual activities.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for viewing by patrons therein.



   ADULT NOVELTY STORE. An establishment having 25% or more of its sales
or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing “novelties”,
lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
or use for specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any other factors
showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.



   ADULT USE. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.



   AGRICULTURE. The growing, harvesting and storing of crops including
legume, hay, grain, fruit and truck or vegetable crops, floriculture,
viticulture, horticulture, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry
and greenhouses; the keeping, raising and feeding of livestock or poultry,
including dairying, poultry, swine, sheep, beef cattle, pony and horse
production, fur farms and fish and wildlife farms; farm buildings used for
growing, harvesting, storing and preparing crop products for market, or for
use on the farm; roadside stands for farm products, farm buildings for
storing and protecting farm machinery and equipment from the elements, for
housing livestock or poultry and for preparing livestock or poultry products
for market; buildings occupied as dwellings by farm owners, operator, tenants
or seasonal or year-round hired farm workers. Buildings occupied as dwellings
by those not engaged in agriculture operations shall not be considered to be
used for agricultural purposes.



   AIRPORT. Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use
for the landing and taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which
are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport
facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and
facilities located thereon.



   ALLEY. A narrow service way providing a secondary public means of
access to abutting properties and not more than 20 feet wide.



   ALTERATIONS. As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location or position to another, or by change in use from
that of one district classification to another.



   ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL. Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. Any building or portions thereof, designated or used
for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.



   ANIMAL SEWAGE LAGOON. Any area of shallow water or pond used for the
collection and disposal of animal waste.



   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure
which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single
housekeeping unit, and which contains complete kitchen, bath and toilet
facilities, permanently installed.



   APARTMENT HOUSE. A building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of
worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including
body, frame or fender straightening or repairs; and over-all painting of
vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and
motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any area of land where two or more motor
vehicles, not incidental to farm operations and not in running condition, or
parts thereof, are stored in the open and not being restored to operation; or
any land, building or structure used for the wrecking or storing of the motor
vehicles, or parts thereof, not in running condition.



   AWNING. Any roof-like structure made of cloth, metal or other material
attached to a building and erected over a window, doorway and the like, in a
manner as to permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the
building when not in use.



   BASEMENT. A story partly underground but having at least one-half of
its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A BASEMENT shall
be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement, if the vertical
distance between the ceiling and average level of the adjoining ground is
more than five feet or if used for business or dwelling purposes.



   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An operator-occupied residence
providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five
guest rooms for rent, in operation for not less than ten nights in a 12-month
period. Breakfast and refreshments may be provided to the guests only. BED
AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS shall not include motels, hotels, boarding
houses or food service establishments.



   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT OPERATOR. The owner of a bed and
breakfast establishment, or the owner’s agent, who is required by this
chapter to reside in the bed and breakfast establishment or on contiguous
property.



   BED AND BREAKFAST GUEST ROOM. A sleeping room intended to serve not
more than two transient guests per night.



   BILLBOARD. Any single- or double-faced street graphic that is
permanently fixed or placed on particular premises and that is used for the
display of messages or advertising not associated with the establishment
located on the premises.



   BLOCK. Property abutting on one side of a street between the two
nearest intersecting streets or other natural barriers.



   BOARDINGHOUSE. A building or premises in which sleeping quarters and
meals are provided by prearrangement for compensation on a weekly or longer
basis for five or less persons who are not members of the keeper’s family.
The term BOARDINGHOUSE shall include ROOMING HOUSE and shall also mean
LODGING HOUSE, but a BOARDINGHOUSE shall not include a community residence or
nursing home.



   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for
the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels
or property. When separated by party walls, each portion of the BUILDING
shall be considered a separate structure.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
open space requirements of this chapter have been complied with.



   BUILDING AREA. The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps and cornices projecting not
more than 30 inches.



   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF. The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed existing finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street line at a distance
regulated by the front yard requirements set up in this chapter.



   CANOPY. A roof-like structure similar to an awning; except that, it
cannot be raised or retracted to a position against the building.



   CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its height below grade.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign which has provision for changing the
message thereon either manually or electronically.



   CITY. The City of Sparta, Illinois, and contiguous territory within one
and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the city.



   COMMERCIAL FEEDING FACILITY. A structure or enclosed area used for
feeding cattle, hogs or other livestock in lots of 100 animals or more and
not otherwise connected with a farming operation.



   COMMERCIAL POULTRY FACILITY. A structure or enclosed area used for
feeding and raising farm poultry in excess of 500 domestic fowl and not
otherwise connected with a farming operation.



   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A group home or specialized residential care home
serving unrelated persons with disabilities which is licensed, certified or
accredited by appropriate local, state or national bodies. COMMUNITY
RESIDENCE does not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative
to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for
placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment for a communicable
disease.



   CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER. A legally-binding order to effect compliance
with this chapter, issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with
the procedures set forth herein.



   COVERAGE. The percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building area.



   DISTRICT. A section of the city for which uniform regulations governing
the use, height, area and intensity of use by buildings and land, and open
spaces about buildings, are herein established.



   DWELLING. A building, but not a trailer (mobile home), designed or used
exclusively as the living quarters for one or more families.



   DWELLING, GROUP. A group of two or more one-family, two-family or
multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having any yard in
common.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A dwelling or group of dwelling on one plat
containing separate living units for three or more families, but which may
have joint services or facilities or both.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively
by two families living independently of each other. May also be referred to
as a DUPLEX.



   DWELLING, ROW. A dwelling, the walls on two sides of which are in
common with the walls of adjoining dwellings and are party or lot line walls.



   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies,
or underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
elevated and underground water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by the public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.



   FAMILY.



      (1)   Two or more persons, each related to the other by blood,
marriage or adoption, together with usual domestic servants and not more than
one bona fide guest, all living together as a single housekeeping unit and
using common kitchen facilities (that is, a related family); or



      (2)   Five or fewer persons, all of whom are not necessarily
related to each of the others by blood, marriage or adoption, all living
together as a single housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities
(that is, an unrelated family). For purposes of this chapter, however, an
unrelated FAMILY shall not include persons living together in a community
residence or nursing home.



   FLOODPLAIN. Lands which are low-lying, difficult to drain, subject to
flood or are natural drainage ways.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings.



      (1)   In particular, the FLOOR AREA of a building or buildings
shall include:



         (a)   Basement space;



         (b)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;



         (c)   Floor space for mechanical equipment with
structural headroom of seven feet, six inches or more;



         (d)   Penthouses;



         (e)   Attic space (whether or not a floor has actually
been laid) providing structural headroom of seven feet, six inches or more;



         (f)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;



         (g)   Enclosed porches; and



         (h)   Accessory uses, not including space for accessory
off-street parking.



      (2)   However, the FLOOR AREA of a building shall not include:



         (a)   Cellar space; except that, cellar space used for
retailing shall be included for the purpose of calculating requirements for
accessory off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street berths;



         (b)   Elevator and stair bulkheads, accessory water
tanks and cooling towers;



         (c)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment, with
structural headroom of less than seven feet, six inches;



         (d)   Attic space, whether or not a floor has actually
been laid, providing structural headroom of less than seven feet, six inches;



         (e)   Uncovered steps;



         (f)   Terraces, breezeways and open spaces;



         (g)   Accessory off-street parking spaces; and



         (h)   Accessory off-street loading berths up to 200% of
the amount required by § 155.005 of this chapter.



   FLUSH-MOUNTED SIGN. Any sign attached to or erected against any wall,
awning, canopy or marquee with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
approximately parallel to the plane of the wall, and the like, and not
projecting more than 18 inches. The signs shall not be painted directly on
any exterior wall.



   FREE-STANDING SIGN. Any sign supported by one or more uprights, poles
or braces placed in or upon the ground in a permanent manner.



   FRONTAGE. All  the  property  abutting  on  one  side  of  a 
road,  street  or  place  between  two intersecting roads or places
(crossing or terminating) or if the road, street or place is dead ended, then
all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting road, street
or place and the dead end of the road, street or place.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building, housing not to exceed four
motor driven vehicles, the property of and for the use of the occupants of
the lot on which the private garage is located.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any garage other than a private garage, available to
the public, operated for gain and which is used for storage, repair, rental,
greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other
motor vehicles.



   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use of a character customarily conducted
within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly secondary to the
use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character
thereof.



      (1)   Permitted uses. HOME OCCUPATIONS shall include, but are
not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Artists, sculptors, authors, photographers and
composers;



         (b)   Computer programming, personal computer data
processing and home computer bulletin board;



         (c)   Direct-sale product distribution (Amway, Avon,
Tupperware and the like); provided, parties for the selling of merchandise or
taking orders shall not be held more than once a month, shall be limited to
ten customers and shall be held between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;



         (d)   Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors;



         (e)   Hairdresser/barber provided only one person may
conduct such activity;



         (f)   Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving,
woodworking, ceramics and similar activities;



         (g)   Home offices for architects, engineers, lawyers,
realtors, insurance agents, brokers, ministers, rabbis, priests,
salespersons, sales representatives, manufacturers’ representatives, home
builders, home repair contractors, trash haulers and similar occupations;



         (h)   Mail order, not including retail sales from site;



         (i)   Music and art teachers or other tutoring services
on an individual basis;



         (j)   Telephone marketing;



         (k)   Washing and ironing;



         (l)   “Work at home” activities where employees of a
business, located at another location perform work for the business in their
own residence; provided, all physical contact between the business and the
employee occurs at the place of business and not at the residence, other than
the installation of any equipment or other work facilities. The work
activities of the employee shall conform with all other requirements of this
section;



         (m)   Daycare homes as regulated by the state; (Proof of
valid license must be presented prior to approval of permit.)



         (n)   Automotive detailing (washing, cleaning, truck
lettering) limited to one vehicle at the premises at any given time; and



         (o)   Sign painting.



      (2)   Use limitations. The following regulations shall apply
to all HOME OCCUPATIONS.



         (a)   HOME OCCUPATIONS shall be carried out by members
of the household occupying that dwelling and not more than one paid assistant.



         (b)   The HOME OCCUPATION shall be conducted entirely
within the principal residential building or in a permitted accessory
building.



         (c)   No manufacturing of any sort whatsoever shall be
done, except as otherwise permitted herein.



         (d)   One sign not exceeding four square feet as
regulated herein.



         (e)   No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on
the premises, except for delivery of orders.



         (f)   No stock in trade, except articles produced by the
residents of the premises, shall be stored on the premises.



         (g)   No alteration of the principal residential
building shall be made which changes the character thereof as a dwelling.



         (h)   The HOME OCCUPATION shall not produce offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors or heat. Any
noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors or heat
detectable beyond the property lines or beyond the walls of a dwelling unit,
if the unit is part of a multi-family structure, shall constitute a violation
of this section.



         (i)   No mechanical or electrical equipment other than
normal household or domestic equipment shall be used.



         (j)   There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or
materials used in the home occupation.



         (k)   The receipt of delivery of merchandise, goods or
supplies for use in a home occupation shall be limited to United States mail,
similar parcel delivery service or private vehicles with a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. only.



         (l)   Not more than one vehicle shall be utilized for
business purposes.



         (m)   No customer waiting area shall be provided.



         (n)   No vehicles shall be parked and no equipment or
materials shall be stored for trash haulers, home builders, home repair
contractors and similar occupations.



         (o)   A HOME OCCUPATION permit must be obtained prior to
commencement of any home occupation activity.



      (3)   Prohibited home occupations. The following activities
shall not constitute HOME OCCUPATIONS under this chapter:



         (a)   Animal hospitals;



         (b)   Auto repair and painting;



         (c)   Massage parlors or massage therapy establishments;



         (d)   Medical offices for doctors, dentists and
veterinarians;



         (e)   Palm reading or fortune telling;



         (f)   Shops for contractors and tradesmen;



         (g)   Tanning salons; and



         (h)   Trash hauler operations other than a home office.



   HOSPITAL. Includes sanitarium, sanatorium, preventorium, clinic or any
other place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of ailments, and shall
be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis, treatment or other care
of human ailments.



   JUNK YARD. An open area or fenced enclosure, where used or second-hand
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and bottles. A JUNK YARD includes an automobile wrecking
yard, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed
buildings.



   KENNEL. Any structure or premises where three or more dogs over four
months of age are kept.



   LAND USE PLAN. The comprehensive long range plans for the desirable use
of land as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the city
and the Board of Commissioners of the county; the purpose of the plans being,
among other things, to serve as a guide to the zoning and progressive changes
in the zoning of land to meet changing needs of the city and contiguous
territory, in the subdividing and use of undeveloped land, and in the
acquisition of land for the public purposes as roads, parks, schools and
other public buildings or public uses.



   LARGE COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A community residence serving six to 20
persons with disabilities.



   LAUNDROMAT. A business that provides home-type washing, drying and/or
ironing machines and/or dry-cleaning machines for hire to be used by
customers on the premises.



   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot
therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks.



   LOT. A parcel, tract or area of land accessible by means of a road,
street or place. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or
plat which is recorded in the office of the county’s Recorder, or it may
include parts of or a combination of the parcels when adjacent to the other
and used as one.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two or
more intersecting streets or roads.



   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building
area.



   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line, measured in the general direction of the side lot
lines.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, the line abutting a
road, street or place; and, in the case of a corner lot, the line of the
narrowest portion of the lot abutting a road, place or street.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, addition or
survey, a plat of which is recorded or a parcel of land described by metes
and bounds consisting of five acres or less, the plat or description of the
parcel of land having been recorded in the office of the county’s Recorder
of Deeds prior to the effective date of this chapter.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.



   LOT, WIDTH. The dimension of a lot, measured between side lot lines on
the building setback line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME - TYPE A. A factory fabricated single-family home
built in one or more sections, the average width and/or length of the living
area (excluding garages, carports, porches or attachments) of this type of
manufacture home shall not exceed a ratio of three to one. All TYPE A
MANUFACTURED HOMES must be placed on a full, permanent perimeter foundation
extending below the frost depth. All wheels and towing devices must be
removed. A TYPE A MANUFACTURED HOME must have a minimum 3/12 pitch roof with
overhang and must have a minimum living area of not less than 1,000 square
feet. TYPE A MANUFACTURED HOMES must meet the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards (HUD). A metal label must be permanently
affixed to the rear of each towable unit evidencing compliance with such
standards.



   MANUFACTURED HOME - TYPE B. A factory fabricated single-family home
built on a permanent chassis that consists of wheel assembly, undercarriage
and towing hitch assembly. The average length of a TYPE B MANUFACTURED HOME
(excluding garages, carports, porches or attachments) is in excess of three
times its average width. TYPE B MANUFACTURED HOMES must have a minimum of 800
square feet of floor area and must contain complete kitchen and sanitary
facilities. TYPE B MANUFACTURED HOMES moved into the city must meet the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD). A metal
label must be permanently affixed to the rear of each towable unit evidencing
compliance with said standards.



   MARQUEE. Any canopy made of durable materials that is a permanent
fixture of the building to which it is attached.



   MOBILE HOME. A factory-fabricated single family home built on a
permanent chassis that consists of wheel assembly, undercarriage and towing
hitch assembly. The average length of a MOBILE HOME (excluding garage,
carports, porches or attachments) is in excess of three times its average
width. MOBILE HOMES must have a minimum of 800 square feet of floor area and
must contain a complete kitchen and sanitary facilities. MOBILE HOMES moved
in to the city must meet the HUD Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards.



   MOBILE/PORTABLE SIGN. Any street graphic not designed to be permanently
attached to a building or part thereof or to be anchored to the ground. The
street graphics primarily include, but are not limited to, signs attached to
wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable; paper,
cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles; and the like. A
PORTABLE SIGN may be converted into a free-standing sign upon terms and
conditions set forth by the Code Enforcement Officer and City Council.



   MODULAR HOME. A building assembly or system of building sub-assemblies
designed for habitation as a dwelling for one or more persons, including the
necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service
systems, which is of closed or open construction and which is made or
assembled by a manufacturer approved by the state’s Department of Public
Health, on or off the building site, for installation or assembly and
installation, on the building site, with a permanent perimeter foundation
which extends below the frost depth, and built in strict compliance with the
regulations of the state’s Department of Public Health. All MODULAR HOMES
must evidence a seal in the shape of the state placed on the electrical panel
box of each unit evidencing compliance with the regulations of the state’s
Department of Public Health.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. The use of a building or use of land that does not
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated.



   NURSERY SCHOOL. A school designed to provide daytime care or
instructions for two or more children from two to five years of age inclusive.



   PARKING LOT. Any place, lot, parcel or yard used in whole or in part
for the storage or parking of two or more vehicles where the usage is not
incidental to or in conjunction with a dwelling, or other usage permissible
in dwelling districts and located on the same tract.



   PARKING SPACE. An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle, and having an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive
of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto
and having direct access to a street or alley.



   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any individual whose disability:



      (1)   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical
impairments or a combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments;



      (2)   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time
or indefinitely; and



      (3)   Results in functional limitations in three or more of
the following areas of major life activities:



         (a)   Self care;



         (b)   Receptive or expressive language;



         (c)   Learning;



         (d)   Mobility;



         (e)   Self direction;



         (f)   Capacity for independent living;



         (g)   Economic self-sufficiency; and



         (h)   Reflects the person’s need for a combination and
sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other
services which are of a lifelong or extended duration.



   PLACE. An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley,
permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.



   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is supported by any exterior wall of a
building or suspended beneath any awning, canopy or marquee with the exposed
face of the sign in a plane approximately perpendicular to the plane of the
wall, and the like, and projecting more than 18 inches.



   ROOF LINE. The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette, on the side of the building
where the street graphic is located.



   ROOF-MOUNTED SIGN. Any sign erected or maintained on the roof of any
building.



   SERVICE STATION. A building, buildings, premises or portions thereof
which are used or arranged, designed or intended to be used for the retail
sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle, motorboat or aircraft fuels.



   SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof that is
used to advertise, identify, display or attract attention to any object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service or event
related to the premises on which the SIGN is situated by any means including
words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors or illumination.



   SIGN AREA. The area of the one imaginary square or rectangle that would
completely enclose all parts of a sign including the background.



   SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE. The total of the areas of all signs which a
particular establishment is permitted to display under the terms of this
chapter.



   SMALL COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A community residence serving five or fewer
persons with disabilities in a family-like atmosphere.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely or opaquely covered:
human genitals, or pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy, fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.



   STABLE. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is used in
whole or in part for the shelter or care of horses, cattle or other similar
animals, either permanently or transiently.



   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STREET or ROAD. A public or private way which affords the principal
means of access to abutting properties.



   STREET OR ROAD GRADE. The officially established grade of the street
upon which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the
existing grades of the street shall be taken as the STREET GRADE.



   STREET GRAPHIC. Any on-premises identification or advertising sign, or
any off-premises advertising sign visible from the public right-of-way or
from any parking area used by the general public.



   STREET GRAPHIC PERMIT. A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
to regulate the erection, expansion, alteration, relocation or reconstruction
of street graphics in all parts of the city, except in areas of special
controls.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, that use of which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having location on the
ground. The term STRUCTURE shall include billboards and signs.



   TRAILER COURT. An area of land divided into two or more lots or parking
berths platted and laid out to provide sites for trailers permanently affixed
to the land. A TRAILER shall be deemed to be permanently affixed to the land
when its wheels or other transporting device have been removed therefrom or
otherwise fixed so as to prevent ready removal or ready mobility of the
TRAILER.



   TRAILER PARK. An area of land containing two or more trailers or
providing space where two or more trailers are harbored or parked or intended
to be harbored or parked without being permanently affixed to the land either
free of charge or for remuneration purposes, and shall include any building,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure, used or intended for use as a part of
the equipment of the park.



   USE. The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term PERMITTED USE or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
non-conforming use.



   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign visible from the exterior of a building which is
painted on, affixed to, or suspended immediately in front of or behind a
window. A permanent WINDOW SIGN is one that is intended to remain on display
for 30 days or more; a temporary WINDOW SIGN is one that is intended to
remain on display for a shorter period of time.



   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and
similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the
front lot line and the building line.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line unoccupied other
than by accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the required
space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and similar
structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of the principal building.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the principal building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard or from the front lot line where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required SIDE YARD is
measured horizontally, at 90 degrees with the side lot line, from the nearest
part of the principal building.



   ZONING DISTRICT MAP. A map entitled Zoning District Map of the city,
together with all explanatory matter thereon adopted by this chapter and
which shows the boundaries of the zoning districts for the city.



(1994 Code, § 155.004)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 399, passed
4-22-1991; Ord. 411, passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 429, passed 1-11-1993; Ord.
99-09, passed 11-22-1999; Ord. 2001-02, passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 2003-09,
passed 10-27-2003)



§ 155.005  ADDITIONAL HEIGHT, AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS.



   The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify
or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this chapter.



   (A)   Height regulations.



      (1)   One-family dwellings and two-family dwellings may be
increased in height by not more than ten feet when the side and rear yards
are increased over the yard requirements of the district in which they are
located by not less than ten feet each, but they shall not exceed three
stories in height.



      (2)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio towers or necessary mechanical
appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or
future ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Area regulations.



      (1)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot
until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and
no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes unless the main
building on the lot is also being used for dwelling purposes.



      (2)   More than one industrial, commercial, multiple dwelling
or institutional building may be erected upon a single lot or tract, but the
yards and open spaces required around the boundaries of the lot or tract
shall not be encroached upon by any building, nor shall there be any change
in the intensity of use requirements. When more than one multiple dwelling
building is erected upon a single lot or tract, the minimum distances between
main buildings shall be the following:



         (a)   Front to front: 70 feet; front to rear: 60 feet;



         (b)   Side to side: one-half the height of the taller
building, but not less than 20 feet;



         (c)   Front to side or rear to side: the height of the
taller building, but not less than 30 feet; and



         (d)   Rear to rear: 50 feet.



      (3)   Where an open space is more than 50% surrounded by
building, the minimum width of the open space shall be 30 feet for one-story
buildings, 40 feet for two-story buildings and 50 feet for three-story
buildings.



      (4)   All distance requirements and buffer area or screening
requirements established for the protection of R districts shall be
applicable to any trailer (mobile home) court now existing or hereafter
established.



   (C)   Yard regulations.



      (1)   In computing the depth of a rear yard, where the yard
opens onto an alley, one-half of the alley width may be included as a portion
of the rear yard.



      (2)   No accessory buildings shall be built in any yard, but a
rear yard and shall be distant at least five feet from the rear lot line. An
accessory building shall not occupy more than 30% of the required rear yard
and shall not occupy any part of the required side yard.



      (3)   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky,
unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for
the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and
ornamental features projecting not to exceed 12 inches. This requirement
shall not prevent the construction of fences not exceeding eight feet in
height, except on that portion of lots within 30 feet of the intersection of
two or more streets.



      (4)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fire-proof
outside stairways and balconies opening  upon fire towers projecting into a
yard not more than five feet and the ordinary projections of chimneys and
flues may be permitted by the Building Inspector.



      (5)   For the purposes of side yard requirements, a two-family
dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying a single lot.



      (6)   An open unenclosed porch not more than one story in
height or paved terrace may project into the required front yard for a
distance not exceeding ten feet. An enclosed vestibule containing not more
than 40 square feet may project into the required front yard for a distance
not to exceed four feet.



      (7)   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental
features which do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of
the first (ground) story may project into a required yard; provided, these
projections be distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line.



      (8)   When 40% of a frontage is developed with two or more
buildings, then the depth of the front yards heretofore established shall be
adjusted in the following manner.



         (a)   When the building furthest from the street
provides a front yard no more than ten feet deeper than the building closest
to the street, then the average depth of the front yard for the frontage
shall be the minimum depth of front yard for new buildings or additions to
existing buildings in the block.



         (b)   When the above is not the case and the lot is
within 100 feet of an existing building on each side, excluding, however,
buildings on corner lots which front upon the intersecting street, then the
depth of the front yard is determined by a line drawn from the closest front
corners of these two adjacent buildings at the intersection of the line and
the centerline of the lot.



         (c)   When neither divisions (C)(8)(a) or (C)(8)(b)
above is the case and the lot is within 100 feet of an existing building on
one side only, excluding, however, buildings on corner lots which front upon
the intersecting street, then the depth of the front yard is the same as that
of the existing adjacent building.



      (9)   In all districts a triangular space shall be maintained
at the street corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to
vision between the heights of three and 12 feet above the established street
grade. The street grade is measured at the intersection of the centerlines of
the intersecting street pavements, and the triangular space is determined by
a diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet equidistant from the
intersection of the property lines.



      (10)   In one-family dwelling districts, when 80% of the
frontage of a block on both sides of the street between two intersecting
streets or between an intersecting street and a cul-de-sac has been developed
with main buildings and accessory buildings with side yards less than that
required by the dwelling district in which the property is situated, then the
side yard requirement for any main buildings or accessory buildings in the
block shall be the average side yard of all parcels of property in the block
rather than the side yard set forth in the dwelling district in which the
parcel of property is situated. In determining the existing side yard of any
developed parcel, in order to compute the average herein required, the side
yard of the main building on any developed parcel shall be used except that
when an accessory building exists with a smaller side yard than the main
building has, the side yard shall be taken as being the average between the
side yard of the main building and the side yard of the accessory building.



(1994 Code, § 155.005)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 97-02, passed
6-9-1997)



DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; ZONING MAP



§ 155.020  USE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The city and contiguous territory within one and one-half
miles of the corporate limits of the city is hereby classified and divided
into 12 districts, designated as follows:



      (1)   Agricultural district: A-1 Agricultural District;



      (2)   Residential districts:



         (a)   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District;



         (b)   R-2 One-Family Dwelling District;



         (c)   R-3 One-Family Dwelling District; and



         (d)   R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District.



      (3)   Business districts:



         (a)   B-1 Central Business District; and



         (b)   Highway Business District.



      (4)   Industrial district: I-1 Light Industrial District; and



      (5)   Special districts:



         (a)   S-1 Floodplain and Drainage District;



         (b)   S-2 Slope District;



         (c)   S-3 Airport District; and



         (d)   S-4 Historic Buildings District.



   (B)   No zoning district established by this chapter shall be
changed or a zoning district established after the effective date of this
chapter unless the districts shall be of the following minimum size:



 

District
 
Minimum Size




A-1 Agriculture
 
No minimum


R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
 
10 acres


R-2 One-Family Dwelling District
 
5 acres


R-3 One-Family Dwelling District
 
2 acres


R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District
 
2 acres


R-5 Multi-Family Dwelling District
 
2 acres or 1 block as defined in § 155.053(A)(3) of this chapter


B-1 Central Business District
 
5 acres


B-2 Highway Business District
 
2 acres


I-1 Light Industrial District
 
10 acres


S-1 Floodplain and Drainage
 
No minimum


S-2 Slope District
 
No minimum


S-3 Airport District
 
No minimum


S-4 Historic Buildings District
 
No minimum




 



(1994 Code, § 155.015)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 212, passed
8-31-1970; Ord. 234, passed 7-8-1972)



§ 155.021  ZONING MAP; AMENDMENTS TO; ANNEXATION OF LAND.



   (A)   (1)   The boundaries of the districts for the city are
shown on the Zoning District Map which is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter and which map is designated “Zoning
District Map of the City of Sparta”. The Zoning District Map and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon are part of this
chapter and have the same force and effect as if the map and all the
notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set
forth or described herein.



      (2)   The Zoning District Map shall be identified by the
signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of
the city under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the
Zoning District Map referred to in division (A)(1) of this section together
with the date of the adoption of this chapter and shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk.”



      (3)   No amendment to this chapter which involves matter
portrayed on the Zoning District Map shall become effective until after the
change and entry has been made on the Map.



   (B)   All land hereinafter annexed by the city shall be classified
as A-1 Agriculture until the classification is changed by amendment to this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.016)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.022  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any
of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, the rules in
the following divisions shall apply.



   (B)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines, the centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way
lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.



   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow the lot lines, township lines, section lines,
one-half-section lines, one-quarter-section lines and one-eighth-section
lines, the lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.



   (D)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the
centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, the district boundaries shall
be construed as being parallel thereto and at the distance therefrom as
indicated on the zoning district maps. If no distance is given, the dimension
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning district maps.



   (E)   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, the
boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of
the railroad line.



   (F)   Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or
other body of water, the boundary shall be the limit of the jurisdiction of
the city unless otherwise indicated.



(1994 Code, § 155.017)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.023  VACATED AREAS.



   Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway
or other similar area is vacated by proper authority, the districts adjoining
each side of the street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way or similar
area shall be extended automatically to the center of the vacation and all
area included in the vacation shall, then and thenceforth, be subject to all
appropriate regulations of the extended districts. In the event of a partial
vacation, the adjoining district or district nearest the portion vacated,
shall be extended automatically to include all the vacated area.



(1994 Code, § 155.018)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 155.035  A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   Within the A-1 Agricultural District, the regulations set forth in this
section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any A-1 Agricultural
District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the following
uses:



      (1)   Agriculture and agricultural buildings or structures;
provided that, no livestock is housed closer than 400 feet from any lot in
any R district;



      (2)   Any buildings or structures occupied by or used for
churches, Sunday schools, parish houses, public and parochial schools, public
libraries, convents, monasteries, lodges and fraternal and private club
buildings, museums and similar public cultural uses, located not less than 40
feet from any R district;



      (3)   Open air recreational use as parks and playgrounds;



      (4)   Essential services, as defined in § 155.004 of this
chapter and public service buildings or properties, except such uses as
storage yards, warehouses, garages or other uses customarily conducted as
gainful business; provided, any building is located not less than 40 feet
from any R district;



      (5)   Cemeteries;



      (6)   Existing railroad rights-of-way, not including
switching, storage, freight yards or sidings;



      (7)   Home occupations, as defined in § 155.004 of this
chapter;



      (8)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes
for a period not to exceed one year;



      (9)   One-family detached dwellings;



      (10)   Small community residence; provided:



         (a)   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.133 of this chapter;



         (b)   It is located not less than 600 feet from another
small community residence and not less than 1,320 feet from a large community
residence; and



         (c)   Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received.



      (11)   Animal sewage lagoon, commercial poultry facilities and
commercial feed facilities; provided, the uses shall be located not less than
800 feet from any lot in any R district;



      (12)   Sale of nursery and greenhouse products where
production or growth of products takes place on the premises;



      (13)   Country clubs, golf courses, swimming clubs and similar
recreational uses provided that any principal or accessory building in
connection therewith shall be located not less than 200 feet from any R
district;



      (14)   Billboards and sign boards subject to the following
restrictions.



         (a)   No billboard or sign board shall be located within
400 feet of any R district.



         (b)   No billboard or sign board shall be located along
any federal or state highway right-of-way within 100 feet of any other public
road right-of-way.



         (c)   No billboard or sign board shall contain more than
300 square feet of surface area nor be higher than 25 feet above the average
grade.



         (d)   No billboard or sign board shall be located within
500 feet of an exit or entrance to a controlled access route.



         (e)   Billboards or sign boards may have constant or
flashing illumination; provided that, any sign located in the direct line of
vision of any traffic-control signaling device shall not have contrasting or
flashing intermittent illumination of red, green or amber color. Where a sign
is illuminated by light reflected upon it, direct rays of light shall not
project upon any existing residential structure or any R district.



      (15)   Sanitary landfills, in accordance with other applicable
requirements and regulations; provided that, no landfill shall be operated
within 1,320 feet of any R district, but only upon application in accordance
with and after compliance with the procedure set forth in §§ 155.110
through 155.113 of this chapter;



      (16)   Extractive uses such as the excavation, removal,
stripping, surface mining or quarrying of topsoil, soil, earth, sand, rock,
gravel, clay, coal, minerals, ores or similar substances, or the surface
location of shafts, mineheads and similar facilities for the subsurface
removal of the substances; provided that, no such use shall be permitted
within one-half mile of the corporate limits of the city as they existed on
11-12-1976, and shall be permitted only upon application in accordance with
and after compliance with the procedures and requirements set forth in §§
155.110 through 155.113 of this chapter;



      (17)   Oil wells and the storage of crude oil; providing that,
no such operation shall be conducted within 400 feet of any residence and
1,320 feet of any R district;



      (18)   Accessory use or building, as defined in § 155.004 of
this chapter and as regulated by §§ 155.110 through 155.113 of this chapter
including buildings and structures accessory to agriculture uses including
roadside stands selling produce grown on the premises; provided that, the
stands are located not less than 50 feet from a street or highway
right-of-way; and



      (19)   Signs subject to the following limitations.



         (a)   Signs accessory to roadside stands shall be
limited to two per stand with no sign larger than ten square feet and set
back 20 feet from the right-of-way. The signs shall be less than 15 feet in
height and pertain to agricultural products offered for sale and
identification of the stand.



         (b)   Real estate sign of a temporary nature, not
exceeding two in number per lot nor larger than 12 square feet, set back 20
feet from any highway, street or road right-of-way.



         (c)   Small announcement or professional signs, not
exceeding four square feet in area; except that, an announcement sign or
bulletin board, not over 12 square feet in area, set back 20 feet from any
right-of-way may be erected in connection with any of the permitted principal
uses of a non-residential character.



         (d)   A sign or signs flat against the building
appertaining to a non-conforming use on the premises, not exceeding in the
aggregate 50 square feet in area, except as may be authorized by the Board of
Appeals.



   (B)   Height. There shall no restriction on the height of buildings
in agricultural districts.



   (C)   Lot size. No minimum lot area shall be required for
agricultural use.



      (1)   Every building to contain a one-family detached dwelling
use other than agricultural, except as otherwise provided herein, hereafter
erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 20,000 square feet
and a width at the established building line of not less than 100 feet,
except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter; and, provided further that,
any building to contain a one-family detached dwelling use may be erected or
constructed on a smaller lot of record.



      (2)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school
having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in a public elementary
school or public high school including religious instruction in parochial
schools, hereafter erected, shall conform to the following minimum standards:



         (a)   Elementary school: five acres, plus one additional
acre per 100 student design capacity in excess of 500 students;



         (b)   Junior high school: ten acres, plus one additional
acre per 100 student design capacity in excess of 1,000 students; and



         (c)   Senior high school: 15 acres, plus one additional
acre per 100 student design capacity in excess of 1,500 students.



   (D)   Yard areas.



      (1)   No minimum yard areas shall be required for agricultural
use, except a front yard requirement of 80 feet along state and federal
highways and a requirement of 60 feet along state aid highways and other
public roads. Every lot upon which a building to contain a one-family
detached dwelling use is constructed shall meet the same front yard
requirements of agricultural structures and buildings and shall have a side
yard on each side of not less than 15 feet.



      (2)   Side yards on each side of a building on a lot of record
which is less than 100 feet in width shall have a side yard of 12% of the
lot, but shall not be less than five feet.



      (3)   Corner lots shall meet the front yard requirements on
each street side of the lots.



      (4)   The lots shall have a rear yard of not less than 35 feet
or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is larger, but it need not
exceed 45 feet.



   (E)   Off-street parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.133 of
this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.030)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 276, passed
2-27-1978; Ord. 399, passed 4-22-1991)



RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS



§ 155.050  R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   Within the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District, the regulations set forth
in this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any R-1 One-Family
Dwelling District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the
following uses:



      (1)   One-family detached dwelling with a minimum floor area
of 2,500 square feet; provided, however, that, home occupations as defined in
§ 155.004 of this chapter shall not be conducted within the R-1 One-Family
Dwelling District and that modular homes as defined in § 155.004 shall not
be a permitted use within the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District;



      (2)   Accessory use or building, as defined in § 155.004 of
this chapter and as regulated by § 155.005 of this chapter;



      (3)   Off-street parking facilities, as required or permitted
by §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter;



      (4)    Private swimming pools appurtenant to a one-family
dwelling on the same lot, when they meet yard depth and width requirements
for principal buildings in the district in which they are located  and when
the swimming pool or the property on which it is located is adequately fenced
to prevent access of small children and meets all applicable health and
sanitary requirements; and



      (5)   Signs subject to the following limitations:



         (a)   A sign or sign board not exceeding eight square
feet in area, appertaining to the sale or lease of the premises or
trespassing thereon; and



         (b)   A name plate, not exceeding two square feet in
area.



   (B)   Height. The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as
follows: one-family detached dwellings: 30 feet, and not over two and
one-half stories, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter.



   (C)   Lot size. Every building, except as otherwise provided herein
hereafter, erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 20,000
square feet and a width at the established building line of not less than 100
feet, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter; and, provided further
that, any building to contain any of the uses permitted in this district may
be erected or constructed on a smaller lot of record.



   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with the building, structure or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a building is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 75 feet along federal
and state rights-of-way; 40 feet along all others. Where a lot has double
frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. The
required front yard shall be computed by measurement from the centerline of
the federal, state, street or other thoroughfare upon which the lot fronts.



      (2)   Side yard. On each lot upon which a building is
constructed, except as provided otherwise herein, there shall be a side yard
on each side of not less than 15 feet. Corner lots shall meet the front yard
requirements on the street side on which the building or structure to be
erected or enlarged shall front, and a side yard requirement of not less than
one-half the front yard requirement on the other street side.



      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 35 feet, or
20% of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is larger, but it need not
exceed 45 feet.



   (E)   Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings including accessory
buildings shall not cover more than 30% of the area of the lot.



   (F)   Off-street parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of
this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.040)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 212, passed
8-31-1970; Ord. 234, passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 97-02, passed 6-9-1997)



§ 155.051  R-2 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   Within the R-2 One-Family Dwelling District, the regulations set forth
in this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any R-2 One-Family
Dwelling District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the
following uses:



      (1)   One-family detached dwelling with a minimum floor area
of 1,400 square feet, including modular homes, as defined in § 155.004 of
this chapter;



      (2)   Modular homes, as defined in § 155.004 of this chapter;



      (3)   Small community residence; provided:



         (a)  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.133 of this chapter;



         (b)  It is located not less than 600 feet from another
small community residence and not less than 1,320 feet from a large community
residence; and



         (c)  Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received.



      (4)   Home occupations, as defined in § 155.004 of this
chapter;



      (5)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school
having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in a public elementary
school or public high school including religious instruction in parochial
schools;



      (6)   Churches and similar places of worship;



      (7)   Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be
occupied by not more than ten persons;



      (8)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes
for a period not to exceed one year;



      (9)   Accessory use or building, as defined in § 155.004 of
this chapter and as regulated by § 155.005 of this chapter;



      (10)   Off-street parking facilities, as required or permitted
by §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter;



      (11)   Private swimming pools appurtenant to a one-family
dwelling on the same lot, when they meet yard depth and width requirements
for principal buildings in the district in which they are located and when
the swimming pool or the property on which it is located is adequately fenced
to prevent access of small children and meets all applicable health and
sanitary requirements; and



      (12)   Signs subject to the following limitations:



         (a)  A sign or sign board not exceeding eight square feet
in area, appertaining to the sale or lease of the premises or trespassing
thereon;



         (b)  A name plate, not exceeding two square feet in area;
and



         (c)  A sign or bulletin board not exceeding 60 square feet
in area erected upon the premises of a church or other institution for the
purpose of displaying the name and activities or services therein provided.



   (B)   Height. The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as
follows:



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings of 30 feet, and not over
two and one-half stories, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter;
and



      (2)   Churches and similar places of worship 75 feet for
towers or steeples and not more than 45 feet for the principal building.



   (C)   Lot size.



      (1)   Every building, except as otherwise provided herein
hereafter, erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 12,000
square feet, and a width at the established building line of not less than 80
feet, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter and provided further
that any building to contain any of the uses permitted in this district may
be erected or constructed on a smaller lot of record.



      (2)   Churches and similar places of worship hereafter erected
or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than
one-half acre and a width at the building line of not less than 85 feet.



      (3)   For public and private schools, the same regulations
shall apply as required or permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District.



   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with the building, structure or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a building is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot has
double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a building is constructed,
except as otherwise provided herein, there shall be a side yard on each side
of not less than ten feet. Corner lots shall meet the front yard requirements
on the street side on which the building or structure to be erected or
enlarged shall front, and a side yard requirement of not less than one-half
the front yard requirement on the other street side.



         (b)   On lots upon which a church or similar place of
worship is constructed or extension made to an existing church or similar
place of worship, there shall be a side yard of lot less than 15 feet on each
side of the main structure.



      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet, or
20% of depth of lot, whichever is larger.



   (E)   Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings including accessory
building shall not cover more than 30% of the area of the lot.



   (F)   Parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.041)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 212, passed
8-31-1970; Ord. 234, passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 97-02, passed 6-9-1997)



§ 155.052  R-3 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   Within the R-3 One-Family Dwelling District, the regulations set forth
in this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any R-3 One-Family
Dwelling District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for a use
permitted in the R-2 One-Family Dwelling District; provided, every one-family
detached dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet.



   (B)   Height. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-2 One-Family Dwelling District.



   (C)   Lot size.



      (1)   Every building, except as otherwise provided herein
hereafter, erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 7,200
square feet and a width at the established building line of not less than 60
feet, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter; and, provided further
that, any building to contain any of the uses permitted in this district may
be erected or constructed on a smaller lot of record.



      (2)   Churches and similar places of worship hereafter erected
or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than
one-half acre and a width at the building line of not less than 85 feet.



      (3)   For public and private schools, the same regulations
shall apply as required or permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District.



   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with the building, structure or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a building is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot has
double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, on each lot
upon which a building is constructed, there shall be a side yard on each side
of not less than six feet or 10% of the width of the lot, whichever is
larger, but it need not exceed eight feet. Corner lots shall meet the front
yard requirements on the street side on which the building or structure to be
erected or enlarged shall front, and a side yard requirement of not less than
one-half the front yard requirement on the other street side.



         (b)   On lots upon which a church or similar place of
worship is constructed or extension made to an existing church or similar
place of worship, there shall be a side yard of not less than 15 feet of each
side of the main structure.



      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet, or
20% of depth of lot, whichever is larger.



   (E)   Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings including accessory
buildings shall not cover more than 30% of the area of the lot.



   (F)   Parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.042)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 212, passed
8-31-1970; Ord. 234, passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 97-02, passed 6-9-1997)



§ 155.053  R-4 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   Within the R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District, the regulations set
forth in this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any R-4 Multi-Family
Dwelling District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the
following uses:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the R-2 One-Family Dwelling
District provided every one-family detached dwelling shall have a minimum
floor area of 1,100 square feet;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings;



      (3)   Multiple dwellings not to exceed more than four dwelling
units or apartments per 18,000 square feet in a block. A BLOCK for the
purpose of establishing the density of multiple dwellings shall be a tract or
parcel of land platted or otherwise surveyed, and enclosed within the four
nearest intersecting streets, or otherwise bounded by a public park,
cemetery, railroad right-of-way or a corporate boundary line of the city.
Alleys shall not be considered boundaries for the purpose of determining the
area of a block hereunder;



      (4)   Boarding house; and



      (5)   Manufactured homes (Type A).



   (B)   Height. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-2 One-Family Dwelling District.



   (C)   Lot size.



      (1)   One-family dwelling. Every one-family dwelling except as
otherwise provided hereinafter erected shall be on a lot having an areas of
not less than 7,200 square feet, and a width at the established building line
of not less than 60 feet, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter;
and, provided further that, any one-family dwelling permitted in this
district may be erected or constructed on a smaller lot of record.



      (2)   Two-family dwellings. Every two-family dwelling
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of
not less than 7,200 square feet or 3,600 square feet per dwelling unit, and a
width at the building line of not less than 60 feet, except as provided in §
155.005 of this chapter.



      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings and row houses. Every building
hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multi-family dwelling shall
provide a lot area per dwelling unit of not less than 1,350 square feet and a
width at the building line of not less than 50 feet, except as provided in
subsequent sections of this chapter.



      (4)   Two- and multi-family dwellings. Where a lot of record
has less area or width than herein required for two-family dwellings,
multi-family dwellings, the lot may be used only for one-family dwelling
purposes or for any of the other non-dwelling uses permitted by this section.



      (5)   Churches, places of worship. Churches and similar places
of worship hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having
an area of not less than one-half acre and a width at the building line of
not less than 85 feet.



      (6)   Public, private schools. Public and private schools the
same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the A-1 Agricultural
District.



   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with the building, structure or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard. Each lot upon which a building is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 30 feet. Where a lot has
double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, on each lot
upon which a building is constructed, there shall be a side yard on each lot
of not less than six feet, or 10% of the width of the lot, whichever is
larger, but it need not exceed eight feet. Corner lots shall meet the front
yard requirements on the street side on which the building or structure to be
erected or enlarged shall front, and a side yard requirement of not less than
one-half the front yard requirement on the street side.



         (b)   On lots upon which a church or similar place of
worship is constructed or extension made to an existing church or similar
place of worship, there shall be a side yard of not less than 15 feet on each
side of the main structure.



      (3)   Rear yard. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet, or
20% of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller.



   (E)   Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings including accessory
buildings shall not cover more than 40% of the lot.



   (F)   Parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.043)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 212, passed
8-31-1970; Ord. 234, passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 380, passed 12-15-1988; Ord. 399,
passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 97-02, passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 99-09, passed 11-22-1999;
Ord. 15-08, passed 8-10-2015)



§ 155.054  R-5 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.



   Within the R-5 Multi-Family Dwelling District, the regulations set
forth in this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any R-5 Multi-Family
Dwelling District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the
following uses:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling
District; provided, every one-family detached dwelling shall have a minimum
floor area of 1,000 square feet;



      (2)   Mobile homes as defined herein; provided:



         (a)   The mobile home is owned by the owner of the real
estate upon which the same is to be located;



         (b)   The mobile home is placed on a permanent
foundation of concrete, mortared concrete block, mortared brick or upon piers
extending into the ground below the frost line (the frost line within the
city is hereby determined to be 30 inches);



         (c)   All wheels, tongue and hitch are removed and the
mobile home is skirted with a fire-resistant material; and



         (d)   The mobile home is secured with an over the top
tie-down and anchors capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of
4,800 pounds or as otherwise necessary for protection against high winds.



      (3)   Manufactured homes (Type B) as defined herein; provided:



         (a)   Such dwelling is owned by the owner of the real
estate upon which the same is located;



         (b)   The Type B manufactured home is placed on a
permanent foundation of concrete, mortared concrete block, mortared brick or
upon piers, extending into the ground below the frost line (the frost line
within the city is hereby determined to be 30 inches);



         (c)   All wheels and hitches are removed and the home is
skirted with a fire-resistant material; and



         (d)   The home is secured with an over the top tie-down
and anchors capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of 4,800 pounds
or as otherwise necessary for protection against high winds.



   (B)   Height. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District.



   (C)   Lot size. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District; provided, mobile homes
shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 7,200 square feet and a
width at the established building line of not less than 60 feet, except as
provided in § 155.005 of this chapter; and, provided further that, any
mobile home permitted in this district may be erected or located on a smaller
lot of record.



   (D)   Yard areas. The same regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the R-4 Multi-Family Dwelling District.



   (E)   Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings and mobile homes,
including accessory buildings, shall not cover more than 40% of the lot.



   (F)   Parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.044)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 322, passed
11-8-1982; Ord. 411, passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 97-02, passed 6-9-1997; Ord.
99-09, passed 11-22-1999; Ord. 15-08, passed 8-10-2015)



BUSINESS DISTRICTS REGULATIONS



§ 155.065  B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   Within the B-1 Central Business District, the regulations set forth in
this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any B-1 Central
Business District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the
following uses:



      (1)   Any use permitted in R-2 One-Family Dwelling District,
except one-family dwellings;



      (2)   Apartment houses or one-family dwelling units located on
the second floor of any two-story building;



      (3)   Amusement establishments: bowling alleys, dance halls
and other places of recreation when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building;



      (4)   Art, book, school supply, stationery stores and
newsstands;



      (5)   Automobile display, sales and service; auto accessory
store; used car lots; battery and tire stores;



      (6)   Bakery shop, including the baking and processing of food
products when prepared for retail use on the premises only;



      (7)   Barbershop, beauty parlor, massage or similar personal
service shops;



      (8)   Banks, financial institutions, savings and loan
associations;



      (9)   Bus passenger terminal;



      (10)   Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sales,
photography studio, art gallery or studio, including the developing of film
and pictures when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises;



      (11)   Clubs and fraternal organizations, catering
establishments;



      (12)   Drugstores, candy and ice cream store;



      (13)   Department stores, gift shops, dry good store,
haberdashery, shoe stores, variety stores and wearing apparel stores;



      (14)   Dyeing and dry-cleaning and pressing establishments,
when employing facilities for the cleaning and pressing of dry goods, and
when using carbon tetrachloride, perchloroethylene or other similar
non-flammable solvents approved by the Fire Department;



      (15)   Electrical appliance store and repair, but not
including appliance assembly or manufacturing;



      (16)   Farm implement display and sales room, feed and seed
store;



      (17)   Florist shop and conservatory for retail trade on
premises only;



      (18)   Food and fruit stores; meat markets;



      (19)   Frozen food lockers;



      (20)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



      (21)   Furniture store and interior decorating shops,
including upholstery and making of draperies, slip covers and other similar
articles, when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to
the main use;



      (22)   Launderette, laundromat or similar self-service laundry
or self-service dry-cleaning establishments;



      (23)   Hardware stores and plumbing showrooms without shop;



      (24)   Hobby stores and sporting goods store;



      (25)   Hotels, including dining and meeting rooms;



      (26)   Household appliance store and repair shops;



      (27)   Jewelry and leather goods store, and watch repair;



      (28)   Liquor store, package goods only;



      (29)   Medical clinics and laboratories;



      (30)   Messenger or telegraph service station;



      (31)   Newspaper publishing and general offices;



      (32)   Offices, business and professional, insurance, real
estate, office equipment sales and service, blueprinting and photostating
establishments;



      (33)   Off-street parking facilities in an open lot or a
covered building;



      (34)   Paint and wallpaper store;



      (35)   Printing shops not employing more than five persons;



      (36)   Post office;



      (37)   Public utility collection offices; telephone business
office and telephone exchange building;



      (38)   Restaurant, tea room, café when establishment is not
of the drive-in type where food is served to occupants remaining in a motor
vehicle;



      (39)   Service stations, public garages and other motor
vehicle services provided no major repair work is performed out of doors;
provided, all pumps, underground storage tanks, lubricating and other devices
are located at least 20 feet from any street right-of-way; provided, all
fuel, oil or similar substances are stored inside or underground; and,
provided, all automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar articles are
stored within a building;



      (40)   Signs advertising merchandise or services;



      (41)   Taverns subject to local municipal ordinances and other
applicable county ordinances and state laws;



      (42)   Tailor shops, custom dressmaking, millinery or shoe
repair when conducted for retail sales on the premises only;



      (43)   Theaters, indoor;



      (44)   Any accessory use or building customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses and as regulated by subsequent sections of this
chapter; and



      (45)   Any other similar type retail stores not specifically
permitted herein when authorized by the Board of Appeals.



   (B)   Height of building. The height of all buildings or structures
shall be no more than five stories or 55 feet in height.



   (C)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be constructed or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with the building.



      (1)   Front yard.



         (a)   No front yard shall be required when all frontage
between two intersecting streets lies within this district.



         (b)   However, when lots within this district are
adjacent to and adjoining lots in an R district, all of which front upon the
same street between two intersecting streets, there shall be established the
same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been established in
the abutting R district.



         (c)   Exception: when existing buildings located in this
district have already established a building line at the street line at a
depth less than required above, then all new buildings may conform to the
same building line, except for the first 50 feet of the B-1 District frontage
adjacent to the R district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback
of not less than ten feet.



      (2)   Side yard. No side yard is required except for a corner
lot which abuts upon an R district. There shall then be provided a side yard
equal to one-half the front yard required in the abutting R district, but in
no case less than ten feet. The same setback shall apply also if business
buildings front the intersecting street, commonly referred to as the side
streets.



      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than
20 feet; provided, however, that, not more than one, one-story accessory
building may be relocated thereon, except for the five feet adjacent and
parallel to the rear lot line for the following uses:



         (a)   Storage of motor vehicles;



         (b)   Unloading or loading of motor vehicles under roof
as provided in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter; or



         (c)   Storage of equipment or merchandise normally
carried in stock on the same lot with any retail service or business use.



   (D)   Off-street parking and loading facilities. Off-street parking
and loading facilities shall be provided as required in §§ 155.125 through
155.139 of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.055)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 234, passed
7-10-1972; Ord. 01-01, passed 1-22-2001; Ord. 05-02, passed 1-24-2005; Ord.
14-04, passed 5-12-2014)



§ 155.066  B-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   Within the B-2 Highway Business District, the regulations set forth in
this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any B-2 Highway
Business District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for the
following uses:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-1 Business District, except
one-family dwelling units;



      (2)   Automobile repair, major sales and service shops,
including automobile body repair and rebuilding, and painting of automobiles;



      (3)   Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical
conveyors, blowers and steam cleaning;



      (4)   Beverage, non-alcoholic, bottling and distributing;



      (5)   Bicycle and motorcycle sales, repair and rental;



      (6)   Boat showroom;



      (7)   Kennel;



      (8)   Motel;



      (9)   Pet shop or animal hospital when conducted wholly within
an enclosed building;



      (10)   Plumbing, heating and air conditioning, sheet metal and
roofing supply shops when conducted wholly within a building;



      (11)   Recreation places, including bowling alley, dance
halls, gymnasium, skating rink, archery range, miniature golf course or other
similar places of amusement or entertainment when operated for pecuniary
profit;



      (12)   Restaurant, non-drive-in, drive-in car service;



      (13)   Trailer sales or rental (house trailers) on an open lot
or within a building;



      (14)   Any other similar type retail stores not specifically
permitted herein when authorized by the Board of Appeals;



      (15)   All activities, except for automobile off-street
parking facilities and service stations as permitted or required in this B-2
District, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building; and



      (16)   Any accessory use or building customarily incidental to
the above permitted uses and as regulated by subsequent sections of this
chapter.



   (B)   Height. No building or structure shall exceed five stories or
55 feet in height, except as provided in § 155.005 of this chapter.



   (C)   Lot size. Every building hereafter erected, shall be on a lot
having an area of not less than 9,600 square feet and a width at the
established building line of not less than 80 feet, except as provided in
subsequent sections of this chapter.



   (D)   Yard areas. No building or structure shall be constructed or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with the building.



      (1)   Front yard.



         (a)   Each lot upon which a building is constructed
shall have a front yard of not less than 75 feet along all federal and state
rights-of-way; along all others 50 feet.



         (b)   The required front yard shall be computed by
measurement from the centerline of the federal, state street or other
thoroughfare upon which the lot fronts.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   No side yard is required, except for a lot which
abuts upon an R district, or upon an alley separating this district from an R
district.



         (b)   There shall then be provided a side yard equal to
one-half the front yard required in the abutting R district, but in no case
less than 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than
25 feet; provided, however, that, not more than one, one-story accessory
building may be relocated thereon, except for the five feet adjacent and
parallel to the rear lot line for the following uses:



         (a)   Storage of motor vehicles;



         (b)   Unloading or loading of motor vehicles under roof
as provided in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter; or



         (c)   Storage of equipment or merchandise normally
carried in stock on the same lot with any retail service or business use.



   (E)   Buffer area. On lots abutting an R district, there shall be
provided a privacy fence not less than six feet in height extending the
length of the lot adjoining the R district constructed of sufficient
materials so as to provide an adequate screening of the commercial activity
from the abutting R district.



   (F)   Off-street parking and loading facilities. Off-street parking
and loading facilities shall be provided as required in § 155.125 of this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.056)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 212, passed
8-31-1970; Ord. 234, passed 7-10-1972; Ord. 399, passed 4-22-1991; Ord.
2001-01, passed 1-22-2001)



INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS



§ 155.080  I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   Within the I-I Light Industrial District, the regulations set forth in
this section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses. A light industrial use is one which creates a
minimum amount of nuisance outside the plant and is conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings. Since most uses permitted in this district will be in
close proximity to residential districts, it is hereby declared that
performance standards shall be high, and that all manufacturing, processing
or assembly of materials and products must be carried on in a manner not
injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the
emission of odors, fumes or gases, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations or fire
hazards. Therefore, the following uses may be permitted provided there is
compliance with the performance standards established herein:



      (1)   Any use permitted in an A-1 Agricultural District,
except one-family dwelling use;



      (2)   Any use permitted in a business district (B-1 and B-2)
without restriction as to number of employees or type of operation; provided,
however, no apartment or dwelling units are permitted, except dwelling
accommodations as may be needed to house a caretaker or watchman employed on
the premises and his or her family;



      (3)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packing or
treatment of the products as candy, cosmetics, drugs, perfumes,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries and food products, except the rendering or
refining of fats and oils, fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar and
yeast;



      (4)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembly,
treatment or packaging of articles of merchandise from the following
previously prepared materials: aluminum; bond; cellophane; canvas; cloth;
cork; feather; felt; fiber; fur; glass; hair; horn; leather; paper; plastics;
precious or semi-precious metals or stones; shell; rubber; tin; tobacco; wood
(excluding saw mill); tars and paint not involving a boiling process;



      (5)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other
similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay, kilns fired
only by electricity or gas;



      (6)   Foundry casting, light-weight non-ferrous metal not
causing noxious fumes or odor; machine shop or other metal working shop;
excluding drop hammers and other noise-producing machine-operated tools;



      (7)   Any other building, use or service similar to the uses
herein listed in the type of services or goods sold, in the number of persons
or cars to be attracted to the premises, or in the effect upon adjacent areas
in more restricted use districts; and



      (8)   Adult uses as defined in § 155.004 of this chapter;
provided that:



         (a)   No adult use be located within 800 feet of any
property zoned for use for residences, churches, school, parks or other adult
use;



         (b)   No adult use be permitted to operate within 300
feet of the centerlines of S.R. 4 or S.R. 154, respectively; and



         (c)   All adult uses shall strictly comply with the
provisions of Ch. 115 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Conditions of use. The above permitted uses shall be subject
to the following:



      (1)   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall take place
without creating disturbing influences to the use and occupancy of adjoining
properties; and



      (2)   All business, production, servicing and processing shall
take place within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified.
All storage abutting any residential R district or street shall be screened
by a solid wall or fence at least six feet high, but in no ease lower than
the enclosed storage. However, open off-street loading facilities and open
off-street parking facilities for the storage of motor vehicles may be
unenclosed throughout the district, except for the screening of parking and
loading facilities as may be required.



   (C)   Height. No height limitations.



   (D)   Yard areas.



      (1)   Front yard. All buildings and structures shall have a
front yard depth of at least 25 feet. Building and structures placed on
corner lots shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. Front
yards abutting residential districts shall have front yard depths of 50 feet.



      (2)   Yard adjacent to residential districts. All buildings
and structures on lots adjacent to residential districts shall be located as
to provide 50 feet yard widths or rear yard depths adjacent to the
residential districts.



      (3)   Railroad siding frontage. No yards shall be required for
those portions of lots which front on railroad sidings.



   (E)   Performance standards. The following requirements shall apply.



      (1)   Noise. Objectionable sound shall be controlled so as not
to become a nuisance to adjacent properties.



      (2)   Smoke and particulate matter. The emission of smoke or
dusts by manufacturing plants in an amount sufficient to create a general
nuisance to adjoining properties shall be prohibited. Total emission of smoke
and particulate matter shall be limited to the standards adopted by the state
and any agency thereof, or as prescribed by any ordinance of the city.



      (3)   Odors. No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in
this district in such quantities as to be objectionable to an average
observer at any point on the boundary line of the premises or beyond.



      (4)   Noxious gases. Processes and operations of permitted
uses capable of dispersing gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere
must be hooded or otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of the toxic
gases or particulate matter shall be from a stack.



      (5)   Glare and heat. Operation producing intense light or
heat shall be performed within an enclosed building and not be visible beyond
any lot line bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.



      (6)   Vibrations. No uses shall be located and no equipment
shall be installed in such a way to produce intense, earth-shaking vibrations
which are noticeable at the property lines of the subject premises.



   (F)   Off-street parking and loading facilities. Off-street parking
and loading facilities shall be provided as required in §§ 155.125 through
155.139 of this chapter.



   (G)   Planting areas. Landscape development shall be required in
front yards (and side yards of corner lots) along all streets, with the
exception of approved entrances, wherever the industrial use abuts a
residential district.



(1994 Code, § 155.065)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 2003-09, passed
10-27-2003)



SPECIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 155.095  S-1 FLOODPLAIN AND DRAINAGEWAY DISTRICT.



   The S-1 Floodplain and Drainageway District is designed to meet the
needs of storm water channels to carry abnormal flows of water in time of
flood; to prevent encroachments into the district which will unduly increase
flood heights and damage; and to prevent the loss of life and excessive
damage to property in the area of greatest flood hazard. Within the S-1
Floodplain and Drainageway District, the regulations set forth in this
section shall apply.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Agriculture, including customary agricultural buildings,
structures, permanent agricultural dwellings, nurseries and greenhouses;
provided that, any greenhouse heating plant or any building or enclosure in
which animals are kept shall comply with the distance requirement in division
(B) below;



      (2)   Commercial poultry farms and feeding facilities,
kennels, riding stables and dairies; provided that, any building or enclosure
in which animals or fowl are kept shall comply with two times the distance
requirement in division (B) below;



      (3)   Outdoor advertising signs and billboards set back from
the established  right-of-way of any highway or thoroughfare at least as far
as the required front yard depth for a principal building, subject to
requirements of § 155.035(A)(13) and (A)(18) of this chapter;



      (4)   One-family detached dwellings;



      (5)   The following uses may be permitted in the district when
authorized by the Board of Appeals upon application in accordance with and
after compliance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter:



         (a)   Public parks, playgrounds and community centers;
private recreation areas and facilities, including country clubs, golf
courses, fishing lakes and boat docks;



         (b)   Baseball, football stadium or sports arena;
provided that, the location of any structure used for the purposes shall
comply with two times the distance requirements in division (B) below;



         (c)   Drive-in theaters and other similar commercial
recreation establishments, provided that these are located on premises
abutting on a highway or primary thoroughfare, and so as to comply with two
times the distance requirements in division (B) below;



         (d)   Outdoor rifle or skeet shooting ranges; on
premises so located as to comply with three times the distance requirement in
division (B) below, and which premises, in addition, are deemed suitable by
the Board of Appeals for the use, for reasons, among others, of topography,
screening by trees or other features, and also in consideration of the
present and potential use of adjacent properties;



         (e)   Equipment and materials storage yards, and junk
yards; provided, these are enclosed on all sides by a solid fence or wall not
less than eight feet high; petroleum or inflammable liquid storage; provided
further that, any of the foregoing uses shall be authorized only on premises
adjoining and within 1,000 feet of a railroad or a highway or primary
thoroughfare, and so located as to comply with three times the distance
requirement in division (B) below, and which premises, in addition, are
deemed suitable by the Board of Appeals for the intended use, for reasons,
among others, of topography, screening by trees or other features, and in
consideration of the present and potential use of adjacent properties;



         (f)   Sanitary landfill subject to requirements and
regulations set forth in § 155.035(A) of this chapter; and



         (g)   Any other use which, in the judgment of the Board
of Appeals will not, when located, constructed and operated as proposed, be
inconsistent with the purposes intended to be served by the provisions
prescribed in this section for the S-1 District among others, of protecting
human life, preventing material losses and reducing the cost to the public of
relief or rescue efforts occasioned by the unwise occupancy of areas subject
to floods; and which use, at the same time, will not impair the present or
potential use of adjacent properties.



      (6)   Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to
a permitted principal use in the S-1 District. Any other accessory use that
is determined by the Board of Appeals to be necessary and incidental to any
aforesaid permitted principal use and located on the same lot therewith.



   (B)   Required conditions. All uses, buildings or premises, for
which compliance with distance requirement in this division (B) is stipulated
in this subchapter, shall be a distance of at least 200 feet from any lot in
any R district, or any lot occupied by a dwelling or by any schools, church
or institution for human care.



   (C)   Height regulations. No non-agriculture principal structure
shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height, and no accessory
structure shall exceed one story or 15 feet in height, except as provided in
§ 155.005 of this chapter.



   (D)   Lot area, frontage and yard requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications in § 155.005 of this chapter:



 

Use
 
Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Front Yard Depth
 
Side Yard Width Each
 
Rear Yard Depth


Agricultural
 
Same as A-1 Agricultural District


Non-agricultural residences
 
20,000
 
100
 
60 ft.
 
15 ft.
 
35 ft.


Non-residential uses or structures other than agricultural
 
None
 
None
 
50 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
50 ft.



 



(1994 Code, § 155.075)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.096  S-2 SLOPE DISTRICT.



   The S-2 Slope District is designed to allow proper use of land having a
cross-slope which exceeds 12% and to prevent encroachment into the district
which will unduly increase storm water run-off and damage. Within the S-2
District, the regulations set forth in this section shall apply.



   (A)   Any slope area, the average cross-slope of which exceeds 18%,
shall be subject to a special use exception which shall be in conformity with
the land use plans, except agricultural dwellings, buildings and structures.



   (B)   Any slope area, the average cross-slope of which is less than
12% shall be considered suitable for any uses permitted in an S-1 Floodplain
and Drainageway District.



   (C)   Any slope area, the average cross-slope of which exceeds 12%,
shall be considered to be extremely rugged and the development of this
terrain shall be limited to compatible uses as follows:



      (1)   One-family detached dwelling use subject to lot size,
setback and yard requirements of the A-1 Agricultural District;



      (2)   Utility and pedestrian easements;



      (3)   Parks, playgrounds and general community open space; and



      (4)   Agricultural uses as limited and defined in §
155.095(A) of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.076)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.097  S-3 AIRPORT DISTRICT.



   In the S-3 Airport District, no building, structure, land or premises
shall be used and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected,
constructed, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following uses:



   (A)   Agricultural buildings or structures, one-family detached
dwellings subject to the lot size, setback and yard requirements of the A-1
Agricultural District and the height limitations set forth in the S-3 Airport
District;



   (B)   Aviation fields, airports, airport facilities, including
restaurants and motel, landing strips or landing areas, provided that the
following conditions have been met: permission of the respective owners, in
the form of easements or other suitable assignment to the owner of the
airport or landing strip, of air rights over all land in separate ownership
and within the approach zones of all runways or landing strips shall be
required. Copies of the easements or assignments of rights and an
aeronautical evaluation of the proposed facility by the Federal Aviation
Agency, as required by law shall be submitted to the Building Inspector
before a permit for establishing or enlarging a runway, landing strip or
landing area is authorized. Heliports may be permitted after an aeronautical
evaluation of the proposed facility by the Federal Aviation Agency, as
required by law, has been reviewed by the Building Inspector; and



   (C)   No open vacant, or unimproved land shall be used for any
purposes other than as provided in this section, and the use shall be further
subject to the zoning, building or other regulations adopted by any airport
authority organized under state law having jurisdiction over an S-3 Airport
District.



(1994 Code, § 155.077)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.098  S-4 HISTORICAL BUILDING DISTRICT.



   The S-4 Historic Building Districts are designed to preserve and
protect buildings, places and areas of historic and architectural interest
within the city and to prevent incompatible encroachments into this district.



   (A)   Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any S-4 Historic
Building District unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for a use
permitted in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.



   (B)   Height, lot, yard, coverage. The same regulations shall apply
to height, lot size, yard areas and percentage of lot coverage as required or
permitted in the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.



   (C)   Parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in §§ 155.125 through 155.139 of this chapter.



   (D)   Special considerations.



      (1)   Within this district, no building or structure shall
hereafter be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored unless and until the
application for the building permit shall have been approved as to exterior
architectural features which are subject to public view from a public street,
way or place by the Board of Appeals.



      (2)   No building within the historic district shall be razed,
without obtaining a permit approved by the Board of Appeals, and the Board of
Appeals shall be empowered to refuse a permit for any structure of the
architectural or historic interest, the removal of which, in the opinion of
the Board of Appeals, would be detrimental to public interest of the
municipality.



(1994 Code, § 155.078)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



SPECIAL USES



§ 155.110  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   The special exceptions listed in § 155.112, Figure 1, of this chapter
and their accessory buildings and uses may be permitted by the city as
indicated therein, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this
subchapter and the requirements listed in § 155.112, Figure 1, of this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.090)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.111  PROCEDURE; HEARING; FEE.



   (A)   Investigation.



      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit for a
special use exception by the Building Inspector, it shall be referred to the
city’s Planning Commission for investigation as to the manner in which the
proposed location and character of the special use exception will effect the
Land Use Plan and how the standards in § 155.112, Figure 1, of this chapter
are applied.



      (2)   The city’s Planning Commission shall report the
results of its study to the City Council within 30 days following the
city’s Planning Commission’s receipt of the application.



      (3)   A failure to submit the report within the time period
shall not prevent the city from further processing the application.



   (B)   Public hearing.



      (1)   Within 30 days of the receipt of an application for a
permit for a special use exception, the city shall cause a public hearing to
be held before the Board of Appeals in relation thereto after not more than
30-days’, nor less than 15-days’, notice thereof has been given in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.



      (2)   The hearing shall be held in the city and the notice
thereof shall contain the particular location for which the special use
exception is requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed
special use consists.



   (C)   Recommendations of Board.



      (1)   Within ten days following the hearing, the Board of
Appeals shall file a report of the hearing and its recommendations relative
to said application with the city. Upon an affirmative finding by the city
that:



         (a)   The proposed special use exception is to be
located in a district wherein the use may be permitted;



         (b)   The requirements set forth in § 155.112, Figure
1, of this chapter for the special use exception will be met; and



         (c)   The special use exception is consistent with the
spirit, purpose and intent of the Land Use Plan, will not substantially and
permanently injure the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will
serve the public convenience and welfare, and upon a favorable vote of four
of the five members of the City Council, the city shall order the Building
Inspector to issue a permit for the special use exception.



      (2)   The city, upon recommendation of the Board of Appeals,
may provide that the special use permit is issued pursuant to specific
conditions or requirements concerning the construction, location and
operation of the special use, including, but not limited to, provisions for
the protection of adjacent property, the expiration of the special use after
a specified period of time, or other requirements as set forth in § 155.112,
Figure 1, of this chapter or as shall be determined by the Board of Appeals
necessary to secure the general intent and purpose of this chapter, and to
reduce injury to the property in the neighborhood. A failure to comply with
these conditions or requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the
special use permit issued hereunder.



   (D)   Fee. A fee of $35 shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time
the application is filed, and an additional fee of $15 shall be paid to the
City Clerk for the publication of a public notice.



   (E)   Existing lawful uses.



      (1)   An existing lawful use at the time of adoption of this
chapter which is listed herein as a special use exception, and which is
located in a district in which the special use exception may be permitted,
shall not be required to apply for a permit as a special use exception.



      (2)   Any expansion of the special use exception involving the
enlargement of the buildings, structures and land area devoted to the use
shall be subject to the procedure described in this section.



   (F)   When nature involves more than one special use exception. If
the nature of the special use exception involves more than one of those
listed in § 155.112, Figure 1, of this chapter the applicant may apply for a
permit for the special use exception which is most closely related to the
primary use; provided that, the requirements of all related uses are met.



(1994 Code, § 155.091)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.112  TABLE OF SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



 

Figure 1: Special Use Exceptions and Requirements


Use
 
District(s) in Which Use May Be Permitted
 
Requirement Designation




Airport, heliport
 
A-1, S-3
 
b6, g, h2, j1, k1, l2, n2, i2, p, r1, s, t, u2, v, w


Artificial lakes of one or more acres
 
All districts
 
i1, j2, p, r1, u1, w


Bed and breakfast establishments
 
All districts
 
f2, k26, o, p, r1, t, u1, u6


Billboards
 
A-1, B-2, I-1
 
p


Crematory or cemetery
 
All R districts, I-1, A-1,
 
b11, c2, p, q, r1, v, w


Extractive uses such as the excavation, removal, stripping, surface mining,
or quarrying of topsoil, soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel, clay, coal,
minerals, ores or similar substances; or, the surface location of shafts,
mineheads and similar facilities for the subsurface removal of such substances
 
A-1, I-1
 
b16, e4, s, t, u4, w, z, 1-16, incl., aa, bb, cc, dd, ee


Fire station
 
All R districts, B-1, B-2
 
b4, c12, r1, s, t, v


Greenhouse, commercial
 
A-1, R-1, I-1, B-2
 
b4, c6, f2, h1, k7, m4, n1, r1, v, w


Hospital or sanatorium
 
A-1, all R districts
 
b7, c6, g, h5, j1, k9, l2, m5, n1, p, s, t, v


Industrial park
 
I-1
 
a1, b10, c7, d3, g, h3, j2, k10, l2, m6, n2, o, p, q, r1, s, t, v, w


Kindergarten or day nursery
 
A-1, B-2, all R districts
 
b3, c8, f3, h1, i3, j1, k12, r1, v


Large community residence
 
All districts
 
b14, c8, e5, f7, h1, k31, l3, u5


Library
 
All R districts, B-1
 
b6, c6, k29, l2, m1, r1, v


Other public buildings, City Hall, courthouse
 
B-1
 
b6, c6, h1, k30, m1, r1, s, t


Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise
 
S-1, S-2
 
l2, n1, p, r2, s, t, v, w,


Outdoor theater
 
B-2, I-1, A-1
 
c7, i6, k11, p, r1, s, t, v, w


Power transmission line
 
All districts
 
p


Practice golf-diving range
 
A-1, I-1, S-1, B-2
 
c7, i7, j3, k16, l2, p, r1, v


Private recreational development
 
All R districts, S-1, S-2, A-1, B-2
 
c4, g, h1, j3, k2, l2, p, r1, v, w


Produce or stockyard terminal, wholesale
 
A-1, B-2 I-1
 
b10, c7, d3, e, h1, i8, j11, k11, l4, m3, n2, p, r1, s, t, v, w


Public or commercial sewage or garbage disposal plant
 
I-1, S-1
 
b11, c11, e, k19, p,  r1, u1, v, w


Public or employee off-street parking areas
 
All districts
 
b2, p, r1, s, t, v, x, y


Public park or public recreational facilities
 
All districts
 
c4, g, h1, j2, k21, l2, p, t, v, w


Public utility substation or exchange, including telephone exchange
 
All districts
 
c1, g, j4, k18, p, r1, v


Radio of television tower
 
A-1, I-1, S-1
 
k19, p, r1, v


Railroad right-of-way and uses essential to railroad operations
 
All districts
 
h1, k20, r1, v


Riding stable
 
A-1, R-1, I-1
 
b5, c10, h1, j1, k21, m1, r1, v, w


Service stations
 
A-1, B-1, I-1
 
a1, b4, e, r2, s, t


Shelter care homes and private nursing home
 
A-1, All R districts
 
b6, c1, g, h4, j3, k9, l1, m5, n4, p, s, t, v


Shopping center
 
B-2
 
a2, b7, g, j1, k23, l3, m3, n1, o, p, s, t, u1, v


Storage and distribution facilities, inflammable liquids and gases, chemicals
and liquid fertilizers
 
A-1, B-1, I-1
 
a1, b6, e, r1, s, t


Trailer or mobile home court or park
 
B-2, A-1
 
b8, p, u3


Truck freight terminal
 
B-2, I-1
 
c1, e, j1, k25, l4, n2, p, r1, s, t, v, w




 



FIGURE 1: REQUIREMENTS



NOTES TO TABLE:



Use of * symbol in the figure indicates that the requirements of the district
apply to the district where located.



   (a)   Classification of use permitted:



      (1)   Light industrial; and



      (2)   Local business.



   (b)   Minimum lot area:



      (1)   *



      (2)   1,500 sq. ft.



      (3)   110 sq. ft. per child.



      (4)   25,000 sq. ft



      (5)   20,000 sq. ft. plus 5,000 sq. ft. per horse over four
horses.



      (6)   One acre.



      (7)   5 acres.



      (8)   5 acres including 2,100 sq. ft. per mobile home stand.



      (9)   6 acres.



      (10)   20 acres.



      (11)   40 acres.



      (12)   80 acres.



      (13)   320 acres.



      (14)   Two times requirement for one-family dwelling.



      (15)   2 acres.



      (16)   Extractive uses:



         (i)   Surface mining of coal - 120 acres.



         (ii)   Quarrying of rock - 40 acres.



         (iii)   Surface location of shafts, mineheads and
similar facilities for the subsurface removal of coal, and the like — 20
acres.



   (c)   Minimum yards — feet. Note: All required front yards shall
be computed by measurement from the centerline of he federal or state highway
or other thoroughfare upon which the lot fronts.



         Front   Side, each   Rear



      (1)     *   *   *



      (2)     *   50   50



      (3)     *   10   30



      (4)     *   40   40



      (5)     *   --   --



      (6)     100   40   40



      (7)     100   Abutting    *



            residential =



            75, abutting



            other uses = 35



      (8)     *   20   *



      (9)   150   150   150



      (10)   100   100   100



      (11)   300   300   300



      (12)   40   25   35



   (d)   Building setback from centerline of interior road.



      (1)   40 feet.



      (2)   50 feet.



      (3)   85 feet.



   (e)   Use permitted not closer to a residential use than:



      (1)   300 feet.



      (2)   500 feet.



      (3)   1,320 feet.



      (4)   2,640 feet.



      (5)   No residence shall be located less than 1,320 feet from
a small or a large community residence, provided however that this spacing
requirement may be waived if the City Council finds that the cumulative
effect of the uses would not alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional setting, and by its
operation, would not create an adverse effect on surrounding properties.



   (f)   Minimum gross floor area of principal buildings, (square feet).



      (1)   *



      (2)   Over 1,000.



      (3)   Determined by number of children to be accommodated.



      (4)   400.



      (5)   Two times single-family dwelling.



      (6)   672.



      (7)   Two times single family dwelling plus 120 square feet
for each disabled person to be accommodated.



   (g)   Plan of landscape development to be submitted with application.



   (h)   Maximum height of structure (feet).



      (1)   *



      (2)   As required by appropriate state or federal agency.



      (3)   Same as light industrial.



      (4)   45.



      (5)   70.



      (6)   25.



   (i)   Fence.



      (1)   6-foot wire mesh where accessible to the public.



      (2)   6-foot wire mesh when located at ground level.



      (3)   4-foot wire mesh around play area.



      (4)   Solid wall or solid painted fence eight feet high.



      (5)   4-foot wire mesh abutting residential use.



      (6)   Painted board fence eight feet high.



      (7)   Adequate to protect abutting use.



      (8)   6-foot wire mesh.



      (9)   6-foot solid painted for refuse dump.



      (10) 6-foot wire mesh abutting residential use.



   (j)   Screen planting where abutting residential use. (Adequate
planting that will produce tight screen.)



      (1)   6-foot height by 3-foot width, minimum.



      (2)   25-foot abutting residential district or use.



      (3)   8-foot height by a-foot width, minimum.



      (4)   Adequate to screen power substation from street view.



      (5)   7-foot high along streets for refuse dump.



   (k)   Parking spaces.



      (1)   1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 4 seats in waiting room.



      (2)   1 per 2 customers or members.



      (3)   1 per 2 employees plus 3 per doctor.



      (4)   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 6 students.



      (5)   30.



      (6)   1 per 3 employees per shift.



      (7)   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 125 sq. ft., of sales area.



      (8)   1 additional.



      (9)   1 per 4 beds plus 1 per doctor plus 1 per 8 employees
plus 1 per hospital vehicle.



      (10)   1 per 2 employees on largest shift.



      (11)   1 per 2 employees.



      (12)   1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 5 children to be
accommodated.



      (13)   1 per 2 employees plus 1 per mobile home stand.



      (14)   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 500 sq. ft. of use area.



      (15)   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 10 inmates at estimated
capacity.



      (16)   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per driving tee.



      (17)   1 per camp site and 1 per cabin.



      (18)   Telephone exchange - 1 per employee.



      (19)   1 per employee per shift.



      (20)   1 per 2 employees where headquartered.



      (21)   1 per 5,000 square feet.



      (22)   One.



      (23)   1 per 60 sq. ft. of sales area.



      (24)   3 per 4 employees plus 1 per 4 seats.



      (25)   1 per 2 employees plus 4 for customers.



      (26)   1 per employee plus 1 per sleeping accommodation.



      (27)   Two.



      (28)   1 per employee plus 1 for each 6 seats in main
auditorium.



      (29)   1 per 30 sq. ft. of use area.



      (30)   1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 150 sq. ft.



      (31)   One per supervisory employee plus 1 per 2 disabled
persons at estimated capacity.



   (l)   Distance of parking area from residential use. (Feet)



      (1)   10.



      (2)   25.



      (3)   50.



      (4)   100.



      (5)   300.



   (m)   Number of loading and unloading berths. (Should not face on
bordering highway.)



      (1)   1.



      (2)   2.



      (3)   Per development plan.



      (4)   15,000 sq. ft. - 1; Over 15,000 ft. - 2.



      (5)   Up to 200 beds - 1; 200 to 500 beds - 2; over 500 beds.



      (6)   Per figure 6.



   (n)   Distance  of  loading  and  unloading berth from
residential use. (Feet)



      (1)   50.



      (2)   100.



      (3)   300.



      (4)   25.



   (o)   Plat approved by the Commission to be submitted with
application.



   (p)   Development plan to be submitted with application.



   (q)   Covenant by owners to perpetuate maintenance and approve
future improvements.



   (r)   Maximum number of principal entrance from major thoroughfare.



      (1)   1.



      (2)   2.



   (s)   Acceptable relationship to major thoroughfare.



   (t)   Thoroughfares must be adequate to carry additional traffic
engendered by use.



   (u)   Other authority approval required.



      (1)   State Board of Health.



      (2)   Aeronautics Commission.



      (3)   City Trailer Coach Park Ordinance.



      (4)   Department of Mines and Minerals.



      (5)   Each community residence shall be eligible or have
obtained a state license or certification, or the sponsoring agency shall be
duly licensed or certified by the state; and, prior to admitting residents,
the operator of the community residence shall demonstrate that the dwelling
will comply with all applicable licensing and code standards.



         (i)   Applicant shall submit a statement of the exact
nature of the community residence, the qualifications of the agency that will
operate the community residence, the number and type of personnel who will be
employed, and the number and nature of the residents who will live in the
community residence.



         (ii)   The community residence shall, to the extent
possible, conform to the type and outward appearances of the residences in
the area in which it is located.



         (iii)   Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received.



      (6)   Compliance with any and all provisions otherwise set
forth by local ordinance regulating operation or use.



   (v)   Outdoor artificial lighting should be approved by the
Commission.



   (w)   Disposal of liquid and other wastes should meet the approval
of the pertinent health authorities.



   (x)   No sales, dead storage, repair work or dismantling on the lot.



   (y)   Except for approved exits and entrances, a masonry wall 4-feet
in height and 6-inches thick erected at required front line of building and
may be required along boundaries of parking area as determined by the
Commission for the protection of residentially zoned or used property.



   (z)   Blasting.



      (1)   No blast or explosion shall be set off by applicant
within one-half mile of the corporate limits of the city as they were on
11-12-1976.



      (2)   No explosives will be stored in permanent magazines
within one mile of the city limits as of 11-12-1976. EXPLOSIVES shall be
defined for the purpose of this chapter as defined under an “Act regulating
the manufacture, possession, storage, transportation, use, sale or gift of
explosives”, approved 7-12-1939, as amended, and the regulations issued
pursuant thereto (i.e., 225 ILCS 210/1001 et seq.). POUNDS OF EXPLOSIVES as
used herein shall mean the equivalent of “pounds of TNT”.



      (3)   No explosion shall be detonated in the interval
commencing at sunset and ending at sunrise except as otherwise permitted by
the state’s Surface Coal and Mining Land Conservation Reclamation Act
effective 6-1-1980 (225 ILCS 720/1.01 et seq.), as now in force or as
hereafter may be amended, or regulations issued pursuant thereto (state’s
Surface/Mining Act and Regulations).



      (4)   No explosion will be detonated on the surface of the
ground unless otherwise authorized by the state’s Surface/Mining Act and
Regulations.



      (5)   All explosions will be detonated in accordance with the
Nonel Blasting System or a system similar or superior in operation and effect
as to noise control or particle displacement or ground vibration.



      (6)   If primacord is used, the same shall be buried to a
depth of not less than six inches.



      (7)   No explosion shall be detonated when a significant
temperature inversion exists at the site of the explosion. Permittee may rely
on the advice of the U.S. Weather Bureau in St. Louis as to the existence of
a temperature inversion and its severity.



      (8)   Except in areas of the territory covered by the permit
as the city may specify, no explosion shall be detonated during any period
when the wind velocity at the site of the explosion is constantly above 15
mph and in the direction of the city.



      (9)   No more than 1,300 pounds of explosives shall be
detonated in any one hole. Where the total consolidated overburden is 20 feet
or less, no more than 250 pounds of explosives per delay shall be detonated
in any one hole.



      (10)   No explosion shall be detonated in a hole drilled
vertically from the surface unless instability of overburden, or governmental
regulations require it.



      (11)   No explosion shall be detonated within 8 milliseconds
of another (whether in the same hole or more than one hole), and no explosive
charge per delayed period (amount of explosives expressed in pounds detonated
within 8 milliseconds of one another) shall exceed 1,300 pounds of
explosives. When the total consolidated overburden is 20 feet or less, no
explosive charge shall exceed 250 pounds of explosives per delay in any one
hole.



      (12)   No explosion shall be detonated within the area covered
by the special use which will result in a maximum peak particle velocity of
ground movement in any direction in excess of two-tenths inches per second at
any point in the present city limits as of November 12, 1976. Upon proper
documentation of the average consolidated overburden and/or the average cap
rock limestone thickness (all layers of piasa limestone 30 feet above the
coal seam) per two-thirds of each 750 feet of shot length the following per
second peak particle velocity of ground movement in all directions shall be
permitted:



 

Overburden
 
 
Cap Rock Thickness
 
Peak Particle Velocity
(inches per second)


Over 40 feet, but less than 45 feet
 
and/or
 
7 feet, but less than 8 feet
 
0.25


Over 45 feet, but less than 50 feet
 
and/or
 
8 feet, but less than 9 feet
 
0.30


Over 50 feet
 
and/or
 
Over 9 feet
 
0.40



 



      Provided if more than four claims for damages during any 6-month
period are filed pursuant to Paragraph (bb) of this Figure 1, Special Use
Exceptions and Requirements, the permitted maximum peak particle velocity of
ground movement shall revert to two-tenths inches per second peak particle
velocity of ground movement.



      (13)   Permittee, in connection with its blasting operations,
shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. If
blasting schedules in respect of proposed detonations in the area covered by
the special use are required by any law or regulation to be published in a
newspaper, that newspaper shall be the Sparta News-Plaindealer.



      (14)   Permittee shall keep accurate records of the time and
location of all explosions set off by it in the area covered by the permit as
well as the type and amount of explosive used for each hole, the size of each
charge and the delay between charges and shall furnish copies of all data to
the City Clerk monthly. If permittee is authorized to exceed two-tenths
inches per second peak particle velocity of ground movement pursuant to
subdivision (13) hereof, and if requested by the city, permittee shall
furnish the data to the City Clerk weekly.



      (15)   Permittee will, at its own expense, cause the peak
particle velocity of ground movement occasioned by its extractive use
activities covered by this special use to be constantly monitored by
appropriate measuring devices to be selected by a qualified engineering firm
acceptable to the city which will record the peak particle velocity of ground
movement. The devices shall have a minimum operating range of zero to seven
inches per second peak particle velocity, be designed for continuous
recording of peak velocities of vibrations and capable of detecting ground
movement in three directions (one vertical and two horizontal). In addition,
permittee shall engage, at its own expense, the services of an engineering
firm acceptable to the city for interpreting and reporting the data supplied
by said measuring devices. The firm shall furnish to the City Clerk, free of
cost, a report based on its interpretations of the data collected by the
measuring devices, which report shall show the date, time and peak particle
velocity of each ground movement which shall reasonably appear to have been
caused by the blasting activities of permittee. Whenever permittee is
required to limit its blasting activities to a maximum two-tenths inches per
second peak particle velocity of ground movement, the measuring devices shall
be monitored weekly by the engineering firm and the reports shall be
furnished monthly; whenever permittee is authorized to exceed two-tenths
inches per second peak particle velocity of ground movement, and if requested
by the city, the measuring devices shall be monitored twice a week by said
engineers and the reports shall be furnished weekly. Provided, however, the
firm shall immediately report, free of cost, to the City Clerk any data
received from the measuring devices indicating an excess of the peak particle
velocity per second ground movement over that permitted pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision (13), paragraph (z), of this Figure 1, Special Use
Exceptions and Requirements. Copies of the reports shall, upon request, be
furnished to permittee and to the Arbitration Board (free of cost). While and
so long as permittee is conducting blasting operations within the one and
one-half miles of the city limits as of November 12, 1976, 4 devices shall be
required. While permittee is not conducting blasting operations within the
distance, only 2 devices shall be required. The sites for the location of the
measuring devices shall be selected by the engineering firm after
consultation with the city. In the event personnel from the firm are called
upon by the Arbitration Board to testify at any hearing before it, the fees
and expenses of the personnel for testifying shall be paid by permittee.
Though the firm shall enter into a contract with permittee for providing the
services herein mentioned, and permittee shall bear all of the firm’s
expenses, it is understood that the firm shall be operating primarily for the
benefit of the city for the purposes of enforcing this special use permit. No
failure to measure, failure to have measurements interpreted, or failure to
deliver measurements or interpretations shall be deemed to be a breach of
this special use where the failure was caused in whole or in part by
malfunction or misfunction of the devices, by any act or occurrence beyond
the control of permittee, or by any force majeure. In the event four
measuring devices of peak particle velocity of ground movement are in place
and only one device shows a violation of this provision, upon certification
by the engineering firm that the measurement is the result of a
malfunctioning of the measuring device or is aberrant or a scientifically
impossible phenomenon, then the measurement may be disregarded and this
provision shall not be deemed violated.



   (aa)   Pre-inspection. Permittee will inspect and photograph the
structures within the corporate limits of the city as shall be determined by
the Board of Appeals, unless permission to do so is refused by the owner.
Permittee need not inspect and photograph the structures once permission has
been refused. No extractive use operation may be commenced prior to
completion of the mandatory inspections unless otherwise permitted by the
Board of Appeals for good cause shown. Permittee may but need not inspect any
structures lying elsewhere in the corporate limits of the city and Sparta
area if the owners thereof request it. If  the city or the owner thereof
shall serve notice or request in writing, permittee shall inspect and
photograph any new structure built during the period the special use permit
is in force within the area designated by the Board of Appeals as requiring
mandatory inspection. Failure to notify by the city or failure to so request
by the owner shall in respect of the structure be the equivalent of refusing
permission to inspect for the purposes of this section. Permittee will
furnish copies of its inspections and reports, together with photographs
taken by it to the City Clerk. The materials shall not be available for
public inspection, but shall be made available to the owner involved, or his
or her authorized representative.



   (bb)   Arbitration Board. Promptly after issuance of a special use
permit to permittee, an Arbitration Board shall be constituted for the
purpose of hearing and determining claims, if any, for damages to land or
improvements there on, in or near the city allegedly caused by permittee’s
extractive use operations, in the amount of $10,000 or less, which have not
been settled by the parties concerned. For each claim that is filed, the city
shall appoint one Arbitrator, permittee shall appoint one Arbitrator and the
two so appointed shall appoint a third. The city and permittee shall have the
right at any time to remove the Arbitrator appointed by it for any reason, or
no reason, and to name a successor. If through death, resignation or removal
of an Arbitrator originally appointed by the city or permittee hereto, a
vacancy exists, it shall be filled by the entity whose Arbitrator he was,
within three weeks of the vacancy. A letter from the appointing entity to the
Arbitrator in question and the Board removing an Arbitrator or appointing a
successor shall be sufficient. If no appointment is made within three weeks
of the occurrence of the vacancy, the remaining Arbitrators shall act as
Arbitrators until the appointment of the successor Arbitrator by the party in
question. The two Arbitrators appointed by the city and permittee shall have
the power, acting jointly, to remove the third Arbitrator at any time for any
reason or no reason, the duty to appoint a successor Arbitrator at any time
for any reason or no reason, the duty to appoint a successor Arbitrator at
any time for any reason or no reason, the duty to appoint a successor
Arbitrator promptly after the removal, and the power and duty to fill a
vacancy on the Board created by the death or resignation of the other
Arbitrator. If the city’s and permittee’s Arbitrators fail to appoint a
successor Arbitrator within 3 weeks after a vacancy arises which they are
under a duty to fill, the third Arbitrator shall be then appointed by the
person then serving as Senior United District Court Judge for the Southern
District of Illinois. An Arbitrator may resign by notifying the other
Arbitrators, the city and permittee, in writing. The effective date of the
resignation shall be as stated in the letter of resignation.



      The Arbitration Board is established in order to assure an
economical and convenient forum for claims for property damage to avoid
employment of an attorney and use of the court system. All persons having
claims against permittee in respect to its operations under a special use
exception permit may use the Arbitration Board, or the court system, at his
or her option. If a claim is presented to the Arbitration Board, the decision
of the Board rendered in respect thereto shall be final and binding on the
claimant or claimants and permittee and may thereafter be enforced as
provided by law. A decision signed by any two Arbitrators shall be the
decision of the Board. Permittee shall pay all claims allowed within 30 days
after the decision of the Board is received by permittee.



      The city and permittee shall compensate its own Arbitrator in the
manner and amount as may be agreeable to the party and its Arbitrator. The
third Arbitrator shall be compensated at a rate established by the first two
Arbitrators or agreed by the city and permittee. The compensation of the
third Arbitrator, and the net expenses, if any, of the Board shall be equally
shared and jointly paid by permittee and the city. Expenses of the Board
shall be approved by at least two Arbitrators.



      The Board shall propose its own procedural rules in advance of
the first hearing and shall cause them to be printed or typed and made
available for public review and comment prior to adoption. The Board shall
make them available to persons appearing before it. The proceedings shall be
informal so that legal counsel shall not be necessary. All witnesses shall
testify under oath. The technical rules of evidence shall not apply but
hearsay evidence shall be only given the weight it deserves. Decisions should
be rendered in writing and ordinarily within two weeks of the conclusion of
the hearing. All requests for arbitration shall be filed, in duplicate, with
the City Clerk who shall transmit the same to the Board and permittee. No
request shall be heard or entertained unless the request to arbitrate is
reduced in writing, signed by the claimants and accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $10 payable to the Arbitration Board. If the claimant is
successful, the filing fee shall be recoverable as part of his or her
damages. All fees shall be used to defray the expenses of the Board. Any
surplus remaining after the Board ceases to exist shall be paid to the city
for its general purposes.



      The Board, in connection with the determination of any claim,
shall consider the pre-extractive use inspection report, if any, the data
submitted by permittee as to its blasting activities, the measurements
interpretation and testimony, if any, of the engineers monitoring the
blasting activities, and other evidence and testimony as may be submitted by
the claimant and permittee which, in the opinion of the Board, is relevant
and material. Once the claimant has proved to the satisfaction of the Board
that damage to his or her structures occurred subsequent to the date
permittee first set off an explosion in the area covered by the permit,
permittee shall have the burden of showing that the damage was not caused by
permittee, but was attributable to other causes, or to structural defects.
The preceding sentence shall not apply and permittee shall have no burden
where permission to inspect was refused. All awards for damages shall be
expressed in dollars and shall be that sum not to exceed $10,000 which the
Board feels will fairly enable the claimant to repair the damage shown so
that the structure will, after the repair, be in the same condition it was in
immediately prior to the occurrence of the damage. Claimant and permittee
shall each be entitled to submit as evidence bids received from reputable
contractors to repair the damage.



      Any person making a claim to the Board shall, by so doing,
authorize and permit permittee, and any contractor designated by it, to enter
on the property for the purpose of inspecting the same and ascertaining the
damage, if any. If the claimant and permittee cannot agree on a date and time
for the inspection and examination, the Board shall set it. If a claimant
fails or refuses to let either permittee or its contractors inspect or
examine the damage, the Board shall dismiss the claim. No claim so dismissed
shall be refiled.



      The Board shall maintain its office at the City Hall, or some
other place in the city, convenient to it. The Board shall wind up its
affairs and cease to exist 6 months after certification by permittee to the
city that it has completed its extractive use activities in the area covered
by the permit.



   (cc)   Noise. Permittee will comply with state statutes relating to
excessive noise (currently 415 ILCS 5/23 through 25) and the lawful
regulations and standards promulgated thereunder.



   (dd)   Reclamation. Permittee shall file with the City Clerk all
reclamation plans involving the area in question that are filed with the
Department of Mines and Minerals of the state, or other state or Federal
agency. All lands disturbed by extractive use to the extent required by the
city, shall be reclaimed to row crop standards according to the state’s
Surface Coal and Mining Land Conservation Reclamation Act effective 6-1-1980
(225 ILCS 720/1.01 et seq.) or as hereafter may be amended, and the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Act, and as in force at the time of
issuance of the permit. However, if more strenuous standards are imposed by
subsequent amendments to the Act, or subsequently adopted rules and
regulations by either the state or the United States, these more stringent
rules and regulations shall apply. The land shall be graded to a rolling
topography having no more than 5% grade, and transversable by machines
necessary for maintenance in accordance with the planned use of row crop
agricultural purposes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, permittee shall not be
required to reclaim a greater area to row crop standards than required by the
state if and to the extent that an insufficient amount of topsoil is
available to do so from within the area disturbed in the extractive use
process. Upon cessation of the extractive use activities in the affected
area, drainage shall be immediately restored and returned to provide for the
original natural drainage or its equivalent, or as permitted by the city.



      (1)   No slurry or refuse from the preparation plant or other
extractive use operation shall be stored or deposited within one and
one-half-mile zone of the present city limits as existing 11-12-1976.



      (2)   Permittee shall reclaim affected lands as provided
herein as contemporaneously as practical. Unless otherwise provided in the
permit, reclamation shall be completed within one year of cessation of
permittee’s extractive use activities under the permit.



      (3)   Overburden and waste material replaced in the area of
extractive use operation by backfilling shall be compacted where necessary to
ensure stability, or to prevent leakage of toxic materials, and shall be
performed by grading or other means so as to cover acid forming or other
toxic materials and eliminate spoil piles. The city shall be entitled at
reasonable times and on notice to permittee to enter upon permittee’s
property for the purpose of observing and inspecting permittee’s operations
under the permit. The city shall promptly notify permittee of any failure to
follow the terms of the permit. Permittee shall promptly comply with the
directives unless it reasonably believes the city is mistaken, in which case
if permittee refuses to comply, the city may in the appropriate case exercise
its rights under § 155.113 of this chapter.



   (ee)   Permittee shall submit a proposed plan of the extractive use
operation for the area covered by the special use permit, which plan shall
show in detail all facilities and appurtenances to be placed upon the
premises; detail the manner and method of operations in the area of the
premises to be occupied or affected thereby; the existing gradients of the
premises and how the same will be affected during the progress of operations
to and including the ending thereof, showing existing drains, drainageways,
sewers, utilities, streets, highways and similar facilities upon and nearby
the premises, and the method and manner of protecting them from adverse
effects from the proposed use. The proposed extractive use plan shall be
accompanied by a written report of someone expert, experienced and
knowledgeable in the subject matter describing the proposed operations in
detail, and the manner and method of conducting the same, which report shall
describe and set forth the effect the operation shall have upon the premises
and lands and uses in the vicinity thereof.



   (ff)   Alternative reclamation and post mining land use. An
alternative reclamation plan and post mining land use other than that
provided for in division (dd) may be presented by the permittee and shall be
approved by the city upon the establishment by the permittee of full
compliance with all criteria and standards required by the state’s
Department of Mines and Minerals pursuant to the state’s Surface Coal
Mining Land Conservation and Reclamation Act effective 6-1-1980, as amended,
(225 ILCS 720/1.01 et seq.) and all applicable rules and regulations issued
by the Department pursuant thereto.



(1994 Code, § 155.092)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 276, passed
2-27-1978; Ord. 285, passed 12-8-1986; Ord. 427, passed 11-23-1992; Ord.
2017-05, passed 10-23-2017)



§ 155.113  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city, upon a favorable vote of four of the five members of
the City Council, may revoke a permit issued under this subchapter if the
special use exception, for which the permit is issued, is not commenced
within six months of the issuance of the permit, if the special use exception
is not conducted or developed in accordance with the plans submitted at the
time the special use permit is granted, or if any condition or requirement
provided in this subchapter, or as set forth in the permit, is not complied
with.



   (B)   However, no permit shall be revoked, modified or suspended
without a prior public hearing thereon before the Board of Appeals, after due
notice thereof to the holder of the special use exception permit.



   (C)   Notice of the hearing shall be given to the permit holder not
more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days, prior to the date thereof, by
serving a written notice of the time, place and date of hearing on the holder
by mailing the same to the holder’s address as stated in the application
for the special use permit. The notice shall also state with particularity
the condition or requirement of the special use exception permit which has
not complied with, or shall otherwise describe the reasons for which
consideration of revocation of the permit is being given.



(1994 Code, § 155.093)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 276, passed
2-27-1978; Ord. 382, passed 2-13-1989)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 155.125  PROCEDURE.



   An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building,
structure or use shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and
fully dimensioned showing any off-street parking or loading facilities to be
provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.105)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.126  EXTENT OF CONTROL.



   The off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter shall
apply as follows.



   (A)   All buildings and structures erected and all land uses shall
provide accessory off-street parking or loading facilities as required
hereinafter for the use thereof.



   (B)   When a building or structure erected or enlarged prior to or
after the effective date of this chapter shall undergo a decrease in number
of dwelling, units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees
or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for required off-street
parking or loading facilities and, further, when the decrease would result in
a requirement for fewer total off-street parking or loading spaces through
application of the provisions of this chapter, off-street parking and loading
facilities may be reduced accordingly; provided that, existing off-street
parking or loading facilities are so decreased only when the facilities
remaining would at least equal or exceed the off-street parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to
the entire building or structure as modified.



   (C)   When a building or structure undergoes any increase in number
of dwelling units, a gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required off-street parking or loading
facilities and, further, when the increase would result in a requirement for
additional total off-street parking or loading spaces through application of
the provisions of this chapter, parking and loading facilities shall be
increased so that the facilities would at least equal or exceed the
off-street parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the
provisions of this chapter to the entire building or structure as modified.



   (D)   These regulations pertaining to off-street parking shall not
apply to any uses of any buildings or structures of any existing main
building or structure which is enlarged or increased in capacity after the
adoption of this chapter located in the B-1 Central Business District.



(1994 Code, § 155.106)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.127  EXISTING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES.



   Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces in existence on the
effective date of this chapter may not be reduced in number unless already
exceeding the requirements of this section for equivalent new construction;
in which event, the spaces shall not be reduced below the number required
herein for the equivalent new construction.



(1994 Code, § 155.107)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.128  SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Tables for required off-street parking and loading
requirements governing the number and location of off-street parking and
off-street loading facilities in relation to the use of property are
established hereinafter in § 155.137 of this chapter.



      (2)   The off-street parking and loading requirements for any
use not specified therein shall be the same as for similar specified use, as
determined below.



   (B)   The term FLOOR AREA, as employed in this off-street parking
and loading subchapter in the case of office, merchandising or service types
of use, shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure used or
intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients,
patients or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used
for display or sale of merchandise. FLOOR AREA for the purposes of this
subchapter shall not include any area used for:



      (1)   Storage accessory to the principal use of a building;



      (2)   Incidental repairs;



      (3)   Stairways and elevators;



      (4)   Show windows;



      (5)   Rest rooms;



      (6)   Utilities; and



      (7)   Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.



(1994 Code, § 155.108)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.129  USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.



   Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use and
developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of
this subchapter shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles
or commercial vehicles of Class C license category owned by occupants of the
dwelling structures to which the facilities are accessory or by guests of the
occupants.



(1994 Code, § 155.109)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.130  JOINT PARKING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Off-street parking facilities for different buildings,
structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any
district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each constituent
use would be required; provided that, the total number of spaces so located
together are not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use
and not more than 300 feet from the buildings, structures, uses or mixed uses
served.



   (B)   In any case where the required parking spaces are collectively
or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereto assuring their
retention for the purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the
parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the city’s Attorney
or appointed legal advisor, and shall be filed with the application for a
building permit.



(1994 Code, § 155.110)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.131  JOINT PARKING SPACES.



   Not more than 50% of the parking spaces required for theaters, and
places of amusement, and up to 100% of the parking spaces required for a
church or school may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail
stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally
open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in this section.
However, written agreement, assuring the retention for the purpose, shall be
properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and
execution by the city’s Attorney or appointed legal advisor and shall be
filed with the application for a building permit.



(1994 Code, § 155.111)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.132  CONTROL OF OFF-SITE FACILITIES.



   When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided
elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use served is located, they
shall be in the same possession, by written agreement, as the property
occupied by the principal use, and the written agreement shall be properly
drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and
execution by the city’s Attorney or appointed legal advisor and providing
for the maintenance in the owner and his or her heirs and assigns of the lot
on which the principal use is located of the possession of the required
number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of the principal use.



(1994 Code, § 155.112)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.133  PERMITTED DISTRICTS FOR ACCESSORY PARKING.



   Accessory parking facilities provided elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the principal use served in accordance with the requirements below,
may be located in any zoning district; except that, no parking facilities
accessory to a business or manufacturing use shall be located in a
residential district, except where authorized by the Board of Appeals
prescribed hereinafter.



(1994 Code, § 155.113)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.134  NON-RESIDENTIAL PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Accessory off-street parking facilities serving non-residential uses of
property may be permitted in any R district, when authorized by the Board of
Appeals, subject to the following requirements in addition to all other
relevant requirements.



   (A)   The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in
connection with, one or more non-residential establishments located in
adjoining districts or in connection with one or more existing professional
or institutional office buildings or institutions, if the parking lot
proposed is within 300 feet of the non-residential use which it is to serve.



   (B)   The parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles of not more than ten-ton GVW.



   (C)   No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on the parking lot.



   (D)   No sign of any kind other than signs designating entrances,
exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on the parking lot, and
shall exceed 20 square feet in area.



   (E)   The parking lot may be open from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and
shall be closed at all other times. However, supervised by one or more
full-time attendants, the parking lot may be kept open until 12:00 midnight.
Parking lot lights shall be turned off when the lot closes.



   (F)   Each entrance to and exit from the parking lot shall be at
least 20 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential
district, except where ingress and egress to the parking lot is provided from
a public alley or public way separating the residential areas from the
proposed parking lot.



   (G)   In addition to the foregoing requirements, the parking lots
shall conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be prescribed
by the city for the protection of properties adjacent to and in the vicinity
of the proposed parking lot.



(1994 Code, § 155.114)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.135  DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Parking space description. A required off-street parking space
shall be an area of not less than 180 square feet, nor less than nine feet
wide by 20 feet long, measured perpendicularly to the sides of the parking
space exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work
areas, accessible from streets or alleys or from private driveways or aisles
leading to streets or alleys and to be used for the storage or parking of
passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles of not more than ten-ton GVW.
Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in
width when serving automobiles parked at a 45-degree angle in one direction,
nor less than 25 feet in width when serving automobiles parked
perpendicularly.



   (B)   Measurement of space. When determination of the number of
required off-street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded, and
fractions over one-half shall be interpreted as one parking space.



   (C)   Access. Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner as will least
interfere with the movement of traffic and so designed as to permit adequate
maneuvering area for vehicles to turn around where only one entry or exit is
provided in order that no backing of vehicles into the street is required. No
driveway or curb cut in any district shall exceed 25 feet in width.



   (D)   Signs. No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within
any residential district, except as provided in this subchapter.



   (E)   Striping. All parking spaces shall be properly marked by
durable paint in stripes a minimum of four inches wide and extending the
length of the parking space.



   (F)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, except those
accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted
gravel base, not less than four inches thick, surfaced with all weather
dustless material.



   (G)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from all
adjoining properties.



   (H)   Storm water drainage. Adequate storm water drainage facilities
shall be installed in order to ensure that storm water does not flow onto
abutting property or abutting sidewalks in a way or quantity that pedestrians
using the sidewalk would be detrimentally affected or inconvenienced. The
city shall approve all facilities.



(1994 Code, § 155.115)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 298, passed
2-28-1987)



§ 155.136  LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS.



   Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located as
hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, the distance shall be
the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to
the nearest entrance of the building that the parking area is required to
serve.



   (A)   For one- and two-family dwellings, on the same lot with the
building they are required to serve; provided that, the off-street parking
shall be only maintained upon all-weather parking surfaces.



   (B)   For clubs, hospitals, sanitariums, orphanages, homes for the
aged, convalescent homes and for other similar uses, the off-street parking
facilities required shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the main
buildings being served, or upon properties contiguous to the zoning lot upon
which is located the building or buildings they are intended to serve.



   (C)   For uses other than those specified above, off-street parking
facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the main
building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over 300
feet from any entrance of the main building measured from the nearest point
of the parking area; provided, the separate lot or parcel of land intended
for the parking facilities is located in the same district as the principal
permitted use or in a less restricted district.



(1994 Code, § 155.116)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 426, passed
11-23-1992)



§ 155.137  SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   This section sets forth the schedule of off-street parking requirements.



   (A)   One-, two- and multi-family dwellings. One parking space for
each one family dwelling; one and one-half parking spaces for each family
dwelling unit in two and multi-family dwellings.



   (B)   Bowling alleys, recreational centers, swimming pools, skating
rinks and other recreation and amusement facilities. One parking space for
every five customers computed on the basis of maximum servicing capacity at
any one time, plus one additional space for every two persons regularly
employed on the premises.



   (C)   Club houses and permanent meeting places of veterans,
business, civic, fraternal, labor and similar organizations. One parking
space for every 50 square feet of aggregate floor area in the auditorium
assembly hall and dining room of the building, plus one additional space for
every two persons regularly employed on the premises.



   (D)   Funeral homes and undertaking establishments. Parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business,
plus one parking space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises and one space for every four seats in the auditorium or chapel of
the establishment.



   (E)   Hospitals. One parking space for each bed intended for
patients, excluding bassinets, plus one per doctor, plus one per employees,
plus one for hospital vehicle.



   (F)   House trailers (mobile homes). One parking space for each
trailer (mobile home) used for dwelling or sleeping purposes.



   (G)   Indoor retail businesses. Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus three parking
spaces for the first 1,000 square feet of total area and one additional space
for every additional 200 square feet of floor area.



   (H)   Industrial plants and facilities. Parking or storage space for
all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the industrial use, plus one
parking space for every two employees on the premises at maximum employment
on a single shift.



   (I)   Junior and senior high schools. One parking space for every
eight seats available at maximum capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium,
stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the school grounds or campus. If
the school has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, one
parking space shall be provided for each person regularly employed at the
school, plus two additional spaces for each classroom.



   (J)   Libraries, museums, post offices and similar establishments.
Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the operation of
the establishments, plus three parking spaces for the first 1,000 square feet
of total floor area and one additional space for every additional 200 square
feet of floor area.



   (K)   Medical and dental clinics. Three parking spaces for each
doctor, plus one additional space for every two regular employees.



   (L)   Nursing homes. One parking space for every two beds occupied
at maximum capacity, plus one space for every two regular employees.



   (M)   Offices. One parking space for every 300 square feet of office
space.



   (N)   Outdoor retail business. Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus two parking
spaces for each person employed on the premises based on maximum seasonal
employment and the additional space as may be required by the Board of
Appeals based on the nature of the business and other relevant factors.



   (O)   Public and private elementary schools. One parking space for
every 12 seats available at maximum capacity in the assembly hall,
auditorium, stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the school grounds
or campus. If the school has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or
gymnasium, one parking space shall be provided for each person regularly
employed at the school, plus one additional space for each classroom.



   (P)   Public garages. Indoor or outdoor parking or storage space for
all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus three parking
spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises.



   (Q)   Repair shops, plumbing shops, electrical shops, roofing shops
and other service establishments. Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the business, plus two parking spaces for
each person regularly employed on the premises.



   (R)   Restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments. One
parking space for every 200 square feet of total floor area.



   (S)   Self-service laundries. One parking space for every two
washing machines.



   (T)   Service stations. Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the business plus one parking space for each
gas pump, three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, and one
space for every two persons employed on the premises at maximum employment on
a single shift.



   (U)   Theaters, auditoriums, churches, stadiums, civic centers and
other places of public assembly. One parking space for every six seats
available at maximum capacity.



   (V)   Transportation terminals. One parking space for every 100
square feet of waiting room space.



   (W)   Motels and hotels. One parking space for each sleeping unit
accommodation, plus one space for each dwelling unit on the premises.



   (X)   Universities, colleges, junior colleges, academics, technical
schools and similar institutions of higher learning. One parking space for
every six seats occupied at maximum capacity in the assembly hall,
auditorium, stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the campus. If the
institution has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, one
parking space shall be provided for each person regularly employed at the
institution, plus five additional spaces for each classroom.



   (Y)   Warehouses, freight terminals and trucking terminals. Parking
or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus two parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the
premises.



   (Z)   Wholesale businesses. Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus two parking
spaces for each person employed on the premises based on maximum seasonal
employment.



(1994 Code, § 155.117)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Res. passed 11-6-1990;
Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 155.138  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.



   Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall
provide adequate space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the
street or public alley. The space shall have access to a public alley or, if
there is no alley, to a street. Off-street loading and unloading space shall
be in addition to and not considered as meeting a part of the requirements
for off-street parking space. Off-street loading and unloading space shall
not be used or designed, intended or constructed to be used in a manner to
obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining
property.



(1994 Code, § 155.118)  (Res. passed 1-6-1990)



§ 155.139  DESIGN.



   (A)   Loading berth description. An off-street loading berth shall
be a hard-surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or
public way, used principally for the standing, loading or unloading of motor
trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the
public use of streets and alleys.



   (B)   Location. No permitted or required loading berth shall be
closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential district unless
completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence or
wall,  or any combination thereof not less than six feet in height. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any two streets. Loading berths open to the
sky may be located in any required yards.



   (C)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be
improved with a compacted gravel base, not less than seven inches thick,
surfaced with an all-weather dustless material.



(1994 Code, § 155.119)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



STREET SIGNS AND GRAPHICS



§ 155.150  REGULATIONS OF STREET SIGNS AND GRAPHICS.



   Any sign or other street graphic not expressly permitted by this
section shall be prohibited within the corporate limits of the city.



   (A)   Calculation of sign area. The area of every sign shall be
calculated as follows.



      (1)   If a sign is enclosed by a box or outline, the total
area (including the background) within that outline shall be deemed the sign
area.



      (2)   If a sign consists of individual letters, parts or
symbols, the area of the one imaginary square or rectangle which would
completely enclose all the letters, parts or symbols shall be deemed the sign
area.



      (3)   In calculating sign area, only one side of any
double-faced sign shall be included.



      (4)   The area of signs of unusual shapes, such as globes,
cylinders or pyramids, shall be computed as one-half of the total of the
exposed surfaces.



   (B)   Sign area allowance.



      (1)   Within the limitations and restrictions as further
provided in this section, the total of the areas of all signs which a
particular establishment is permitted to display shall be computed in
accordance with the following formula:  one and one-half square feet of sign
area per one foot of lineal street frontage for the first 100 feet of the
frontage, plus one additional square foot of sign area per one foot frontage
in excess of 100 feet. Except as otherwise provided herein, no establishment
in any zoning district shall display more than 400 square feet of signs.



      (2)   (a)   If any establishment has frontage on two or
more streets, each side having frontage shall be considered separately for
purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this section.
However, the sign area allowances shall not be aggregated so as to allow any
establishment to display on any one frontage a greater area of signs that
this section would otherwise permit.



         (b)   The side of an establishment adjacent to an
off-street parking area shall not be deemed frontage unless the establishment
has no other frontage.



   (C)   Movement permitted. Any sign or other street graphic that
revolves, rotates or mechanically moves in any manner shall not obstruct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic in any fashion and shall not be constructed
so as to be unsafe in any manner.



   (D)   Illumination. Illumination of signs and other street graphics
is permitted, subject to the following requirements.



      (1)   Only white light is permitted in residential zoning
districts and within 200 feet thereof.



      (2)   No red, yellow, green or other color light shall be used
at any location in such a manner as to confuse or interfere with vehicular
traffic.



      (3)   No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering
lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity,
brightness or color; provided that, this section shall not apply to any
message on any electronically operated changeable copy sign. Beacon lights
and illumination by flame are prohibited.



      (4)   The light from any illuminated sign or other street
graphic shall be shaded, shielded or directed so as to avoid the creation or
continuation of any nuisance or traffic hazard.



      (5)   No exposed reflective type bulb, and no strobe light or
incandescent lamp which exceeds 15 watts, shall be used on the exterior
surface of any sign in such a manner as to expose the face of the bulb, light
or lamp to any public street or to adjacent property.



   (E)   Street signs and graphics not to be hazardous.



      (1)   No sign or other street graphic shall be erected,
relocated or maintained so as to prevent free access or egress from any door,
window, fire escape or driveway of any establishment.



      (2)   No sign or other street graphic shall be erected or
maintained in such a manner that it interferes with, obstructs the view of or
is likely to be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
Accordingly, no street graphic shall contain the words “stop”, “go”,
“caution”, “danger”, “warning” or similar words.



   (F)   Structural and maintenance requirements.



      (1)   Every sign or other street graphic shall be designed and
constructed in conformity with the applicable provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The electrical component of any illuminated sign or
other street graphic shall conform to the applicable requirements of this
chapter and to all requirements of the National Electrical Code, the
International Building Code (2006) and the International Property Maintenance
Code (2006).



      (3)   Every sign or other street graphic shall be maintained
in a neat and attractive condition by its owner. The street graphic supports
shall be kept painted/treated in order to prevent rust or deterioration.



      (4)   Except as provided for portable signs, any free-standing
sign shall be made permanent and anchored by screw-in bolts and/or by a
concrete footing to a depth of not less than 30 inches below the soil surface.



(1994 Code, § 155.130)  (Ord. 429, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. 96-10, passed
7-8-1996)



§ 155.151  SIGNS IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Prohibited street graphics. The following street graphics are
strictly prohibited within the corporate limits of the city:



      (1)   Signs attached to trees or public utility poles, other
than warning signs issued by public utilities, or except with written consent
of the affected public utility; and



      (2)   Defunct signs, including the posts or other supports
therefor, that advertise or identify an activity, business, product or
service no longer conducted on the premises where the sign is located, or
which describes another location. However, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit an extension of time as granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer as requested by owners in consideration of location or establishment
of new business.



   (B)   Permitted street graphics. Every sign or other street graphic
enumerated in this division (B) that complies with the indicated requirements
may be erected in any zoning district of this city without a permit. The area
of these signs or street graphics shall not be debited against the displaying
establishment’s sign area allowance:



      (1)   Construction signs identifying the architects,
engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the
construction, and/or announcing the character or purpose of the building, but
not advertising any product. The signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area, shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall be removed
after the construction has been completed;



      (2)   Directional and informational signs erected for the
convenience of the public, such as signs identifying entrances, exits,
parking areas, no-parking areas, restrooms, public telephones, walkways and
similar features or facilities. The signs shall not exceed three square feet
in area;



      (3)   Flags of any country, state or unit of local government;



      (4)   Garage sale/auction signs advertising a garage or yard
sale or public auction. The signs shall not exceed four square feet in area
and shall not be posted for longer than five days;



      (5)   Governmental or public signs such as traffic-control
signs, city welcome signs, civic organizational signs, railroad crossing
signs, legal notices, signs indicating the location of underground cables and
the like;



      (6)   Holiday decorations such as Christmas lights and
ornaments; provided that, such decorations must be removed within a
reasonable time after the holiday;



      (7)   Home occupation signs identifying only the name and
occupation of the resident. Home occupation signs shall be non-illuminated
and shall not exceed four square feet in area;



      (8)   House numbers and/or name of occupant signs located on
the lot to which the sign pertains. The signs shall not exceed three square
feet in area for single-family dwellings, nor six square feet for
multiple-family dwellings;



      (9)   Institutional signs for a public, charitable or
religious institution. The signs shall be located on the premises of the
institution, shall not obstruct the vision of motorists and shall not exceed
60 square feet in sign area;



      (10)   Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to
become part of the building, and containing the information as date or
erection, name of buildings and memorial tributes;



      (11)   Interior signs located in the interior of any building
or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of buildings;
provided, the signs are not visible from the exterior of the buildings;



      (12)   Political campaign signs announcing candidates seeking
public office and/or political issues and other pertinent information. The
signs shall be confined to private property. In the agricultural district and
in any residential district, political campaign signs shall not exceed 16
square feet in area; in other districts, the signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet. Political campaign signs shall be removed within seven days after the
election to which they pertain;



      (13)   Property regulation signs such as no trespassing, no
hunting, no fishing and the like. The signs shall not exceed three square
feet in area;



      (14)   Public interest signs publicizing a charitable or
non-profit event of general public interest. The signs shall be erected only
on private property. In the agricultural district and in any residential
district, the signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area; elsewhere, the
signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. Public interest signs shall be
permitted only for 14 days before and seven days after the event;



      (15)   Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental or lease
of the premises on which they are located. The signs on residential property
shall not exceed six square feet in area; on other property the signs shall
not exceed 16 square feet. Not more than one real estate sign per street
front shall be erected on any lot. The signs shall be removed within 30 days
after the sale, rental or lease;



      (16)   Residential development identification structures at
major entrances designed to identify a residential subdivision, apartment
complex or planned unit development; containing no commercial advertising;
and not exceeding 40 square feet in area;



      (17)   Mobile/portable signs utilized for any purpose or
street banners advertising a public entertainment or event. Street graphics
may be placed only in locations approved by the Code Enforcement Officer
during the period 21 days before the seven days after the event. If a
mobile/portable sign is utilized for any purpose for more than 60 continuous
days, the owner shall be required to conform to free-standing sign provisions
and make such permanent pursuant to division (F)(4) below or remove the same;



      (18)   Utility company signs that serve as an aid to public
safety or that show the location of public telephones, underground cables and
the like;



      (19)   Murals or other non-commercial artistic public graphics;



      (20)   Commercial banners. Any banner placed on the property
of an establishment located in a B-1 or B-2 District; provided that:



         (a)   Such shall not interrupt the free flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic;



         (b)   Such shall not be placed in the public
right-of-way; and



         (c)   No establishment shall have more than two such
commercial banners erected at any one time.



      (21)   All establishments located more than 250 feet from a
designated state highway may, with the permission of the land owner,
construct an off-premises sign directing the public to such establishment.
Such off-premises signs placed in residential districts shall be limited to
four square feet and such off-premises signs placed in all other districts
shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area. No business shall have more
than two off-premises signs.



   (C)   Signs in agricultural district or residential district
limited. No signs or other street graphics except those listed in division
(B) above shall be erected in any agricultural district or in any residential
district within the corporate limits of the city to § 155.152(C)(1) of this
chapter.



   (D)   Signs in business, industrial districts limited. No
establishment located in any business district or industrial district shall
display a total area of signs in excess of its sign area allowance. Further,
all signs in any business district or industrial district shall conform to
the requirements indicated below.



      (1)   Flush-mounted signs. For aesthetic and safety reasons,
flush-mounted signs are the preferred type of sign in the city. No
flush-mounted sign shall:



         (a)   Project more than 18 inches from the wall or
surface to which it is attached (if the wall/surface is not vertical, the
projection shall be measured from the closest point of the wall/surface to
the sign); or



         (b)   Extend more than three feet above the roof line of
the building to which it is attached.



      (2)   Projecting signs. No establishment in any zoning
district shall display more than one projecting sign on any street front. No
projecting sign shall:



         (a)   Project more than four feet from the building to
which it is attached;



         (b)   Extend more than three feet above the roof line of
the building to which it is attached;



         (c)   Project over a street, alley or driveway, or
closer than two feet to the curb or edge of the vehicular driveway;



         (d)   Extend below a point eight feet above the ground
or pavement;



         (e)   Extend above a point 35 feet above the ground or
pavement; or



         (f)   Exceed 32 square feet in area.



      (3)   Signs on awnings, canopies or marquees. Signs mounted
flush against any awning, canopy or marquee shall be considered flush-mounted
signs, and shall comply with the regulations of division (D)(1) above. Signs
suspended beneath any awning, canopy or marquee shall be considered
projecting signs, and shall comply with the regulations of division (D)(2)
above.



      (4)   Window signs. Any establishment may display window
signs. Permanent window signs shall be debited against the displaying
establishment’s sign area allowance, but temporary window signs shall not.



      (5)   Shopping center identification signs. A shopping center,
as an entity, may erect an identification sign in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter if the total gross floor area of all the
establishments located in the center exceeds 50,000 square feet. A shopping
center identification sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area.



      (6)   Free-standing signs. Not more than two free-standing
signs shall be displayed on any street front of any lot. All free-standing
signs shall comply with the following regulations.



         (a)   No part of any free-standing sign shall intrude
into or project over any public right-of-way or otherwise obstruct view of
traffic by motorists.



         (b)   No free-standing sign (including shopping center
identification signs) shall exceed 200 square feet in area or 20 feet in any
dimension.



         (c)   When attached to a post or other supports, the top
edge of a free-standing sign shall not extend more than 35 feet above the
ground or pavement.



      (7)   Roof-mounted signs. Roof-mounted signs are strictly
prohibited everywhere in the corporate limits of the city, except in the
industrial district. No roof-mounted sign shall extend more than 20 feet
above the roof line of the building to which it is attached.



      (8)   Billboards. Billboards are strictly prohibited
everywhere in the corporate limits of the city, except in the industrial
district. No billboard erected in the industrial district shall:



         (a)   Be stacked on top of another billboard;



         (b)   Be located closer than 50 feet to any public
right-of-way;



         (c)   Be located closer than 1,000 feet to any other
billboard on the same side of the roadway;



         (d)   Extend more than 20 feet above the ground or
pavement; or



         (e)   Exceed 300 square feet in area.



(1994 Code, § 155.131)  (Ord. 429, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. 96-10, passed
7-8-1996; Ord. 05-06, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 11-01, passed 7-11-2012)



§ 155.152  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF SIGNS AND GRAPHICS.



   (A)   Code Enforcement Officer, duties. The City Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the
provisions of this subchapter. This broad responsibility encompasses, but is
not limited to, the following specific duties:



      (1)   To supervise the registration of all existing street
signs and graphics;



      (2)   To review and pass upon all applications for street sign
and graphic permits;



      (3)   To inspect existing and newly constructed street signs
and graphics to determine compliance with this chapter, and where there are
violations, to initiate appropriate corrective action;



      (4)   To review and forward to the City Clerk all applications
for variances, appeal and amendments;



      (5)   To maintain up-to-date records of the applications and
of any official actions taken pursuant thereto;



      (6)   To periodically review the provisions of this chapter to
determine whether revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on these
matters to the City Council at least once each year;



      (7)   To provide information to the general public on matters
related to this chapter; and



      (8)   To perform other duties as the City Council may from
time to time prescribe.



   (B)   Street sign and graphic permits.



      (1)   No sign, billboard or other street sign or graphic
(except those listed in § 155.151(B) of this chapter) shall be erected,
expanded, altered relocated or reconstructed without a street graphic permit
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.



      (2)   Every applicant for a street sign or graphic permit
shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, in narrative and/or graphic
form, all of the items of information listed below. Items of information
shall be as follows:



         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant;



         (b)   Name and address of owner of the premises on which
the street sign or graphic is to be erected, if different from division
(B)(2)(a) above;



         (c)   Location of the building, structure or lot where
the proposed street sign or graphic is to be erected, and the zoning district
classification of the premises;



         (d)   Description of the proposed street sign or graphic
indicating proposed location, dimensions, area, overall height, illumination
and method of support/attachment;



         (e)   Relationship of the proposed street sign or
graphic to nearby traffic-control devices;



         (f)   Amount of street frontage that the establishment
which proposes to display the street sign or graphic has, and the total area
of all existing signs on the premises; and



         (g)   Other information as the Code Enforcement Officer
shall reasonably require to determine full compliance with this subchapter.



   (C)   Non-conforming street signs and graphics.



      (1)   A NON-CONFORMING STREET SIGN OR GRAPHIC shall mean any
lawfully erected sign, billboard or other street graphic that does not
conform to one or more provisions of this subchapter or any amendment thereof.



      (2)   A non-conforming street sign or graphic that does not
pose an imminent peril to life or property may remain and be maintained by
ordinary repairs, but shall not be:



         (a)   Altered or enlarged in such a way as to increase
its non-conformity;



         (b)   Replaced by another non-conforming street sign or
graphic (provided that, changing the message on a changeable copy sign shall
not be deemed a violation of this subchapter);



         (c)   Relocated unless it is made to conform with this
subchapter; or



         (d)   Reconstructed after incurring damage in an amount
exceeding 50% of its market value prior to the time of loss as determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (D)   Corrective action orders. Whenever the Code Enforcement
Officer finds, by inspection or otherwise, that any street sign or graphic is
in violation of this subchapter, he or she shall so notify the responsible
party and shall order appropriate corrective action; provided that, this
notice requirement shall not apply whenever the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that any street sign or graphic poses an imminent peril to life or
property.



      (1)   Contents of order. The order to take corrective action
shall be in writing and shall include:



         (a)   A description of the premises sufficient for
identification;



         (b)   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;



         (c)   A statement of the remedial action necessary to
effect compliance;



         (d)   The date by which the violation must be corrected
(which may be the same as the date of the order);



         (e)   A statement that the alleged violator is entitled
to conference with the Code Enforcement Officer if he or she so desires;



         (f)   The manner and date by which an appeal of the
corrective action order must be filed and a statement of the procedure for so
filing; and



         (g)   A statement that failure to obey a corrective
action order shall result in revocation of the street sign or graphic permit,
and may result in remedial action by the city and/or the imposition of a fine.



      (2)   Service of order. A corrective action order shall be
deemed properly served upon the owner of the offending street sign or graphic
if it is:



         (a)   Served upon him or her personally;



         (b)   Sent by certified mail with return receipt to his
or her last known address; or



         (c)   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the
affected premises.



   (E)   Remedial action of city.



      (1)   Whenever the recipient of a corrective action order
fails to obey the order within the time limit set forth therein, or in any
emergency, the Code Enforcement Officer may alter/remove the offending street
sign or graphic or take any other action necessary to effect compliance with
this subchapter.



      (2)   Any expense incurred by the city pursuant to authorized
street sign or graphic remedial action shall be billed by first class mail to
the owner of the offending street sign or graphic. If said bill has not been
paid within 30 days, the unpaid charge shall constitute a lien upon the real
estate where the street graphic is located. The city’s Attorney is hereby
authorized to file a notice of lien in the office of the county’s Recorder
of Deeds, to foreclose this lien, and to sue the owner of the real estate, or
sign permittee, or their agents, in a civil action to recover the money due
for the foregoing services, plus all expenses incurred pursuant to collection
efforts including litigation expenses, plus reasonable attorney’s fees to
be fixed by the court.



   (F)   Complaints. Whenever any violation of this subchapter occurs,
or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint on
forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall record the complaints, promptly investigate and if he or she deems
necessary, initiate appropriate corrective action.



   (G)   Fees. All permit fees, or fees for appeals or variances, shall
be established by the City Council by resolution and shall be paid to the
City Clerk. These fees are intended to defray the administrative costs
connected with the processing/conducting of the listed permits/procedures;
they do not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device.



   (H)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Code Enforcement Officer in any matter related to the interpretation or
enforcement of any provision of this subchapter may appeal to City Council.



      (1)   Filing, stay of further proceedings.



         (a)   Every appeal shall be made within ten days of the
matter complained of by filing with the Code Enforcement Officer a written
notice specifying the grounds for appeal. Thereupon, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall promptly transmit all pertinent records to the City Council.



         (b)   An appeal stays all further action on the matter
being appealed unless the Code Enforcement Officer certified to the City
Council, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that for
reason stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, further action shall not be stayed unless the City
Council or the circuit court grants a restraining order for due cause, and so
notifies the Code Enforcement Officer.



      (2)   Public hearing, notice. The City Council shall consider
every appeal within a reasonable time after the filing of the notice of
appeal pursuant to division (H)(1) above and shall act upon such not later
than 30 days after the filing of the appeal. The City Clerk shall notify the
appellant and all interested parties of the time and place at which the
appeal shall be heard and post public notice of the proceeding at City Hall.
The City Council shall render a decision on the appeal by a simple majority
vote of all members then holding office or may modify or amend the order
appealed to the extent and in a manner as is appropriate in its discretion.



   (I)   Variances. A variance is a relaxation of the requirements of
this subchapter that are applicable to particular street sign or graphic.



      (1)   Application. Every application for a variance shall be
filed with the Code Enforcement Officer on a prescribed form. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall promptly transmit the application to the City
Council. The application shall contain sufficient information to allow the
City Council to make an informed recommendation, and shall include, at a
minimum, the following:



         (a)   Name and address of the applicant;



         (b)   Location of the street sign or graphic for which
the variance is sought;



         (c)   Full and detailed explanation of the grounds for
the variance request;



         (d)   Specific divisions of this subchapter containing
the regulations which, if strictly applied, would cause a serious problem; and



         (e)   Any other pertinent information that the Code
Enforcement Officer may require.



      (2)   Public hearing, notice. The City Council shall consider
requests for variances within a reasonable time after the variance
application is submitted and shall act upon such not later than 30 days after
the filing of a variance request. Consideration of a request for variance
shall be made in the same manner as prescribed with regard to appeals as
hereinabove set forth in division (H)(2) above. The City Council may grant a
street sign or graphic variance by an ordinance passed by a simple majority
vote of all members then holding office. In a separate statement accompanying
the ordinance, the City Council may state its findings of fact and indicate
its reasons for granting or denying the requested variance.



      (3)   Standards for variances. No variance of any street sign
or graphic provision of this code shall be granted unless, based upon
substantial evidence, it is determined that:



         (a)   The proposed variance is consistent with the
spirit and purpose of this subchapter, and will not cause injury to the area
in which the street sign or graphic is/will be located or be detrimental to
the public welfare in any way; and



         (b)   Strict application of the requirements of this
subchapter would result in great practical difficulties or hardship to the
applicant; the proposed variance is not a great deviation from the
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship while protecting
the broader public interest; or



         (c)   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar
circumstances not of his or her own making; and the peculiar circumstances
engendering the variance request are not applicable to other street signs or
graphics in the vicinity and, therefore, that a variance would be a more
appropriate remedy than an amendment.



(1994 Code, § 155.132)  (Ord. 429, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. 96-10, passed
7-8-1996)



NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS



§ 155.165  EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The lawful use of land for storage purposes except for
agriculture uses or where the use is an adjunct of any structure, and
advertising signs and bulletin boards which do not conform to the provisions
of this chapter shall be discontinued within one year from the date of the
approval of this chapter and the lawful use of land for storage purposes,
except for agriculture uses or where the use is an adjunct of any structure,
and signs and bulletin boards which becomes non-conforming by reason of a
subsequent change in this chapter shall also be discontinued within one year
from the date of the change.



   (B)   (1)   The lawful use of a building or structure existing at
the time of the effective date of this chapter may be continued, although the
use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. If no structural
alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to
another non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification.



      (2)   Whenever the non-conforming use has been changed to a
more restricted use or to a conforming use, the use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.



(1994 Code, § 155.145)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.166  WHEN USE BECOMES NON-CONFORMING THROUGH CHANGES IN ZONING
REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever the lawful use of a building becomes non-conforming through a
change in zoning requirements or district boundaries, the use may be
continued and, if no structural alterations are made, it may be changed to
another non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted
classification. Whenever the non-conforming use has been changed to a more
restricted use or to a conforming use, the use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.



(1994 Code, § 155.146)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.167  NON-CONFORMING USE OF LAND AS TRAILER COURT.



   The lawful use of land as a trailer court which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall not be extended beyond the area actually so
used at the date of approval of this chapter and no new parking spaces or
berths for additional trailers shall be added thereto.



(1994 Code, § 155.147)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.168  DISCONTINUED USE OF NON-AGRICULTURAL BUILDING NOT TO BE
REESTABLISHED.



   Whenever a non-conforming use of a non-agricultural building or
structure, or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of 12
consecutive months, or for a continuous period of 18 months if the building
was originally designed and constructed for a non-residential use, the use
shall not after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished and the use
of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the
district.



(1994 Code, § 155.148)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.169  WHAT CONSTITUTES ABANDONMENT.



   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
non-conforming use for a period of six months shall constitute abandonment.



(1994 Code, § 155.149)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.170  EXISTING NON-AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.



   Any existing non-agricultural building or structure devoted to a use
not permitted in the district in which the building or premises is located,
may be enlarged, extended or structurally altered; provided, however, any
building containing a residential non-conforming use may be altered in any
way to improve livability, but no structural alterations shall be made which
would increase the number of dwelling units therein; and, provided further
that, any building or structure shall not be extended beyond the contiguous
lot area owned by the owner of the building of structure containing the
non-conforming use on the effective date of this chapter or subsequent
amendment thereto; and, provided further, the building or structure
containing the non-conforming use shall meet the setback and yard
requirements of the district wherein situated and the off-street parking
requirements of a similar conforming use. Any existing building or structure
devoted to a use permitted in the district in which the building or structure
is situated, but failing to comply with the yard or building setback line
requirements of this chapter, may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
structurally altered in any manner which does not further encroach upon the
required open yard space or building setback line which is not complied with.



(1994 Code, § 155.150)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.171  RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Any non-agricultural building or structure containing a
non-conforming use, other than a one-family dwelling use, which is damaged by
explosion, fire, flood, wind or other Act of God to the extent of 50% or more
of its fair market value immediately prior to damage shall not be repaired or
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   In the event that the Building Inspector’s estimate of the
extent of damage or fair market value is not acceptable to the applicant for
the building permit to repair or reconstruct the building or structure, the
applicant may appeal to the Board of Appeals.



(1994 Code, § 155.151)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.172  NON-AGRICULTURAL BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No non-agricultural building or structure designed or intended
to be utilized for a non-conforming use shall be constructed or allowed
unless substantial construction is underway at the time of the enactment or
subsequent amendment of this chapter and is being diligently prosecuted so
that the building or structure will be completed within 18 months from the
time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter.



   (B)   All outstanding building permits for construction which do not
meet these requirements shall be rendered null and void by the enactment or
subsequent amendment of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.152)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.173  JUNK OR AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD.



   No junk or automobile wrecking yard not within an S-1 Floodplain and
Drainageway District shall be operated or maintained for more than 36 months
after the effective date of this chapter or after a zoning change to a use
district within which the use is not permitted except that if within an A-1
Agriculture District or I-1 Light Industrial District, the Board of Appeals
may permit for a specified time, the continued use of an area containing junk
or automobile wrecking yard; provided that, an eight-foot high solid fence or
wall, or a ten-foot wide planting strip of trees and shrubs to provide a
dense screen at maturity, enclose the area.



(1994 Code, § 155.153)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.174  LOTS SMALLER THAN PERMITTED IN USE DISTRICT; CONFORMANCE
REQUIRED.



   When adjacent lots of record are in single ownership and fronting on
the same street or place, even though the lots are smaller in area and width
than permitted in the use district where located, no building or structure
shall be erected or structurally altered on the lots, except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.154)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 155.185  ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD; COMPOSITION; TERM; CHAIRPERSON.



   (A)   A Board of Appeals is hereby established. The word “Board”
when used shall be construed to mean the Board of Appeals. The Board shall
consist of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed by the City Council.
Members of the Board shall reside only in the territory subject to the
application of the provisions of this chapter and the failure of any member
of the Board to maintain this residence qualification at any time shall
subject him or her to removal from the Board for cause.



   (B)   The term of office of the members of the Board shall be for
five years; excepting that, the membership of the first Board appointed shall
serve respectively for terms of one for one year, one for two years, one for
three years, one for four years, one for five years, one for six years and
one for seven years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of five
years each.



   (C)   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members
shall be removed for cause by the City Council only upon written charges and
after public hearing.



   (D)   The City Council shall name one of the members so appointed as
Chairperson at the time of his or her appointment and he or she shall hold
the office as Chairperson until his or her successor is appointed. In the
absence of the Chairperson, the Board shall elect one of its members as
acting Chairperson.



(1994 Code, § 155.165)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.186  BOARD TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Board shall adopt from time to time rules and regulations as it may
deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter. The Board
shall, in addition, adopt a schedule of fees or other method to determine the
manner and amount of charges to be collected by the Building Inspector for
the erection, construction, enlargement, reconstruction or extension of any
building or structure after the effective date of this chapter and to provide
for other fees and charges as may be necessary to carry into effect the
provisions of this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.166)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.187  MEETINGS.



   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and
at such other times as the Board may determine. Four members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote of the members present shall
determine all questions presented to the Board, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter. The Chairperson shall be entitled to vote upon all questions
presented to the Board. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting
Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact  and  shall
keep records of  its  determinations and  other official actions,  all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Appeals and
shall be a public record. The Board may select or appoint officers as it
deems necessary.



(1994 Code, § 155.167)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.188  POWERS OF BOARD.



   (A)   Powers relative to appeals. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement
of this chapter.



   (B)   Powers relative to variations.



      (1)   When, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness
or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of adoption of this
chapter, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other
extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of
property, which condition is not generally prevalent in the area, the strict
application of the area regulations would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of
the property, the Board shall be empowered to authorize upon application in
regard to the property, a variation from the district application so as to
relieve the difficulty or hardship.



      (2)   Variations shall be permitted by the Board of Appeals
only when they are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
regulations. In its consideration of the above standards of practical
difficulties or particular hardship, the Board of Appeals shall require
evidence that:



         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable
return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
regulations in that zone;



         (b)   The plight of the owner is due to unique
circumstances; and



         (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality.



      (3)   A variation shall be permitted only if the evidence, in
the judgment of the Board of Appeals, sustains each of the three conditions
enumerated.



      (4)   The Board of Appeals shall have no authority by virtue
of this section to grant variations in whole or in part in respect to the
classification, regulation and restriction of the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial
business, residential and other uses.



   (C)   Powers relative to exceptions. Upon application, the Board
shall be empowered to permit the following exceptions:



      (1)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary
line of a district divides a lot of record in single ownership;



      (2)   To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming
building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, Act of God or the public
enemy to the extent of more than 50% of its assessed value when the Board
finds some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the
non-conforming use;



      (3)   To interpret the provision of this chapter where the
street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown
on the map fixing the several districts;



      (4)   To vary parking regulations whenever the character or
use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of
parking facilities or when the regulations would impose an unreasonable
hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an
advantage or a convenience; and



      (5)   To permit any existing non-agriculture building or
structure devoted to a use not permitted in the district in which the
building or structure is located on the effective date of this chapter, or
any subsequent amendment thereto, to be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
structurally altered when the Board finds it to be in the public interest to
continue the non-conforming use or finds a need to relieve an undue hardship
upon the owner of the property; provided, the continuance of the
non-conforming use shall not be extended beyond the lot area occupied by the
non-conforming use on the effective date of this chapter or subsequent
amendment thereto.



(1994 Code, § 155.168)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.189  PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Appeals of any matter over which the
Board is specifically granted jurisdiction may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by an officer, department or board, of the city affected by any
decision of the Building Inspector. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
of such decision by filing with the Building Inspector and with the Board a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the form of the notice to be
prescribed by general rules of the Board. The Building Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from is taken.



   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board after the
notice of appeal has been filed with him or her that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings should not be stayed
otherwise than by proper legal action.



   (C)   (1)   Any person desiring a variation or exception shall
file a petition requesting the action with the Board of Appeals by depositing
the same with the Building Inspector along with the accompanying maps, plats,
data, statements and supplemental information as shall be necessary or
desirable. The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board the
petition and accompanying material for a hearing and a report as herein set
out.



      (2)   In addition, the applicant for a variation or exception
(other than an applicant for a special use exception under §§ 155.110
through 155.113 of this chapter) shall give due notice of the request for
variation or exception either in person or by registered mail, return receipt
requested, not more than 30 days prior to the hearing to the parties
concerned and to the property owners, as recorded in the office of the
county’s Recorder of Deeds, and as appears from the authentic tax records
of the county of all property within 250 feet in each direction of the
location for which the variation or exception is requested; the number of
feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways
shall be excluded in determining the 250 feet requirement. The notice shall
state the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the
owner of the property, the location of the property, a statement of intent to
file an application, approximate date it will be filed and a brief statement
of the nature of the request for variation or exception. The applicant shall
furnish the Board a complete list containing the names and last known
addresses of the owners of property required to be served at the time the
application is filed and a certificate that they were so served.



   (D)   Upon an appeal, request for a variation or exception, the
Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing, but not later than 60 days
from the filing of the notice of appeal, request for variation or exception,
the Board shall give not more than 30 days’, nor less than 15 days’,
public notice of the hearing thereon in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city. The notice shall contain the particular location of the property
affected by the decision appealed from or the variation or exception
requested, as well as a brief statement of the nature of the appeal or of
what the proposed variation or exception consists.



   (E)   The party filing a notice of appeal, request for variation or
exception with the Board shall pay at the time of filing a refundable deposit
of $1,250 toward the costs of the proceedings. The refundable deposit shall
be paid to the City Clerk, who shall give a receipt therefor; a copy of the
receipt shall be presented to the Board at the convened hearing, as evidence
that the deposit has been paid. Said refundable deposit shall be applied to
the costs of the proceedings, including but not limited to, certified
mailing, publication of notice, court reporter fees and other professional
fees incurred by the city. Should the total costs of said proceedings be less
than the deposit, a refund of any overpayment shall be made to the filing
party; however, should the costs of said proceedings exceed the deposit paid,
the filing party shall pay any and all additional costs to the city upon
demand. The city reserves the right to delay any formal action regarding said
proceedings until all costs have been paid in full.



   (F)   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
make the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made
and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken. In considering all appeals or applications for variations or
exceptions the Board shall, before making any finding in a specific case,
first determine that the proposed change will not constitute a change,
including a variation in use, in the Zoning District Map and will not impair
an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or increase
congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or materially
diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area,
or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare of the city. Every appeal, variation or exception granted or denied
by the Board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on sworn
testimony and evidence, specifying the reason for granting or denying the
appeal, variation or exception. The decision of the Board shall be made a
part of any building permit in which an appeal, variation or exception is
allowed.



   (G)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variations
or exceptions in this chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.169)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 276, passed
2-2-1978; Ord. 2007-02, passed 1-22-2007; Ord. 13-03, passed 2-25-2013; Ord.
16-04, passed 4-25-2016)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 155.200  BUILDING INSPECTOR TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.



   The city shall appoint a Building Inspector, whose duty it shall be to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Appeal from the decision of the
Building Inspector may be made to the Board of Appeals as provided in this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.180)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.201  BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   No non-agricultural building or structure shall be erected,
added to or structurally altered until a permit has been issued by the
Building Inspector. Except upon a written order of the Board of Appeals no
building permit shall be issued for any building where the construction,
addition or alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter. No agriculture building or structure exceeding
$500 in cost shall be erected, added to or structurally altered until a
permit has been issued by the Building Inspector without charge. The permit
shall be issued upon compliance by the applicant with the building setback
line.



   (B)   There shall be submitted with all applications for building
permits of non-agricultural buildings or structures two copies of a layout or
plat plan drawn to scale showing actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and accessory
buildings to be erected and other information as may be necessary to
determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.



   (C)   One copy of the layout or plot plan shall be returned when
approved by the Building Inspector together with the permit to the applicant.



(1994 Code, § 155.181)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.202  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, no change in
the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or occupancy in an
existing non-agricultural building, shall be made, nor shall any new
non-agricultural building be occupied for any purpose, until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. Every certificate of
occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   No permit for excavation for, or the erection, construction or
alteration of any non-agricultural building shall be issued before the
application has been made and approved for a certificate of occupancy, but no
occupancy permit shall be issued until the erection, construction or
alteration has been completed, inspected and approved by the Building
Inspector and no non-agricultural building or structure shall be occupied
until that certificate and permit is issued.



   (C)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or
in a building effected by the certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all
non-conforming uses of non-agricultural land or buildings existing after the
passage of this chapter, or any amendment thereto. Application for the
certificate of occupancy for non-conforming uses shall be filed with the
Building Inspector by the owner or occupant of the land or building occupied
by the non-conforming use within one year from the effective date of this
chapter, or amendment thereto. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector
to issue a certificate of occupancy for non-conforming use.



   (E)   No non-conforming use shall be renewed, or changed, without a
certificate of occupancy having first been issued by the Building Inspector.



(1994 Code, § 155.182)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.203  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The city may, from time to time, on its own petition or on the
petition of any person, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal by
ordinance, the boundaries of districts or regulations, or restrictions
established. The petition for the proposed amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal shall be in writing and be filed with the Board of
Appeals. The petition shall set forth with brevity and clarity all the facts
and circumstances involved, the specific change or changes sought, the
reasons the same are sought and the particular and specific result to be
accomplished thereby and, in the case of change in district boundaries, shall
be accompanied by an accurate map or plat of the area sought to be affected
thereby.



   (B)   As soon as convenient the Board of Appeals shall cause a
public hearing to be held in relation thereto, after giving not more than 30,
nor less than 15, days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and
publishing the notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
city. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a brief
statement of the proposed amendment.



   (C)   (1)   Notice of any petition requesting any relief pursuant
to this subchapter shall be served upon all owners of record, other than
those who have signed the petition requesting the proposed change, of all
property which is the subject of the petition and to all owners of record of
property adjacent to the premises to which the appeal pertains. The notice
shall state briefly the names of the petitioners, a description of the
property affected by the proposed change, a brief but clear statement of the
proposed change and the time and place of the hearing on the proposed change
before the Board of Appeals. Notice may be served in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of any owner, or if
the address cannot be reasonably ascertained, to the person in possession
thereof. Notice mailed to the address as appears on the authentic tax books
of the county will be sufficient if no one is in possession of the land.



      (2)   The notice shall be served not more than 30 days, nor
less than 15 days, prior to the date set for the hearing on the proposed
change. No change in the district boundaries shall be effective unless notice
as herein prescribed in given.



   (D)   If a protest against the proposed amendment, supplement,
change, modification or appeal is presented in writing to the City Clerk
signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be
altered or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or
across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, the amendment, supplement,
change, modification or repeal shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members of the City Council.



   (E)   Within 30 days following the hearing the Board of Appeals
shall file a report of the hearing and its recommendations with the City
Council. The City Council shall accept or reject the proposed amendment and
recommendation of the Board of Appeals at its next regular meeting after
receipt of the same, provided that the terms of division (F) below are fully
satisfied.



   (F)   The party or parties proposing or recommending a change in the
district regulations or district boundaries shall pay at the time of filing a
refundable deposit of $1,250 toward the costs of the proceedings. The
refundable deposit shall be paid to the City Clerk, who shall give a receipt
therefor; and a copy of the receipt shall be presented to the Board at the
convened hearing, as evidence that the deposit has been paid. Said refundable
deposit shall be applied to the costs of the proceedings, including but not
limited to, certified mailing, publication of notice, court reporter fees and
other professional fees incurred by the city. Should the total costs of said
proceedings be less than the deposit, a refund of any overpayment will be
made to the filing party; however, should the costs of said proceedings
exceed the deposit paid, the filing party shall pay any and all additional
costs to the city upon demand. The outcome of the proceedings shall in no way
effect the obligation of the filing party to fully satisfy the costs of the
proceedings.



(1994 Code, § 155.183)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 16-04, passed
4-25-2016)



§ 155.204  INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   (1)   In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted
for the promotion of public health morals, safety or the general welfare.



      (2)   Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher
standards shall govern.



   (B)   MORE RESTRICTIVE USES, as employed in this chapter, means the
restrictions on uses of buildings and lands in the districts herein
established. The R-1 Residential District establishes the most restrictive
uses. All other districts establish less restrictive uses. The order of
restrictiveness, beginning with the most restrictive after the R-1
Residential District, is as follows: R-2; R-3; A-1; R-4; B-1; B-2; I-1.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to and in
addition to any covenants, restrictions or agreements relating to lands or
buildings within the city.



(1994 Code, § 155.184)  (Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969)



§ 155.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   The owner or agent of a building, structure or land
in or upon which a violation of this chapter has been committed or shall
exist; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building, entire structure or
entire land in or upon which a violation of this chapter has been committed
or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other
person, firm or corporation who commits, takes part or assists in any
violation of this chapter, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
who maintains any building, structure or land in or upon which a violation of
this chapter shall exist, shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in
division (B) below.



      (2)   In case any building or structure is constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or
structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city’s
Attorney, for and on behalf of the city, or any owner, or tenant of real
property in the same contiguous zoning district as the building or structure
in question, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action
or proceedings to prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to prevent the occupancy
of the building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about the premises, or to restrain, correct or abate
the violation.



(1994 Code, § 155.998)



   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provisions of this chapter, for which another penalty is not already herein
provided shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10, nor more than
$100, for each offense; but if the offense be willful, on conviction thereof,
the punishment shall be a fined of not less than $100, nor more than $200,
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that the violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of §§
155.165 through 155.174 of this chapter, shall be fined not less than $50,
nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day that the violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this division (B)
shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful action that may be
necessary to secure compliance with §§ 155.165 through 155.174 of this
chapter.



(1994 Code, § 155.999)



(Ord. 200, passed 4-28-1969; Ord. 429, passed 1-11-1993)



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Illinois Compiled Statutes



References to 1994 Code



References to Resolutions



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Cites
 
Code Section




5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.
 
133.15


5 ILCS 430/5-15
 
133.15


5 ILCS 430/10-10—10-40
 
133.15


5 ILCS 430/50-5
 
133.15


5 ILCS 430/70-5
 
133.15


5 ILCS 430/70-5(A)
 
133.15


5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)
 
133.15


10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
 
38.01


20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.
 
136.02


20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
 
35.01, 35.03, 35.09, 35.12


20 ILCS 3305/10
 
35.02


25 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
 
154.052


30 ILCS 235
 
40.05, 40.09


30 ILCS 235/1 et seq.
 
32.093


30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
 
51.01


35 ILCS 115/9
 
37.036


35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
 
113.02


35 ILCS 120/2-27
 
37.175


35 ILCS 120/3
 
37.021, 37.051


35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.
 
41.03


35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.
 
37.175


35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.
 
37.175


35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.
 
37.178


35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.
 
37.175


50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
 
41.03, 122.05, 122.06


50 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
 
32.090


55 ILCS 5/3-9005
 
136.02


65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
 
10.99, 152.01


65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1
 
10.99


65 ILCS 5/4-3-1
 
38.01


65 ILCS 5/4-5-11
 
30.26


65 ILCS 5/8-11-1
 
36.17, 37.020, 37.145


65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3
 
36.17


65 ILCS 5/8-11-5
 
37.035, 37.160


65 ILCS 5/8-11-6
 
37.080, 37.081


65 ILCS 5/8-11-7
 
37.050


65 ILCS 5/8-11-8
 
37.095


65 ILCS 5/11-1-5
 
132.02


65 ILCS 5/11-8-4
 
95.15, 95.31


65 ILCS 5/11-12-8
 
154.020, 154.023, 154.040


65 ILCS 5/11-12-12
 
152.01


65 ILCS 5/11-20-16
 
99.28


65 ILCS 5/11-30-2
 
152.01


65 ILCS 5/11-30-9
 
152.01


65 ILCS 5/11-31-2
 
152.01


65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1
 
90.01


70 ILCS 405/22.02a
 
154.020


105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.
 
132.20


205 ILCS 5
 
40.09


210 ILCS 145/1 et seq.
 
135.095


220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
 
37.175


220 ILCS 5/9-221
 
37.175


220 ILCS 5/9-222
 
37.175


220 ILCS 5/9-222.1
 
37.175


220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)   
 
122.02


220 ILCS 5/21-401
 
122.01


220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)
 
122.02


220 ILCS 5/21-801
 
122.01


220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)
 
122.01


220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
122.01


225 ILCS 210/1001 et seq.
 
155.112


225 ILCS 227/1 et seq.
 
95.30, 95.31


225 ILCS 305/1 et seq.
 
150.051


225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq.
 
136.02


225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.
 
135.065


225 ILCS 720/1.01 et seq.
 
155.112


230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.
 
111.17, 120.07


230 ILCS 15/1
 
120.01


230 ILCS 15/2
 
120.02, 120.03


230 ILCS 15/3
 
120.05, 120.06


230 ILCS 15/4
 
120.07


230 ILCS 15/6
 
120.08


230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.
 
111.17


230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
 
111.49


235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
 
111.19, 132.04


235 ILCS 5/6-2
 
111.17


235 ILCS 5/6-2.5
 
111.17


235 ILCS 5/6-21(a)
 
111.17


415 ILCS 5/3.360
 
135.001, 135.002


415 ILCS 5/23—5/25
 
155.112


415 ILCS 105/3
 
135.001


415 ILCS 105/4
 
135.002, 135.112


415 ILCS 105/5
 
135.003, 135.112


415 ILCS 105/6
 
135.004, 135.112


415 ILCS 105/8
 
135.002, 135.007, 135.112


415 ILCS 105/9
 
135.005


415 ILCS 105/10
 
135.006, 135.112


425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
 
95.31


425 ILCS 30/23
 
95.33


425 ILCS 35/1
 
95.30


425 ILCS 35/2
 
95.31


425 ILCS 35/2.1
 
95.31


425 ILCS 35/2.2
 
95.31


425 ILCS 35/2.3
 
95.31


425 ILCS 35/4
 
95.32


430 ILCS 15/1
 
95.15


430 ILCS 65
 
Ch. 136


430 ILCS 65/3(a)
 
136.02


430 ILCS 66/1 et seq.
 
136.01


505 ILCS 100/1 et seq.
 
99.01


510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
 
91.101


510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.
 
91.101


510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.
 
91.086, 91.087, 91.101


510 ILCS 92/1 et seq.
 
91.062


520 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
 
136.03


605 ILCS 120/50
 
135.999


615 ILCS 5/23
 
152.26


625 ILCS 5
 
70.012, 70.013, 70.046, 135.001


625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
 
70.001


625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
 
70.026


625 ILCS 5/5-100 et seq.
 
90.08


625 ILCS 5/6-101
 
70.075


625 ILCS 5/6-303
 
70.075


625 ILCS 5/11-208.3
 
70.076


625 ILCS 5/11-500—11-502   
 
70.012


625 ILCS 5/11-501
 
70.075


625 ILCS 5/12-709
 
70.012


625 ILCS 55/5
 
114.07


625 ILCS 55/15
 
114.08


720 ILCS 5/2-2
 
130.01


720 ILCS 5/2-3
 
130.01


720 ILCS 5/2-4
 
130.01


720 ILCS 5/2-12
 
130.01


720 ILCS 5/4-4
 
130.02


720 ILCS 5/4-5
 
130.02


720 ILCS 5/4-6
 
130.04


720 ILCS 5/4-7
 
130.05


720 ILCS 5/8-4
 
130.06


720 ILCS 5/11-20
 
134.02


720 ILCS 5/11-20G
 
134.02


720 ILCS 5/11-21
 
134.04


720 ILCS 5/11-30
 
134.01


720 ILCS 5/12-35
 
91.101


720 ILCS 5/16-0.1
 
70.075


720 ILCS 5/24-1
 
70.075, 136.01


720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6)
 
136.01


720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(7)
 
136.01, 136.02


720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(9)
 
136.01


720 ILCS 5/24-1(c)(2)
 
136.01


720 ILCS 5/24-1(e)(1)
 
136.01


720 ILCS 5/24-1(e)(2)
 
136.01


720 ILCS 5/24-1.5
 
70.075


720 ILCS 5/24-2
 
136.02


720 ILCS 5/24-3.1
 
70.075, 136.03


720 ILCS 5/24-6
 
136.03


720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3)—(11)
 
111.17


720 ILCS 5/28-1.1
 
111.17


720 ILCS 5/28-2(b)
 
120.01


720 ILCS 5/28-3
 
111.17


720 ILCS 5/31-1
 
133.01


720 ILCS 5/31-8
 
133.02


720 ILCS 5/32-9
 
133.04


720 ILCS 5/36-1
 
70.075


720 ILCS 550
 
70.075


720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
 
135.081


720 ILCS 550/3
 
135.081


720 ILCS 570
 
70.075


720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
 
135.081


720 ILCS 570/102
 
135.081


720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.
 
132.06


725 ILCS 210/1 et seq.
 
136.02


735 ILCS 5/3-101
 
70.076


765 ILCS 205/1
 
154.043


765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
 
154.040


765 ILCS 205/1(b)
 
154.020


765 ILCS 205/(b)
 
154.023


765 ILCS 205/2
 
152.38, 154.023


765 ILCS 205/6
 
154.025


765 ILCS 205/7
 
154.025


765 ILCS 205/8
 
154.025


805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
 
111.16, 111.17


805 ILCS 180/1-1 et seq.
 
111.17


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1994 CODE



 

1994 Code
 
2017 Code




10.01
 
10.01


10.02
 
10.02


10.03
 
10.03


10.04
 
10.04


10.05
 
10.05


10.06
 
10.06


10.07
 
10.07


10.08
 
10.08


10.09
 
10.09


10.10
 
10.10


10.11
 
10.11


10.12
 
10.12


10.13
 
10.13


10.14
 
10.14


10.15
 
10.15


10.16
 
10.16


10.17
 
10.17


10.18
 
10.18


10.19
 
10.19


10.20
 
10.20


10.21
 
10.21


10.22
 
10.22


11.01
 
11.01


11.02
 
11.02


11.03
 
11.03


30.01
 
30.01


30.02
 
30.02


30.03
 
30.03


30.04
 
30.04


30.05
 
30.05


30.15
 
30.20


30.16
 
30.21


30.17
 
30.22


30.18
 
30.23


30.19
 
30.23


30.20
 
30.25


30.21
 
30.26


31.01
 
31.01


31.02
 
31.01


31.03
 
31.03


31.04
 
31.04


31.05
 
31.05


31.06
 
31.06


31.07
 
31.07


31.08
 
31.08


31.09
 
31.09


31.10
 
31.10


31.11
 
31.11


31.12
 
31.12


31.13
 
31.13


31.14
 
31.14


31.15
 
31.15


31.16
 
31.16


31.25
 
31.30


31.26
 
31.31


31.27
 
31.32


31.28
 
31.33


31.29
 
31.34


31.40
 
31.45


31.41
 
31.46


31.42
 
31.47


31.43
 
31.60


31.44
 
31.61


31.45
 
31.62


31.46
 
31.63


32.001
 
32.001


32.002
 
32.002


32.003
 
32.003


32.015
 
32.015


32.016
 
32.016


32.017
 
32.017


32.018
 
32.018


32.019
 
32.019


32.020
 
32.020


32.030
 
32.035


32.031
 
32.036


32.032
 
32.037


32.033
 
32.038


32.034
 
32.039


32.035
 
32.040


32.036
 
32.041


32.037
 
32.042


32.050
 
32.055


32.051
 
32.056


32.052
 
32.057


32.053
 
32.058


32.080
 
32.070


32.081
 
32.071


32.082
 
32.072


32.083
 
32.073


32.084
 
32.074


32.085
 
32.075


32.110
 
32.090


32.111
 
32.091


32.112
 
32.092


32.113
 
32.093


32.114
 
32.094


32.115
 
32.095


32.116
 
32.096


32.125
 
32.110


32.126
 
32.111


32.127
 
32.112


32.128
 
32.113


32.129
 
32.114


33.01
 
33.01


33.02
 
33.02


33.03
 
33.03


33.04
 
33.04


34.01
 
34.01


34.02
 
34.02


34.03
 
34.03


34.04
 
34.04


34.05
 
34.05


34.06
 
34.06


34.07
 
34.07


34.08
 
34.08


34.09
 
34.09


34.10
 
34.10


35.01
 
35.01


35.02
 
35.02


35.03
 
35.03


35.04
 
35.04


35.05
 
35.05


35.06
 
35.06


35.07
 
35.07


35.08
 
35.08


35.09
 
35.09


35.10
 
35.10


35.11
 
35.11


35.12
 
35.12


35.13
 
35.13


36.01
 
36.01


36.10
 
36.15


36.11
 
36.16


36.12
 
36.17


36.13
 
36.18


36.14
 
36.19


36.25
 
36.30


36.26
 
36.31


36.27
 
36.32


36.28
 
36.33


36.29
 
36.34


36.30
 
36.35


36.31
 
36.36


36.32
 
36.37


36.33
 
36.38


36.45
 
36.50


36.46
 
36.51


36.47
 
36.52


36.48
 
36.53


36.49
 
36.54


36.50
 
36.55


37.01
 
37.001


37.02
 
37.002


37.03
 
37.003


37.04
 
37.004


37.05
 
37.005


37.06
 
37.006


37.07
 
37.007


37.08
 
37.008


37.20
 
37.020


37.21
 
37.020


37.30
 
37.035


37.31
 
37.036


37.40
 
37.050


37.41
 
37.051


37.42
 
37.052


37.55
 
37.065


37.56
 
37.066


37.57
 
37.067


37.70
 
37.080


37.71
 
37.081


37.80
 
37.095


37.81
 
37.096


37.82
 
37.097


37.90
 
37.110


37.105
 
37.125


37.106
 
37.126


37.107
 
37.127


37.108
 
37.128


37.109
 
37.129


37.110
 
37.130


37.111
 
37.131


37.125
 
37.145


37.126
 
37.146


37.135
 
37.160


37.136
 
37.161


37.200
 
37.175


37.201
 
37.176


37.202
 
37.177


37.203
 
37.178


37.204
 
37.179


37.205
 
37.180


37.206
 
37.181


38.01
 
38.01


39.01
 
39.01


39.02
 
39.02


39.03
 
39.03


39.04
 
39.04


39.05
 
39.05


39.06
 
39.06


39.07
 
39.07


39.08
 
39.08


40.01
 
40.01


40.02
 
40.02


40.03
 
40.03


40.04
 
40.04


40.05
 
40.05


40.06
 
40.06


40.07
 
40.07


40.08
 
40.08


40.09
 
40.09


40.10
 
40.10


40.11
 
40.11


40.12
 
40.12


40.13
 
40.13


40.14
 
40.14


40.15
 
40.15


40.16
 
40.16


40.17
 
40.17


41.01
 
41.01


41.02
 
41.02


41.03
 
41.03


41.04
 
41.04


41.05
 
41.05


41.06
 
41.06


41.07
 
41.07


41.08
 
41.08


41.09
 
41.08


41.10
 
41.10


41.11
 
41.11


41.12
 
41.12


41.13
 
41.13


41.14
 
41.14


41.15
 
41.15


41.16
 
41.16


41.17
 
41.17


41.18
 
41.18


50.01
 
50.01


50.02
 
50.02


50.15
 
50.15


50.16
 
50.16


50.17
 
50.17


50.18
 
50.18


50.19
 
50.19


50.20
 
50.20


50.21
 
50.21


50.22
 
50.22


50.23
 
50.23


50.35
 
50.35


50.36
 
50.36


50.37
 
50.37


50.38
 
50.38


50.39
 
50.39


50.40
 
50.40


50.41
 
50.41


50.42
 
50.42


50.99
 
50.99


51.01
 
51.01


51.02
 
51.02


51.10
 
51.15


51.11
 
51.16


51.12
 
51.17


51.13
 
51.18


51.25
 
51.30


51.26
 
51.31


51.27
 
51.32


51.28
 
51.33


51.29
 
51.34


51.30
 
51.35


51.31
 
51.36


51.32
 
51.37


51.33
 
51.38


51.34
 
51.39


51.35
 
51.40


51.36
 
51.41


51.37
 
51.42


51.45
 
51.55


51.46
 
51.56


51.47
 
51.57


51.48
 
51.58


51.49
 
51.59


51.50
 
51.60


51.51
 
51.61


52.001
 
52.001


52.002
 
52.002


52.003
 
52.003


52.004
 
52.004


52.005
 
52.005


52.006
 
52.006


52.007
 
52.007


52.008
 
52.008


52.009
 
52.009


52.010
 
52.010


52.011
 
52.011


52.012
 
52.012


52.013
 
52.013


52.025
 
52.025


52.026
 
52.026


52.027
 
52.027


52.028
 
52.028


52.029
 
52.029


52.030
 
52.030


52.031
 
52.031


52.032
 
52.032


52.033
 
52.033


52.034
 
52.034


52.035
 
52.035


52.045
 
52.050


52.046
 
52.051


52.047
 
52.052


52.048
 
52.053


52.049
 
52.054


52.050
 
52.055


52.051
 
52.056


52.052
 
52.057


52.053
 
52.058


52.054
 
52.059


52.065
 
52.070


52.066
 
52.071


52.067
 
52.072


52.068
 
52.073


52.069
 
52.074


52.070
 
52.075


52.071
 
52.076


52.080
 
52.090


52.081
 
52.091


52.082
 
52.092


52.083
 
52.093


52.084
 
52.094


52.085
 
52.095


52.086
 
52.096


52.087
 
52.097


52.088
 
52.098


52.090
 
52.099


52.091
 
52.100


52.105
 
52.115


52.106
 
52.116


52.107
 
52.117


52.108
 
52.118


52.999
 
52.999


53.01
 
53.01


53.02
 
53.02


53.03
 
53.03


53.04
 
53.04


53.05
 
53.05


53.06
 
53.06


53.07
 
53.07


53.08
 
53.08


53.20
 
53.20


53.21
 
53.21


53.22
 
53.22


53.23
 
53.23


53.24
 
53.24


53.25
 
53.25


53.35
 
53.40


53.36
 
53.41


70.01
 
70.001


70.02
 
70.002


70.03
 
70.003


70.04
 
70.004


70.05
 
70.005


70.06
 
70.006


70.07
 
70.007


70.20
 
70.020


70.21
 
70.021


70.22
 
70.022


70.23
 
70.023


70.24
 
70.024


70.25
 
70.025


70.26
 
70.026


70.27
 
70.027


70.28
 
70.028


70.29
 
70.029


70.30
 
70.030


70.31
 
70.031


70.50
 
70.045


70.51
 
70.046


70.60
 
70.060


70.61
 
70.061


70.62
 
70.062


70.70
 
70.075


70.71
 
70.076


70.72
 
70.077


70.73
 
70.078


70.80
 
70.090


70.99
 
70.999


Ch. 71 Sch. I
 
Ch. 71 Sch. I


Ch. 71 Sch. II
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


Ch. 71 Sch. III
 
Ch. 71 Sch. III


Ch. 71 Sch. IV
 
Ch. 71 Sch. IV


Ch. 71 Sch. V
 
Ch. 71 Sch. V


Ch. 71 Sch. VI
 
Ch. 71 Sch. VI


Ch. 71 Sch. VII
 
Ch. 71 Sch. VII


Ch. 72 Sch. I
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


Ch. 72 Sch. II
 
Ch. 72 Sch. II


Ch. 72 Sch. VI
 
Ch. 72 Sch. III


90.01
 
90.01


90.02
 
90.02


90.03
 
90.03


90.04
 
90.04


90.05
 
90.05


90.06
 
90.06


90.07
 
90.07


90.08
 
90.08


90.09
 
90.09


90.10
 
90.10


90.11
 
90.11


90.12
 
90.12


90.99
 
90.99


91.01
 
91.001


91.02
 
91.002


91.03
 
91.003


91.10
 
91.015


91.11
 
91.016


91.12
 
91.017


91.13
 
91.018


91.14
 
91.019


91.15
 
91.020


91.16
 
91.021


91.17
 
91.022


91.18
 
91.023


91.19
 
91.024


91.25
 
91.035


91.26
 
91.036


91.27
 
91.037


91.28
 
91.038


91.29
 
91.039


91.30
 
91.040


91.31
 
91.041


91.32
 
91.055


91.33
 
91.056


91.34
 
91.057


91.35
 
91.058


91.36
 
91.059


91.37
 
91.060


91.38
 
91.061


91.39
 
91.062


91.50
 
91.075


91.51
 
91.076


91.52
 
91.077


91.53
 
91.078


91.54
 
91.079


91.55
 
91.080


91.56
 
91.081


91.57
 
91.082


91.58
 
91.083


91.59
 
91.084


91.60
 
91.085


91.61
 
91.086


91.62
 
91.087


91.63
 
91.100


91.64
 
91.101


91.99
 
91.999


92.01
 
92.001


92.10
 
92.015


92.11
 
92.016


92.12
 
92.017


92.13
 
92.018


92.14
 
92.019


92.15
 
92.020


92.25
 
92.035


92.26
 
92.036


92.27
 
92.037


92.28
 
92.038


92.29
 
92.039


92.30
 
92.040


92.31
 
92.041


92.32
 
92.042


92.33
 
92.043


92.34
 
92.044


92.35
 
92.045


92.45
 
92.060


92.46
 
92.061


92.47
 
92.062


92.48
 
92.063


92.49
 
92.064


92.50
 
92.065


92.51
 
92.066


92.52
 
92.067


92.65
 
92.080


92.66
 
92.081


92.67
 
92.082


92.68
 
92.083


92.80
 
92.095


92.81
 
92.096


92.82
 
92.097


92.83
 
92.098


92.84
 
92.099


92.85
 
92.100


92.86
 
92.101


92.87
 
92.102, 92.999


93.01
 
93.01


93.02
 
93.02


93.03
 
93.03


93.04
 
93.04


93.05
 
93.05


93.06
 
93.06


93.07
 
93.07


93.99
 
93.99


94.01
 
94.01


94.02
 
94.02


94.03
 
94.03


94.04
 
94.04


94.05
 
94.05


94.06
 
94.06


94.07
 
94.07


94.20
 
94.20


94.21
 
94.21


94.22
 
94.22


94.23
 
94.23


94.24
 
94.24


94.25
 
94.25


94.26
 
94.26


94.27
 
94.27


94.28
 
94.28


95.01
 
95.01


95.02
 
95.02


95.03
 
95.03


95.15
 
95.15


95.25
 
95.30


95.26
 
95.31


95.27
 
95.32


95.28
 
95.33


96.01
 
96.01


96.02
 
96.02


96.03
 
96.03


96.04
 
96.04


96.05
 
96.05


96.06
 
96.06


96.15
 
96.20


96.16
 
96.21


96.17
 
96.22


96.18
 
96.23


97.01
 
97.01


97.02
 
97.02


97.03
 
97.03


97.04
 
97.04


97.05
 
97.05


98.01
 
98.01


98.02
 
98.02


98.15
 
98.15


98.16
 
98.16


98.17
 
98.17


98.18
 
98.18


98.19
 
98.19


99.01
 
99.01


99.02
 
99.02


99.03
 
99.03


99.04
 
99.04


99.05
 
99.05


99.06
 
99.06


99.15
 
99.20


99.16
 
99.21


99.17
 
99.22


99.18
 
99.23


99.19
 
99.24


99.20
 
99.25


99.21
 
99.26


99.22
 
99.27


99.23
 
99.28


100.01
 
100.001


100.02
 
100.002


100.03
 
100.003


100.04
 
100.004


100.05
 
100.005


100.06
 
100.006


100.07
 
100.007


100.20
 
100.020


100.21
 
100.021


100.22
 
100.022


100.35
 
100.035


100.36
 
100.036


100.37
 
100.037


100.38
 
100.038


100.50
 
100.050


100.51
 
100.051


100.52
 
100.052


100.53
 
100.053


100.54
 
100.054


100.55
 
100.055


100.65
 
100.070


100.66
 
100.071


100.75
 
100.085


110.01
 
110.01


110.02
 
110.02


110.03
 
110.03


110.04
 
110.04


110.05
 
110.05


110.06
 
110.06


110.07
 
110.07


110.08
 
110.08


110.09
 
110.09


110.10
 
110.10


110.11
 
110.11


110.12
 
110.12


110.13
 
110.13


110.14
 
110.14


110.15
 
110.15


111.01
 
111.01


111.02
 
111.02


111.03
 
111.03


111.04
 
111.04


111.15
 
111.15


111.16
 
111.16


111.17
 
111.17


111.18
 
111.18


111.19
 
111.19


111.20
 
111.20


111.21
 
111.21


111.22
 
111.22


111.23
 
111.23


111.24
 
111.24


111.25
 
111.25


111.26
 
111.26


111.27
 
111.27


111.40
 
111.40


111.41
 
111.41


111.42
 
111.42


111.43
 
111.43


111.44
 
111.44


111.45
 
111.45


111.46
 
111.46


111.47
 
111.47


111.48
 
111.48


111.49
 
111.49


111.99
 
111.99


112.01
 
112.01


112.02
 
112.02


112.15
 
112.15


113.01
 
113.01


113.02
 
113.02


113.03
 
113.03


113.04
 
113.04


113.05
 
113.05


113.06
 
113.06


113.07
 
113.07


113.08
 
113.08


113.09
 
113.09


113.10
 
113.10


113.11
 
113.11


113.12
 
113.12


114.01
 
114.01


114.02
 
114.02


114.03
 
114.03


114.04
 
114.04


114.05
 
114.05


114.06
 
114.06


115.01
 
115.01


115.02
 
115.02


115.03
 
115.03


115.04
 
115.04


115.05
 
115.05


115.06
 
115.06


115.07
 
115.07


115.08
 
115.08


115.09
 
115.09


115.10
 
115.10


115.11
 
115.11


115.12
 
115.12


115.13
 
115.13


115.14
 
115.14


115.15
 
115.15


116.01
 
116.01


116.02
 
116.02


116.03
 
116.03


116.04
 
116.04


116.05
 
116.05


116.06
 
116.06


116.07
 
116.07


116.08
 
116.08


116.09
 
116.09


116.99
 
116.99


117.01
 
117.01


117.02
 
117.02


117.03
 
117.03


117.04
 
117.04


117.05
 
117.05


117.06
 
117.06


117.07
 
117.07


117.08
 
117.08


117.09
 
117.09


117.10
 
117.10


117.99
 
117.99


118.01
 
118.01


118.03
 
118.02


118.99
 
118.99


119.01
 
119.01


119.02
 
119.02


119.03
 
119.03


119.04
 
119.04


119.05
 
119.05


119.06
 
119.06


119.99
 
119.99


120.01
 
120.01


120.02
 
120.02


120.03
 
120.03


120.04
 
120.04


120.05
 
120.05


120.06
 
120.06


120.07
 
120.07


120.08
 
120.08


120.09
 
120.09


120.10
 
120.10


120.99
 
120.99


130.01
 
130.01


130.02
 
130.02


130.03
 
130.03


130.04
 
130.04


130.05
 
130.05


130.06
 
130.06


130.99
 
130.99


131.01
 
131.01


131.02
 
131.02


131.03
 
131.03


131.04
 
131.04


131.05
 
131.05


131.06
 
131.06


131.07
 
131.07


131.08
 
131.08


131.09
 
131.09


131.10
 
131.10, 131.99


132.01
 
132.01


132.02
 
132.02


132.03
 
132.03


132.04
 
132.03


132.05
 
132.05


132.06
 
132.06


132.20
 
132.20


132.21
 
132.21


132.22
 
132.22


132.23
 
132.23


132.24
 
132.23


133.01
 
133.01


133.02
 
133.02


133.03
 
133.02


133.04
 
133.04


133.05
 
133.15


134.01
 
134.01


134.02
 
134.02


134.03
 
134.03


134.04
 
134.04


136.01
 
135.001


136.02
 
135.002


136.03
 
135.003


136.04
 
135.004


136.05
 
135.005


136.06
 
135.006


136.07
 
135.007


136.10
 
135.020


136.20
 
135.035


136.25
 
135.050


136.30
 
135.065


136.40
 
135.080


136.41
 
135.081


136.42
 
135.082


136.43
 
135.083


136.44
 
135.084


136.50
 
135.095


136.60
 
135.110


136.61
 
135.111


136.62
 
135.112


136.02
 
135.112


136.03
 
135.112


136.04
 
135.112


136.06
 
135.112


136.25
 
135.112


136.42
 
135.112


136.99
 
135.112


137.01
 
136.01


137.02
 
136.02


137.03
 
136.03


137.05
 
136.03


137.06
 
136.05


150.01
 
150.001


150.02
 
150.002


150.03
 
150.003


150.04
 
150.004


150.05
 
150.005


150.06
 
150.006


150.10
 
150.020


150.11
 
150.021


150.12
 
150.022


150.13
 
150.023


150.15
 
150.035


150.16
 
150.036


150.17
 
150.037


150.18
 
150.038


150.19
 
150.039


150.25
 
150.050


150.26
 
150.051


150.27
 
150.051


150.28
 
150.053


150.29
 
150.054


150.30
 
150.055


150.31
 
150.056


150.40
 
150.070


150.41
 
150.071


150.42
 
150.072


150.43
 
150.073


150.55
 
150.085


150.56
 
150.086


150.57
 
150.087


150.58
 
150.088


150.59
 
150.089


150.70
 
150.100


150.71
 
150.101


150.72
 
150.102


150.85
 
150.115


150.86
 
150.116


150.87
 
150.117


150.88
 
150.118


150.89
 
150.119


150.90
 
150.120


150.91
 
150.121


151.01
 
151.01


152.01
 
152.01


152.02
 
152.02


152.03
 
152.03


152.04
 
152.04


152.05
 
152.05


152.06
 
152.06


152.15
 
152.20


152.25
 
152.35


152.26
 
152.36


152.27
 
152.37


152.28
 
152.38


152.98
 
152.99


152.99
 
152.99


153.01
 
153.01


153.02
 
153.02


153.99
 
153.99


154.01
 
154.001


154.02
 
154.002


154.03
 
154.003


154.04
 
154.004


154.05
 
154.005


154.06
 
154.006


154.15
 
154.020


154.16
 
154.021


154.17
 
154.022


154.18
 
154.023


154.19
 
154.024


154.20
 
154.025


154.30
 
154.040


154.31
 
154.041


154.32
 
154.042


154.33
 
154.043


154.34
 
154.044


154.35
 
154.045


154.36
 
154.046


154.37
 
154.047


154.38
 
154.048


154.39
 
154.049


154.40
 
154.050


154.41
 
154.051


154.42
 
154.052


154.43
 
154.053


154.44
 
154.054


154.45
 
154.055


154.46
 
154.056


154.47
 
154.057


154.48
 
154.058


154.50
 
154.070


154.51
 
154.071


154.52
 
154.072


154.53
 
154.073


154.54
 
154.074


154.54-1
 
154.075


154.54-2
 
154.076


154.54-3
 
154.077


154.54-4
 
154.078


154.55
 
154.079


154.55-1
 
154.080


154.55-2
 
154.081


154.55-3
 
154.082


154.56
 
154.083


154.57
 
154.084


154.60
 
154.095


154.61
 
154.096


154.62
 
154.097


154.63
 
154.098


154.64
 
154.099


154.99
 
154.999


155.001
 
155.001


155.002
 
155.002


155.003
 
155.003


155.004
 
155.004


155.005
 
155.005


155.015
 
155.020


155.016
 
155.021


155.017
 
155.022


155.018
 
155.023


155.030
 
155.035


155.040
 
155.050


155.041
 
155.051


155.042
 
155.052


155.043
 
155.053


155.044
 
155.054


155.055
 
155.065


155.056
 
155.066


155.065
 
155.080


155.075
 
155.095


155.076
 
155.096


155.077
 
155.097


155.078
 
155.098


155.090
 
155.110


155.091
 
155.111


155.092
 
155.112


155.093
 
155.113


155.105
 
155.125


155.106
 
155.126


155.107
 
155.127


155.108
 
155.128


155.109
 
155.129


155.110
 
155.130


155.111
 
155.131


155.112
 
155.132


155.113
 
155.133


155.114
 
155.134


155.115
 
155.135


155.116
 
155.136


155.117
 
155.137


155.118
 
155.138


155.119
 
155.139


155.130
 
155.150


155.131
 
155.151


155.132
 
155.152


155.145
 
155.165


155.146
 
155.166


155.147
 
155.167


155.148
 
155.168


155.149
 
155.169


155.150
 
155.170


155.151
 
155.171


155.152
 
155.172


155.153
 
155.173


155.154
 
155.174


155.165
 
155.185


155.166
 
155.186


155.167
 
155.187


155.168
 
155.188


155.169
 
155.189


155.180
 
155.200


155.181
 
155.201


155.182
 
155.202


155.183
 
155.203


155.184
 
155.204


155.998
 
155.999


155.999
 
155.999


 
 
 




 



 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Ref. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


-
 
11-6-1990
 
155.137, 155.138


 
 
 
 
 



 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1
 
6-21-1937
 
100.002


4
 
4-11-1938
 
31.45


7
 
5-29-1939
 
111.19, 111.20


13
 
10-21-1940
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


19
 
12-7-1942
 
92.019, 92.035—92.045, 92.065, 92.066, 92.081—92.083, 92.100, 92.101


18
 
3-22-1943
 
32.001—32.003


22
 
8-14-1944
 
92.019


24
 
3-26-1945
 
111.21


25
 
5-21-1945
 
92.064, 92.065, 92.080


40
 
2-16-1948
 
92.083


55
 
1-22-1951
 
51.02, 51.30—51.38, 52.011, 53.06


85
 
5-3-1951
 
111.40


76
 
9-8-1954
 
33.04


79
 
10-25-1954
 
31.12


82
 
12-20-1954
 
Ch. 72 Sch. II


87
 
8-8-1955
 
150.050, 150.051, 150.053—150.056


95
 
4-1-1957
 
98.02


104
 
3-28-1960
 
52.011


105
 
3-28-1960
 
51.15—51.17


110
 
10-31-1960
 
92.060—92.064


111
 
11-28-1960
 
Ch. 72 Sch. III


95
 
12-3-1962
 
32.035—32.042


99
 
7-22-1963
 
32.015—32.020


135
 
7-27-1964
 
153.01


136
 
7-27-1964
 
151.01


137
 
7-27-1964
 
150.035, 150.053, 150.085


138
 
8-10-1964
 
95.01


68
 
8-23-1964
 
98.01


160
 
1-23-1967
 
Ch. 71 Sch. IV


163
 
6-12-1967
 
51.32


171
 
8-14-1967
 
100.022


176
 
1-8-1968
 
92.061


179
 
3-25-1968
 
51.02, 53.40


186
 
7-22-1968
 
Ch. 72 Sch. II


193
 
11-12-1968
 
51.32


125
 
4-7-1969
 
Ch. 71 Sch. IV


198
 
4-28-1969
 
52.010


200
 
4-28-1969
 
155.001—155.005, 155.020—155.023, 155.035, 155.050—155.054, 155.065,
155.066, 155.080, 155.095—155.098, 155.106, 155.110—155.113,
155.125—155.137, 155.139, 155.165—155.174, 155.185—155.189,
155.200—155.204, 155.999


202
 
8-11-1969
 
37.020, 37.021, 37.035, 37.036


204
 
9-2-1969
 
Ch. 72 Sch. II


206
 
9-15-1969
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


210
 
8-3-1970
 
93.01—93.07, 93.99


212
 
8-31-1970
 
155.020, 155.050—155.053, 155.066


214
 
10-13-1970
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


218
 
12-20-1970
 
32.015, 32.018


220
 
2-8-1971
 
32.018


224
 
5-15-1971
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


227
 
4-17-1972
 
150.100—150.102


234
 
7-8-1972
 
155.020, 155.050—155.053, 155.065, 155.066


235-A
 
7-17-1972
 
132.03


240
 
12-11-1972
 
36.01


243
 
2-5-1973
 
92.064, 92.067


244
 
3-19-1973
 
52.013


249
 
8-20-1973
 
33.01—33.03


250
 
11-5-1973
 
111.44—111.48


252
 
5-20-1974
 
98.18


253
 
5-20-1974
 
Ch. 71 Sch. I


256
 
3-3-1975
 
32.055—32.057


257
 
5-19-1975
 
30.20


259
 
7-14-1975
 
151.01


262
 
3-8-1976
 
52.001—52.009, 52.025—52.035, 52.050—52.059, 52.070—52.076,
52.115—52.118, 52.999


263
 
3-8-1976
 
52.090—52.100


266
 
4-27-1976
 
52.059


267
 
6-14-1976
 
98.15


268
 
10-12-1976
 
53.05


269
 
10-12-1976
 
52.059


270
 
10-12-1976
 
35.01—35.13


276
 
2-2-1978
 
155.189


276
 
2-27-1978
 
155.035, 155.112, 155.113


278
 
5-22-1978
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


280
 
6-12-1978
 
Ch. 71 Sch. I


281
 
6-12-1978
 
31.11


282
 
6-12-1978
 
31.45


287
 
9-11-1978
 
51.15


297
 
1-22-1979
 
53.06


292
 
4-10-1979
 
32.090—32.096, 36.15—36.19


298
 
10-22-1979
 
51.02


299
 
1-28-1980
 
111.44—111.48


303
 
2-11-1980
 
111.19


306
 
7-14-1980
 
37.080, 37.081, 37.096, 37.097


309
 
4-13-1981
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


312
 
8-17-1981
 
52.011, 53.05


313
 
1-25-1982
 
37.095


314
 
1-25-1982
 
37.050—37.052


318
 
5-10-1982
 
97.01—97.05


319
 
5-10-1982
 
95.03


321
 
10-12-1982
 
98.02


322
 
11-8-1982
 
155.054


323
 
3-28-1983
 
152.01—152.06, 152.20, 152.35—152.38, 152.99


325
 
4-11-1983
 
111.42, 111.99


326
 
5-23-1983
 
30.01


331
 
10-24-1983
 
52.013


338
 
5-14-1984
 
152.03


341
 
7-23-1984
 
92.039


345
 
5-13-1985
 
151.01


346
 
5-13-1985
 
150.035


347
 
5-28-1985
 
111.40


348
 
7-10-1985
 
Ch. 71 Sch. VII


352
 
10-15-1985
 
92.037


353
 
10-28-1985
 
37.001—37.008


354
 
6-23-1986
 
150.054, 150.055


356
 
6-23-1986
 
111.43


357
 
6-23-1986
 
99.04, 99.06


357
 
6-24-1986
 
99.03


358
 
8-11-1986
 
Ch. 72 Sch. II


360
 
8-28-1986
 
51.32, 51.37, 51.39, 53.06


359
 
9-8-1986
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


285
 
12-8-1986
 
155.112


361
 
12-8-1986
 
32.070—32.075


298
 
2-28-1987
 
155.135


363
 
4-27-1987
 
31.33


364
 
7-13-1987
 
50.01, 50.02, 50.15—50.22, 50.35—50.42, 50.99


365
 
11-9-1987
 
150.035


366
 
11-9-1987
 
151.01


367
 
11-9-1987
 
153.01


368
 
3-28-1988
 
111.40


369
 
4-11-1988
 
92.063


370
 
4-25-1988
 
150.100


371
 
4-25-1988
 
34.09


372
 
4-25-1988
 
98.17


373
 
4-25-1988
 
51.17


374
 
5-23-1988
 
51.18, 51.32


377
 
7-25-1988
 
51.15


378
 
9-26-1988
 
150.002


379
 
9-26-1988
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


380
 
12-15-1988
 
155.053


382
 
2-13-1989
 
155.113


383
 
3-27-1989
 
153.02, 153.99


384
 
4-24-1989
 
52.011, 53.05, 53.20


385
 
9-11-1989
 
32.110—32.114


386
 
12-26-1989
 
132.03


388
 
5-14-1990
 
92.063


389
 
7-9-1990
 
111.01, 111.19—111.21, 111.24, 111.25


391
 
12-10-1990
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


392
 
2-11-1991
 
30.04


393
 
3-11-1991
 
90.01—90.12, 90.99


394
 
3-11-1991
 
150.051, 150.054, 150.055, 150.115—150.121


396
 
3-11-1991
 
53.40


398
 
4-8-1991
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


399
 
4-22-1991
 
155.004, 155.035, 155.053, 155.066


400
 
4-22-1991
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


401
 
5-28-1991
 
51.32


403
 
6-10-1991
 
34.01—34.09


404
 
6-24-1991
 
98.01, 98.16, 98.18


405
 
6-24-1991
 
51.32


406
 
7-22-1991
 
98.01, 98.16, 98.18


407
 
7-22-1991
 
111.20


408
 
9-9-1991
 
150.001—150.004, 150.035


409
 
9-9-1991
 
152.38


411
 
11-12-1991
 
155.004, 155.054


413
 
12-9-1991
 
Ch. 71 Sch. I


417
 
2-10-1992
 
132.01


418
 
2-10-1992
 
132.06


421
 
7-27-1992
 
99.01—99.06


423
 
8-11-1992
 
36.30—36.38


424
 
9-14-1992
 
90.04


425
 
11-23-1992
 
155.002


426
 
11-23-1992
 
155.136


427
 
11-23-1992
 
155.112


429
 
1-11-1993
 
155.004, 155.150—155.152, 155.999


430
 
1-25-1993
 
51.55—51.60


431
 
2-8-1993
 
32.113


432
 
3-8-1993
 
150.053


434
 
4-26-1993
 
154.001—154.006, 154.020—154.025, 154.040—154.058, 154.095—154.099,
154.999


436
 
10-12-1993
 
94.01—94.07, 94.20—94.28


438
 
12-27-1993
 
10.21


439
 
12-27-1993
 
38.01


441
 
12-27-1993
 
34.09


442
 
12-27-1993
 
53.05


94-002
 
4-25-1994
 
50.35


94-003
 
5-23-1994
 
150.035


94-006
 
6-13-1994
 
92.063


94-008
 
6-27-1994
 
111.20


94-011
 
10-11-1994
 
51.02


94-012
 
10-24-1994
 
111.04


94-013
 
11-28-1994
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


94-014
 
12-5-1994
 
53.07


94-015
 
12-5-1994
 
132.06


95-002
 
2-13-1995
 
131.01—131.09, 134.03


95-003
 
2-13-1995
 
150.005, 150.117


95-007
 
5-8-1995
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


95-010
 
6-12-1995
 
135.035


95-011
 
6-12-1995
 
150.050


95-13
 
7-10-1995
 
34.09


95-014
 
7-24-1995
 
113.03, 113.04


95-016
 
8-14-1995
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


95-18
 
10-23-1995
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


95-21
 
12-11-1995
 
50.23


95-22
 
12-26-1995
 
111.01


96-01
 
1-8-1996
 
Ch. 71 Sch. I


96-02
 
1-8-1996
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


96-03
 
3-11-1996
 
150.100, 150.101


96-06
 
5-13-1996
 
150.035


96-07
 
5-13-1996
 
150.035


96-10
 
7-8-1996
 
155.150—155.152


96-11
 
7-8-1996
 
150.050, 150.051


97-02
 
6-9-1997
 
155.005, 155.050—155.054


97-03
 
6-9-1997
 
31.46, 31.47, 33.02, 33.03, 34.02, 34.03, 35.02


97-05
 
9-22-1997
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


97-06
 
9-22-1997
 
Ch. 71 Sch. V


97-07
 
9-22-1997
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


97-10
 
12-23-1997
 
36.50—36.55


98-03
 
3-23-1998
 
39.01—39.08


98-04
 
3-27-1998
 
92.036, 92.037


98-05
 
6-8-1998
 
111.20


99-03
 
3-22-1999
 
40.01—40.17


99-06
 
4-12-1999
 
Ch. 71 Sch. II


99-09
 
11-22-1999
 
155.004, 155.053, 155.054


00-01
 
1-10-2000
 
Ch. 71 Sch. V


00-03
 
2-14-2000
 
131.10, 131.99


00-04
 
2-14-2000
 
111.19, 111.20, 111.40


00-10
 
3-27-2000
 
116.01—116.09, 116.99


00-11
 
3-27-2000
 
37.125—37.131


00-12
 
4-10-2000
 
90.04


2000-18
 
12-11-2000
 
41.01—41.18


2002-01
 
1-14-2001
 
111.20


01-01
 
1-22-2001
 
155.065


2001-01
 
1-22-2001
 
155.066


2001-02
 
1-22-2001
 
155.004


2001-05
 
6-11-2001
 
51.61


2001-07
 
7-23-2001
 
150.035


2001-08
 
7-23-2001
 
150.035


2001-09
 
7-23-2001
 
150.037


2001-10
 
7-23-2001
 
150.038


2001-11
 
7-23-2001
 
113.01—113.12


2001-12
 
10-9-2001
 
135.065


01-13
 
11-26-2001
 
53.06


2002-04-1
 
5-13-2002
 
92.037


2002-05
 
5-13-2002
 
92.039


2002-06
 
5-13-2002
 
92.082


2002-07
 
5-13-2002
 
92.063


2002-08
 
5-28-2002
 
31.60—31.63


2002-09
 
6-24-2002
 
35.02


2002-10
 
7-8-2002
 
30.26


2002-11
 
7-22-2002
 
111.20


2002-16
 
11-25-2002
 
37.110


2002-17
 
12-23-2002
 
135.080—135.084, 135.112


2003-01
 
2-24-2003
 
51.01, 51.02, 51.40—51.42


03-03
 
4-28-2003
 
34.10


2003-05
 
7-28-2003
 
154.070—154.084


03-07
 
8-11-2003
 
95.01


2003-6
 
8-11-2003
 
150.035—150.037


03-08
 
10-14-2003
 
51.35


03-10
 
10-27-2003
 
115.01—115.15


2003-09
 
10-27-2003
 
155.004, 155.080


04-01
 
1-12-2004
 
98.01, 98.16—98.19


04-03
 
3-22-2004
 
51.32


04-06
 
5-10-2004
 
133.15


04-07
 
5-24-2004
 
117.01—117.10, 117.99


2004-10
 
9-13-2004
 
35.02


04-11
 
9-27-2004
 
51.02


04-12
 
10-12-2004
 
150.050


04-13
 
12-6-2004
 
136.02


05-01
 
1-24-2005
 
132.02


05-02
 
1-24-2005
 
155.065


05-04
 
3-28-2005
 
53.05


05-06
 
4-11-2005
 
155.151


05-09
 
7-25-2005
 
150.038, 150.039


05-10
 
8-8-2005
 
50.19


05-11
 
9-12-2005
 
111.20


05-12
 
10-24-2005
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


05-13
 
12-27-2005
 
135.020


05-15
 
12-27-2005
 
98.01


06-01
 
3-13-2006
 
92.102, 92.999


2006-02
 
4-10-2006
 
111.19


2006-03
 
4-10-2006
 
111.40


06-04
 
4-24-2006
 
111.20


2006-06
 
5-22-2006
 
155.137


2006-07
 
6-12-2006
 
Ch. 71 Sch. VI


2006-08
 
6-27-2006
 
111.20


2007-01
 
1-22-2007
 
111.19


2007-02
 
1-22-2007
 
155.189


07-03
 
4-23-2007
 
51.32


07-05
 
6-11-2007
 
132.20—132.23


07-06
 
8-13-2007
 
Ch. 72 Sch. I


07-07
 
11-13-2007
 
91.001—91.003, 91.015—91.024, 91.035—91.041, 91.055—91.062,
91.075—91.087, 91.100, 91.101, 91.999


07-08
 
11-26-2007
 
34.09


08-01
 
1-14-2008
 
51.32


08-02
 
5-27-2008
 
92.037, 92.063


08-03
 
7-1-2008
 
118.01, 118.02, 118.99


08-04
 
8-25-2008
 
135.110—135.112


08-05
 
8-25-2008
 
135.095, 135.112


08-06
 
8-25-2008
 
Ch. 71 Sch. I


08-07
 
10-14-2008
 
31.62


09-01
 
3-9-2009
 
116.05


09-02
 
3-9-2009
 
119.01—119.06, 119.99


09-04
 
6-22-2009
 
53.40


09-05
 
9-14-2009
 
150.035—150.039


09-06
 
10-12-2009
 
51.32


09-07
 
11-9-2009
 
92.095


09-08
 
12-14-2009
 
92.095


09-09
 
12-14-2009
 
50.35


09-10
 
12-14-2009
 
50.20


10-01
 
4-12-2010
 
99.28


10-03
 
6-14-2010
 
98.01


10-04
 
6-14-2010
 
92.037


10-05
 
6-14-2010
 
92.062, 92.063


10-06
 
6-14-2010
 
92.082


11-02
 
7-11-2011
 
50.19


11-03
 
7-11-2011
 
34.09


11-4a
 
7-25-2011
 
135.050, 135.112


11-04
 
11-14-2011
 
30.26


11-05
 
11-14-2011
 
70.001—70.007, 70.020—70.031, 70.045, 70.046, 70.060—70.062, 70.075,
70.078, 70.090, 70.999


11-06
 
12-12-2011
 
70.075—70.078


12-01
 
2-13-2012
 
111.01


12-02
 
2-13-2012
 
111.19


12-03
 
6-25-2012
 
111.49


12-07
 
6-25-2012
 
98.02


11-01
 
7-11-2012
 
155.151


13-01
 
1-14-2013
 
132.05


13-02
 
1-14-2013
 
33.03


13-03
 
2-25-2013
 
155.189


14-04a
 
5-28-2013
 
31.62


13-06
 
8-12-2013
 
150.005, 150.006


13-07
 
10-28-2013
 
37.175—37.181


2014-01
 
3-24-2014
 
37.145, 37.146, 37.160, 37.161


2014-02
 
4-14-2014
 
37.145, 37.146, 37.160, 37.161


14-04
 
5-12-2014
 
155.065


14-05
 
5-27-2014
 
111.19, 111.20


14-50
 
5-27-2014
 
111.40


14-06
 
6-9-2014
 
Ch. 72 Sch. III


14-07
 
7-28-2014
 
91.037, 91.080


14-08
 
10-27-2014
 
98.01


15-01
 
1-26-2015
 
31.15, 31.16


15-02
 
6-8-2015
 
51.32


15-03
 
6-8-2015
 
153.01, 153.02, 153.99


15-04
 
6-8-2015
 
150.039


15-05
 
6-22-2015
 
37.126


15-06
 
7-27-2015
 
10.22


15-07
 
7-27-2015
 
10.21


15-08
 
8-10-2015
 
155.053, 155.054


15-09
 
8-24-2015
 
51.02


15-10
 
9-14-2015
 
150.020—150.023


15-11
 
9-28-2015
 
150.020


15-12
 
10-26-2015
 
120.01—120.10, 120.99


16-03
 
3-28-2016
 
50.16


16-04
 
4-25-2016
 
155.189, 155.203


16-05
 
7-25-2016
 
97.04


16-06
 
9-12-2016
 
70.077


2017-01
 
1-23-2017
 
111.20


17-02
 
7-24-2017
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


17-03
 
7-24-2017
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


17-04
 
9-11-2017
 
121.01—121.05, 121.99


2017-05
 
10-23-2017
 
155.112


17-06
 
12-11-2017
 
70.010—70.013


2017-07
 
12-26-2017
 
40.01—40.17


2018-01
 
1-8-2018
 
32.093


18-02
 
5-29-2018
 
51.32


18-03
 
6-11-2018
 
122.01—122.06


18-04
 
6-25-2018
 
10.22


 
 
 
 
 




 


