MUNICIPAL CODE VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE 
____________ 
Adopted: June 15, 1981 
Effective: June 15, 1981 
____________ 
Published in 1981 by Order of the Corporate Authorities 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Deborah Bullwinkel 
Village President 
____________ 
Chris J. Aiello 
Robert Wagner 
Albert Bulthuis 
John Davis 
Donald Kase 
Robert Taglia 
Trustees 
____________ 
Richard D. Keehner, Jr. 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Hosanna Korynecky 
Village Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the Village of Villa Park of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is one which has been used in many Illinois municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. The figure after the dash is also keyed to the article the section appears in; for example the first section of Article I is 101 and the first section of Article X is 1001. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-101 and the second section of Chapter 3 is 3-202. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-104 and 4-105 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-104.1, 4-104.2, and 4-104.3 respectively. New chapters may be included by the addition of a decimal after the chapter number; e.g., if the new material is to be included between Chapters 10 and 11 it will be designated as Chapter 10.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Roger D. Merriam, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Lawrence Kenyon, Village Manager and Mr. Francis W. Faris, Jr., Village Attorney, and all other Village employees for their cooperation and interest during the progress of the work on this Code. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 1983 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a Villa Park Municipal Code; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing a General Penalty for Violations Thereof; and Providing When this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Villa Park, Du Page County, Illinois: 
Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 25 inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Villa Park Municipal Code," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Corporate Authorities on or before July 23, 1979, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
Section 2.  That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after June 15, 1981, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Villa Park, enacted on final passage on or before July 23, 1979, and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Village or any evidence of the Village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the Village; 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Corporate Authorities not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinances of the Village; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the Village; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinances; 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the Village; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and making assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance extending or contracting the boundaries of the Village; 
(11)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any village officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith; 
(12)  Any ordinance fixing the number of alcoholic liquor licenses; 
(13)  Any ordinance relating to subdivisions or zoning; 
(14)  Any ordinance creating specific funds; 
(15)  Any ordinance contained in an Appendix to such Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance passed after July 23, 1979. 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  That any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Corporate Authorities to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Villa Park Municipal Code," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5.  That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the express duty of the Village Clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the Corporate Authorities to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the Corporate Authorities. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Section 6.  That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-108 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the sections so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7.  That it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the Village to change or amend by additions or deletions, any section or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of Villa Park to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-108 of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Section 8.  That whenever in said Code or in any ordinance of the Village, any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in said Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and state law does not provide otherwise, the violation of any such provision of such Code or any ordinance shall be an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Unless specifically provided otherwise, or the content thereof so dictates, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or continue. 
Section 9.  That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 10.  That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in book or pamphlet form according to law. 
Passed: June 15, 1981 
AYES: 5 Adamczyk, Bertuca, Brandow, Loftus, Toika 
NAYES: 1 Sinibaldi 
ABSENT: 
ATTEST: 
	Approved 
/s/ James H. St. Louis 
Village Clerk 	/s/ Victor Lesch 
President 
Approved 	
/s/ Victor Lesch 
President 	
/s/ James H. St. Louis 
Village Clerk 	
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-101. - Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Villa Park Municipal Code," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 1-2-3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-102. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of trustees. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter of the context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of trustees may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Board, board of trustees, village board. Whenever the words "board," "board of trustees" or "village board" are used, they shall be construed to mean the board of trustees of the Village of Villa Park, which shall consist of the president and trustees. 
State Law reference— Board of trustees to be composed of president and trustees, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-12-5. 
Circuit court or court. The term circuit court or court shall refer to the Circuit Court of the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit. 
State Law reference— DuPage County in Eighteenth Judicial Circuit, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 37, § 72.1. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used herein it shall refer to the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by this Code is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a legal holiday in which case it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
Corporate authorities. The board of trustees. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 1-1-2. 
Corporate limits, village limits. The term "corporate limits" or "village limits" shall mean the legal boundaries of the Village of Villa Park. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" or "county" shall mean the County of DuPage in the State of Illinois. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an elected official or appointed officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize such officer, official or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers generally. Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as "village clerk," "chief of police," "trustee," "president," etc., such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of Villa Park." 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Road. The portion of a street which is improved for vehicular use. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Illinois. 
Street. The work "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the village and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant," or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Village shall mean the Village of Villa Park, DuPage County, Illinois. 
Wholesale, wholesaler, etc. In all cases where the term "wholesale," "wholesaler," or "wholesale dealer" is used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall be understood and held to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities directly to the consumer. 
Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Zoning and planning commission. All references to the plan commission, zoning board of appeals, board of appeals and board shall be deemed to refer to the zoning and planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86) 
State Law reference— Similar rules of statutory construction, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 131, § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-103. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-104. - Amendments to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the corporate authorities.  
Sec. 1-105. - Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be misrepresented thereby.  
Sec. 1-106. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-107. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-108. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violation. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the village any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance is hereby declared to be an offense and shall be punishable by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven-hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or is permitted to occur or continue. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 1, 9-8-64; Ord. No. 3387, § 2, 9-25-06; Ord. No. 3644, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 4031 , § 1, 5-21-18) 
Cross reference— Termination of parking violations, § 14-218. 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 1-2-1; power of village to declare ordinance violation to be a misdemeanor, Ch. 24, § 1-2-1.1; bail for ordinance violations, Ch. 110A, § 528.  
Sec. 1-108.1. - Minimum fines. 
Notwithstanding any other minimum fine set forth in any other section of this Code, the following offenses shall be punishable by a minimum fine of not less than that as indicated in the chart below: 
Violation 	Section 	Minimum Fine 
Disorderly conduct 	16-115(a) 	$150.00 
Possession of cannabis 	16-103(b) 	$150.00 
Possession of drug paraphernalia 	16-112(g) 	$150.00 
Unlawful sale of tobacco to minor under 18 years old 	16-112(d) 	$150.00 
Unlawful sale of paraphernalia to person under 18 years old 	16-112(d) 	$150.00 
Possess or discharge air rifle/gun 	16-113 	$150.00 
Public indecency 	16-110.1 	$150.00 
Retail theft 	16-101(c)(1) 	$150.00 
Trespass 	16-107 	$150.00 
Damage property of another 	16-102 	$150.00 
Interference with police 	16-104 	$150.00 
Negligent driving 	14-111 	$150.00 
Cruelty to animals 	5-103 	$150.00 
Unlawful consumption of alcohol by a minor 	3-408(i) 	$150.00 
Unlawful possession of alcohol by a minor 	3-408(g) 	$150.00 
Reckless driving in a parking lot 	15-804(d) 	$150.00 
Theft 	16-119(a) 	$150.00 
Theft of lost or mislaid property 	16-119(b) 	$150.00 
Theft of labor or services 	16-119(c) 	$150.00 
 
( Ord. No. 4031 , § 2, 5-21-18)  
Sec. 1-108.2. - Prepayment fines for minor violations. 
(a)  Unless another prepayment penalty is specifically provided in this code, such as for parking violations, any person who is issued a complaint for a violation that has a minimum fine stated below, that is not required to appear in administrative adjudication or circuit court or has requested an administrative adjudication hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the citation not counting the day of issuance, may settle and compromise that citation by paying a settlement payment stated below to the village from the date of the citation not counting the day of issuance. Payments received by mail shall be credited as paid on the date received by the village. 
Minimum Fine 	If paid within 10 days 	If paid after 10 days but before 1st
hearing date 	If paid after
nonappearance at
1st hearing date but
before 2nd hearing 	If paid after nonappearance
at 2nd hearing date 
$100.00 	$75.00 	$100.00 	$150.00 	Default fine/judgment amount 
$150.00 	$100.00 	$150.00 	$200.00 	Default fine/judgment amount 
 
(b)  The tickets issued under this section shall be as a courtesy in lieu of arrest. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim the person shall be subject to a fine not more than the penalties set forth in section 1-108. 
( Ord. No. 4031 , § 2, 5-21-18)  
Sec. 1-109. - Prosecution where different penalties exist for the same offense; effect of license, permit revocation or use of other penalties. 
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code of Ordinances, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty sought to be enforced.  
Sec. 1-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 1, adopted May 21, 2012, repealed § 1-110, entitled "Citations", which derived from: Ord. No. 3387, § 3, adopted Sept. 25, 2006; Ord. No. 3410, § 2, adopted Jan. 15, 2007; Ord. No. 3457, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2008; and Ord. No. 3530, §§ 2(A)—(D), adopted Jan. 26, 2009.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The village elected to operate under the managerial form of government (65 ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq.) in an election held on Oct. 27, 1956. See Ord. No. 640B, adopted on July 17, 1956. 
Cross reference— Liquor control commissioner, § 3-201 et seq.; community development department, § 7-101; electrical commission, § 7-316 et seq.; civil defense and emergencies, Ch. 8; emergency services and disaster agency, § 8-201 et seq.; fire department, § 9-301 et seq.; director of parks and recreation, § 17-101; police department, Ch. 19; taxation, Ch. 23; administration of zoning ordinance, App. C, Art. 6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Datum plane. 
There is hereby established for local improvement and other purposes a village datum plane which shall be the same plane used for elevations as established by the United States Geological Survey. 
(Ord. No. 190, 2-1-26)  
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Financing municipal projects. 
The village pursuant to its home rule powers as set forth in Article 7, Section 6(a) of the 1970 Illinois Constitution, and pursuant to the state law, is authorized to make loans and pledge its full faith and credit for said loans to, in its discretion, finance municipal projects. No referendum or hearing shall be required. Such loan shall be payable from unlimited ad valorem property taxes as a general obligation of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1696, §§ 1—5, 3-7-77)  
Sec. 2-202. - Fiscal year. 
There shall be a shorten fiscal year from May 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018 after which the fiscal year of the village shall commence on January first of each year and terminate on the last day of December of that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 350, § 1, 7-5-35; Ord. No. 4025 , § 1, 4-23-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.  
Sec. 2-203. - Depositories. 
(a)  The Villa Park Trust and Savings Bank, Villa Park, Illinois 60181, and such other financial institutions as may be designated by ordinance are hereby designated as depositories for funds of the Village of Villa Park. 
(b)  When a bank has been designated as a depository it shall continue as such until ten (10) days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of resources and liabilities as required by this section. When a new depository is designated, the corporate authorities shall notify the sureties of the municipal treasurer of that fact, in writing at least five (5) days before the transfer of funds. The treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or money which he deposits in a designated bank while the funds and money are so deposited. If municipal funds or money are deposited in a designated bank, however, the amount of such deposits shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the bank's capital stock and surplus, and the treasurer shall be responsible for funds or money deposited in the bank in excess of this limitation. 
(c)  No bank shall be qualified to receive municipal funds or money until it has furnished the corporate authorities with copies of the last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the bank is required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies or to the comptroller of currency. Each bank designated as a depository for such funds or money shall, while acting as such depository, furnish the corporate authorities with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish to the commission of the banks and trust companies or the comptroller of currency. 
(Ord. No. 556, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-49; Ord. No. 2453, § 1, 11-26-90; Ord. No. 2553, § 1, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 3164, § 1, 12-16-02; Ord. No. 3173, §§ 2—4, 2-24-03) 
State Law reference— Depositories, 65 ILCS 5/3-10-3.  
Sec. 2-204. - Attendance requirements for boards, commissions, etc. 
(a)  If any member of any board or commission has failed to attend, except for medical reasons, either fifty (50) per cent of the meetings of that board or commission over a period of six (6) months, or has failed to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of such board or commission, such absences shall automatically cause the resignation of the member from the board or commission without any further action on the part of the member, and a vacancy shall thereby be created. 
(b)  The automatic resignation provided for in subsection (a) shall not prohibit the reappointment of that member to the same board or commission by the president and board of trustees, to fill the vacancy so created. 
(Ord. No. 1827, §§ 1, 2, 1-22-79)  
Sec. 2-205. - Charge for bond issues. 
There shall be a charge of three-fourths of one percent for the issuance of bonds and developments within the village and a charge of one percent for the issuance of bonds on developments outside the village limits, provided however the minimum charge shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Prior to the enactment of a memorandum of intent by the village for the issuance of any bond, a standby fee of one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) shall be paid to the village for expenses incurred up to and including enactment of the memorandum of intent. If the bond issue is abandoned through no fault of the village, this fee shall not be refunded. If the bond issue is successful, this fee shall apply on the above charges as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 1932, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-80)  
Sec. 2-206. - Pollution control and industrial revenue bonds. 
(a)  Whenever used in this section unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  Economic development project means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery or equipment or any combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary in connection therewith, for use by any person, provided that the existence of such economic development project will create or retain employment opportunities in the municipality. 
(2)  Municipality means the Village of Villa Park, DuPage County, Illinois. 
(3)  Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation (including public utilities), association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state agency, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative, agent or assigns. 
(4)  Pollution means any form of environmental pollution including, but not limited to, water pollution, air pollution, land pollution, solid waste pollution, thermal pollution, radiation contamination, or noise pollution as determined by the various standards prescribed by this state, the federal government or other governmental entities and including but not limited to, anything which is considered as pollution or environmental damage in the Environmental Protection Act, compiled as Sections 1001 through 1051 of Chapter 111-½ Ill. Rev. Stats. 1979, and any amendment thereto and substitution therefor. 
(5)  Pollution control facility means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, appurtenance, addition, machinery or equipment, or any combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary therewith, having to do with or the end purpose of which is, reducing, controlling or prevention pollution. 
(6)  Project means any economic development project or pollution control facility or any combination thereof. 
(7)  Project costs means and includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement and extension of a project including without limitation the cost of studies and surveys; plans, specifications, architectural and engineering services; legal, marketing or other special services, financing, acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site development of new and rehabilitated buildings, rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing buildings and all other necessary and incidental expenses including an initial bond and interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a date six (6) months subsequent to the estimated date of completion. 
(b)  It is hereby determined and declared that the purpose of this section is to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of projects in order to relieve conditions of unemployment and to encourage the increase of industry within the municipality, thereby reducing the evils attendant upon unemployment and to provide for the increased welfare and prosperity of the residents of the municipality; it is hereby further determined and declared to be the purpose of this section to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of pollution control facilities in order to eliminate, abate or reduce the serious dangers to the public health and welfare caused by environmental pollution; and the same are hereby declared and determined to be public purposes and functions pertaining to the government and affairs of the municipality. 
(c)  In addition to powers which it may now have, the municipality shall have the power under this Ordinance: 
(1)  To construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease, to reconstruct, improve, better or extend and to finance one or more projects, whether or not now or hereafter in existence, within or without the municipality or partially within or partially without the municipality, but in no event further than ten (10) miles from the territorial boundaries of such municipality, and, if desirable, to acquire by gift, purchase or lease lands or rights in land in connection with any project. 
(2)  To issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project costs of any project and to designate an appropriate name for such bonds. 
(3)  To rent, lease or sell any project to any person in such manner that payments to be received with respect to the project shall produce revenues and receipts sufficient to provide for the prompt payment at maturity of principal, interest and redemption premiums, if any, upon all bonds issued to finance the cost of such project. 
(4)  To pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this section, the interest thereon, and the redemption premiums, if any, the revenues and receipts to be received from such project. 
(5)  To mortgage such project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor. 
(6)  To sell and convey such project, including without limitation the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in this section, for such price and at such time as the governing body of the municipality may determine. However, no sale or conveyance of such project shall ever be made in such manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of any bonds issued to finance the project costs of such project. 
(7)  To issue its bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds theretofore issued by such municipality under authority of this section. 
(8)  To enter into a loan agreement in lieu of any lease agreement with any person and accept a note and/or a mortgage as evidence of any security for the person's obligation to repay the proceeds of revenue bonds and pledge said note and/or mortgage for the benefit of the holders of the bonds. 
Property acquired by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be exempt from the imposition and collection of taxes thereon while owned by the municipality, but the use of such property is subject to taxation to be paid by the lessee or occupant as provided in Section 26 of the "Revenue Act of 1979" filed May 17, 1939, or as may hereafter be amended. 
(d)  The exercise of all powers granted by this section may be authorized, and bonds may be authorized to be issued under this section for the purposes set forth in this section, by ordinance of the governing body of the municipality which may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced and shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, payable at such times, may be in one or more series, may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates, may be payable in such medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be subject to such terms of redemption at such premiums, may be executed in such manner, may contain such terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered, as such ordinance may provide or as may be subsequently determined by the governing body before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at public or private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the governing body of the municipality. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts or certificates in such form and with such provisions as the governing body of the municipality may determine, may be issued to the purchaser or purchasers of bonds sold pursuant to this section. The bonds and interim receipts or certificates shall be deemed to be securities and negotiable instruments within the meaning and for all purposes of the "Uniform Commercial Code". 
(e)  Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this section may contain covenants as to: 
(1)  The use and disposition of the revenues and receipts from the project for which the bonds are to be issued, including the creation and maintenance of reserves; 
(2)  The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to the project or any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions thereto; 
(3)  The maintenance and repair of such project; 
(4)  The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of insurance moneys; 
(5)  The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the state, having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit of the bondholders, paying agent and bond registrar; 
(6)  The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and 
(7)  The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any portion thereof or any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a receiver. 
Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this section may provide that the principal of and interest on any bonds issued under this section shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering such project for which the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture of trust may contain such covenants and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and shall be executed in the manner as may be provided for in the ordinance. The provisions of this section and any such ordinance or ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute a contract with the holder or holders of the bonds and continue in effect until the principal of, the interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any, on the bonds so issued have been fully paid, and the duties of the municipality and its corporate authorities and officers under this section and any such ordinance or ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall be enforceable by any bondholder by mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other appropriate suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided the ordinance or any mortgage or indenture of trust under which the bonds are issued may provide that all such remedies and rights to enforcement may be vested in a trustee for the benefit of all the bondholders which trustee shall be subject to the control of a majority of the holders or owners of any outstanding bonds. 
(f)  The bonds shall bear the signatures of such officers of the municipality as may be designated in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and such signatures shall be the valid and binding signatures of the officers of the municipality, notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payments therefor any or all of the persons whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the municipality issuing such bonds. The validity of the bonds is not dependent on nor affected by the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment or extension of the project for which the bonds are issued. The ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the bonds shall contain a recital that they are issued pursuant to this section, which recital shall be conclusive evidence of their validity and of the regularity of their issuance. 
(g)  All bonds issued under this section have a lien upon the revenues and receipts derived from the project for which the bonds have been issued, and the governing body may provide in the ordinance or ordinances authorizing such bonds for the issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon such revenues and receipts or may provide that the lien upon such revenues and receipts is subordinate. 
(h)  All bonds issued under and pursuant to this section shall be limited obligations of the municipality payable solely out of the revenues and receipts derived from the project with respect to which such bonds are issued. No holder of any bonds issued under this section has the right to compel any exercise of taxing power of the municipality to pay the bonds, the interest or premium, if any, thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an indebtedness of the municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision. It shall be plainly stated on the face of each bond that it has been issued under the provisions of this section and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provisions. 
(i)  The municipality, or any trustee on behalf of the municipality, may invest any funds held by it pursuant to this section in bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities constituting direct obligations of the United States of America; in certificates of deposit or time deposits constituting direct obligations of any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act, as heretofore and hereafter amended, provided, however, that investments may be made only in those certificates of deposit or time deposits in banks which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, if then in existence; or in short term discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association. Any such securities may be purchased at the offering or market price thereof at the time of such purchase. 
(j)  The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or improvements imposed by the Illinois Revised Statutes or any other similar requirements which may be lawfully waived by this section and any requirement of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purpose or the lease, sale or other disposition of property of the municipality is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this section. 
(k)  The powers conferred by this section are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this section shall not affect, the powers conferred by any law or any other ordinance. Projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended and financed, and bonds may be issued under this Ordinance for such purposes, notwithstanding that any law or any other ordinance may provide for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension and financing of a like project, or the issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without regarding to the requirements, restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1933, §§ 1—11, 9-8-80)  
Sec. 2-207. - Investment of money not immediately necessary from the working cash fund. 
(a)  Any and all money of the village, in its working cash fund, not immediately necessary for the purposes of the municipality which are set forth in Chapter 24, Section 8-7-4 of the Illinois Revised Statutes may be used by the village, to be invested in bonds issued by the village which represent the obligations of the village, or may be used to invest in bonds, and other interest bearing obligations of the State of Illinois, or securities authorized for investment in "An Act relating to certain investments of public funds by public agencies" approved July 23, 1943, as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
(b)  No investment authorized by this section, or by provisions of Chapter 24, Section 8-7-4 of the Illinois Revised Statutes shall be made in bonds or interest bearing obligations which are in default, or in bonds or interest bearing obligations for which accrued interest is due. 
(c)  All money realized by the village from the sale or redemption of the securities authorized for investment under this section, and under the provisions of Chapter 24, Section 8-7-4 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, may also be placed in the working cash fund and interest on the investments hereby authorized may also be placed in such working cash fund, or alternatively, such monies may be transferred in whole or in part, to the general or special corporate funds of the municipality, and such transfer shall be authorized by resolution of the corporate authorities. 
(d)  The village treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to make such investments as are authorized by subsection (a) of this section without further action on the part of the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 1977, §§ 1—4, 4-27-81)  
Sec. 2-208. - Fee for dishonored checks. 
The drawer or maker of each check delivered to the village in payment of any fee or charge whatsoever which is returned to the village due to an insufficient amount of funds in the account of the drawer or the maker shall be required to pay a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) for each such check. 
(Ord. No. 1988, § 1, 7-20-81; Ord. No. 3160, § 2, 10-28-02)  
Sec. 2-209. - Budget officer system adopted. 
(a)  Adopted. The village hereby adopts the budget officer system established in Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS 65, 5/8-2-9.1 and ILCS 65, 5/8-2-9.2 through 5/8-2-9.10). 
(b)  Designation of budget officer; amount of surety bond. The President of the Village of Villa Park hereby designates the village manager to serve as the village budget officer and the amount of the required surety bond is hereby determined to be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2762, §§ 1, 4, 4-10-95) 
Cross reference— Budget officer, § 2-1201 et seq.  
Sec. 2-210. - Utilizing collection agencies to collect delinquent fees. 
The village manager shall be and is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to utilize the services of collection agencies as he may determine to be appropriate for the collection of monies owed the village or any department thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2981, § 2, 3-22-99)  
Sec. 2-211. - Costs of collection. 
Whenever any fine, charge, penalty, payment or other debt due the village pursuant to any provision in this Code is not paid when due and owing it shall be deemed delinquent and when referred to a collection agency for collection all costs incurred by the village for the collection of such fine, charge, penalty, payment or other debt from such collection agency shall be assessed as an additional fee and added to the delinquent amount. 
( Ord. No. 3989 § 1, 9-11-17)  
Sec. 2-212. - Debts due and owing the village. 
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity ("debtor") owning any fine, penalty, cost, tax, user charge, fee, judgement, financial contractual obligation or any other debt to the village or any person, partnership, corporation or entity under the control of such debtor, shall not be entitled to any village service, permit, license or other village action or approval unless that debt is paid in full. 
This section shall not prohibit any emergency village services to a debtor such as from the police or fire departments, or line safety services such as water, sewer or refuse service. 
(Ord. No. 4072 , § 1, 3-11-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4072 , § 1, adopted March 11, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as 2-211. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, said section has been codified herein as § 2-212 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-213—2-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-216. - Bid procedure. 
The village manager shall prescribe the requirements to be met where free and open competitive bidding is utilized or proposals are solicited. The village manager shall also prescribe the procedures by which competitive bids shall be received, the time limit upon receiving such bids, and the procedure by which the bids shall be opened, accepted, examined and recommendations made to the board of trustees for acceptance or rejection, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 1799, § 3, 6-19-78; Ord. No. 2511, § 1, 8-6-91)  
Sec. 2-217. - Security deposits for bids. 
On all contracts and purchases wherein competitive bidding procedures are utilized, if security deposits are required of the bidders, the following security deposit requirements shall be met: 
(1)  On all equipment purchases and contracts which do not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), a security deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be required. 
(2)  On all equipment purchases and contracts which exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) but do not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), a security deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) will be required. 
(3)  On all equipment purchases and contracts which exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) but do not exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), a security deposit of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) will be required. 
(4)  On all equipment purchases and contracts which exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), a security deposit of five (5) percent of the actual bid will be required. 
Such security deposits shall be in the form of a cashier's or certified check. 
(Ord. No. 1799, § 2, 6-19-78; Ord. No. 2511, § 2, 8-5-91)  
Sec. 2-218. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3067, § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2000, repealed § 2-218 in its entirety. Former § 2-218 pertained to purchasing procedures as enacted by Ord. No. 1799, § 6, adopted June 19, 1978, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-219. - When bids required. 
(a)  Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when the expense thereof shall exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall be constructed by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids, unless waived by a vote of two-thirds of all trustees then holding office. 
(b)  A responsible bidder for the construction of public works projects shall meet and submit evidence of compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in the State of Illinois; 
(2)  A federal employer tax identification number or Social Security number; 
(3)  Provision of Section 2000(e) of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11246, as amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the "Equal Opportunity Employer" provisions); 
(4)  Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverage's: general liability, worker's compensation, completed operations, automobile, hazardous occupation and product liability; 
(5)  Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those trades covered in the Act; 
(6)  The bidder and all bidder's subcontractors must participate in active apprenticeship and training programs approved and registered with the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training for each of the trades of work contemplated under the proposed contract; 
(7)  All contractors and subcontractors are required to file certified payrolls as specified in Illinois Pubic Act 94-0515, and follow all provisions of the Employee Classification Act (820 ILCS 185/1 et seq.); and 
(8)  All bidders must provide three (3) projects of a similar nature constructed in the immediate past five (5) years with the name, address and telephone number of the contact person having knowledge of the project along with three (3) references (name, address and telephone number) with knowledge of the integrity and business practices of the bidder. 
(Ord. No. 1799, §§ 4, 5, 6-19-78; Ord. No. 2511, § 4, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 2634, § 2, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 3067, § 3, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 3688, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 3733, § 1, 2-11-13; Ord. No. 4005 , § 1, 12-4-17)  
Sec. 2-220. - Exemptions from bidding requirements. 
(a)  The following purchases are exempt from the requirements set forth in section 2-219, subsection (a) of this Code of open and competitive bidding: 
(1)  Purchase contracts, for either labor, materials or both, which by their nature are not adaptable to award by competitive bidding, such as, but not limited to, contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part, contracts for supplies, materials, parts or equipment which are available only from a single source, and contracts for the printing of the finance committee pamphlets. 
(2)  All purchase orders or contracts of whatever nature for labor, services or work, the purchase, lease or sale of personal property, materials, equipment or supplies, wherein the price to be paid by the village is equal to or less than a price established by open and competitive bidding through either an agency of the federal government or an agency of the state, within one year immediately preceding the letting of the proposed contract by the village. 
(3)  All purchase orders or contracts of whatever nature, for labor, services or work, the purchase, lease or sale of personal property, materials, equipment or supplies, wherein the board of trustees, by a two-thirds majority affirmative vote of the members of the village board then holding office, waive the requirement of open and competitive bidding, except in such instances where open and competitive bidding are required by the provisions of section 8-9-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(b)  The trustees may authorize procurement, from any federal, state or local governmental unit or agency thereof any such materials, supplies, commodities or equipment as may be made available through the operation of any legislation heretofore or hereinafter enacted without conforming with the competitive bidding requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1799, §§ 7, 8, 6-19-78) 
State Law reference— Illinois Municipal Code, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 1-1-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-221. - Exemption from advertisement requirements. 
In the event of an emergency affecting the public health or safety so declared by the president and board of trustees at a meeting therefor duly convened, which declaration shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all the members present, and set forth the nature of the danger to the public health or safety, contracts may be let to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without public advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 1799, § 10, 6-19-78)  
Sec. 2-222. - Exemption for employees. 
Regular employment contracts in the municipal service, whether with respect to the classified service or otherwise, shall not be subject to provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1799, §§ 7, 8, 6-19-78)  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices all village officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of _______ according to the best of my ability. 
This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 5-3-9.  
Sec. 2-302. - Bond. 
(a)  Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers, except the president and trustees, shall execute a bond with security to be approved by the corporate authorities. The bond shall be payable to the village in whatever penal sum may be directed by resolution or ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all money received by such officer, according to law and also the ordinances of the village. Such bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure, or closing of any bank organized and operating either under the laws of the state or the United States wherein such officer has placed funds in his custody, if the bank has been approved by the corporate authorities as a depository for these funds. The treasurer's bond shall be an amount of money that is not less than three (3) times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census figure used for motor fuel tax purposes. These bonds shall be filed with the village clerk, except the bond of the clerk, which shall be filed with the village treasurer. 
(b)  Subject to the limitations set out above, the board of trustees may fix the amount and penalty of the bonds of all officers and of all employees charged with the custody of money or property. It may also require the giving of additional bonds, and may increase or decrease the amount and penalty of the bonds of any officer, and require the giving of a new bond where the security of an original bond has become either insufficient or in any way impaired, upon penalty of removal from office. The power vested in the board by this section shall be so administered as to protect the interests of the village from danger of financial loss, and shall never be used as a means of removing any person from the service of the village without a hearing before the civil service commission, if there be one, in accordance with law. In any such case, the employee or official whose office is sought to be declared vacant by reason of a failure to give a new, additional or increased bond, shall have the right to have a hearing before the civil service commission upon the question so involved. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 5-3-9. 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 9-301 et seq.  
Sec. 2-303. - Participation in Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund. 
The village hereby elects to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, effective January 1, 1962. 
(Ord. No. 787, 8-7-61) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to elect to participate in Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 7-132.  
Sec. 2-304. - Compensation during jury duty. 
The regular pay of any village employee absent from work by reason of having been summoned to serve on jury duty, shall be continued without interruption, provided the employee so summoned assigns to the village, all per diem reimbursement payments received by the employee from the county, the state or the United States government, for such jury duty. Such employee need not assign to the village any reimbursement allowance paid for mileage, or other expenses incurred for such jury duty. 
(Ord. No. 1754, § 1, 11-7-77)  
Sec. 2-305. - Disability pay. 
(a)  The regular pay of any village employee who is absent from work by reason of a job-related injury and disability shall be continued without interruption if the disabled employee assigns to the village, his rights to receive any and all temporary total or temporary partial payments from an insurance company made as a result of the disability. 
(b)  The payments to the employee shall continue from the date of disability to date of return to work. The final date for payment shall be, either, the date any physician shall, in writing, designate that the employee shall return to work, or the date the employee shall actually return to work. 
(c)  The payments to the employee shall, in any event, be limited to a period of twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 1753, § 1, 11-7-77)  
Sec. 2-306. - Authority of village to enter into contracts of employment for department heads. 
(a)  The village, acting by and through the village manager, and other appropriate officers, is hereby authorized to enter into contracts of employment for any one or more of the heads or supervisors of the various departments within the village, for periods of time not to exceed three (3) years in each employment contract. 
(b)  By virtue of its home rule powers, the village hereby declares that Section 8-1-7 of Chapter 24 of Illinois Revised Statutes shall have no effect or application to the employment contracts which are authorized by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1938, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-80) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 1938, adopted Oct. 13, 1980, were nonamendatory of the Code. Codification as § 2-306 has been at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-307. - Intergovernmental personnel benefit cooperative. 
(a)  The village president is hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the village the contract and bylaws of the intergovernmental personnel benefit cooperative as such bylaws exist on the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this section derived. 
(b)  Upon membership in the cooperative the village shall be entitled to each of the benefits and obligations contained within that document as it exists on the day of the approval of the ordinance or as it may be subsequently validly amended pursuant to its terms. 
(c)  Except to the extent of the limited financial contributions to the cooperative set forth in its contract and bylaws, the village, by its entry as a member of the cooperative, shall not be held responsible in any way for claims of any kind against any other member of the cooperative. The obligation of the village to participate as a member in the cooperative shall be established by the action of the cooperative in accepting this governmental body as a member in the manner set forth within the contract and bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 2086, §§ 1—3, 9-12-83) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 2086, enacted Sept. 12, 1983, have been codified as § 2-307.  
Sec. 2-308. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 2-308 pertained to disclosure of confidential and privileged information and derived from Ord. No. 2282, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 25, 1988. Ord. No. 2282 was repealed by Ord. No. 2323, § 11, adopted Jan. 23, 1989.  
Secs. 2-309—2-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ETHICAL CONDUCT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Inclusion of Ord. No. 2323, §§ 1—9, Jan. 23, 1989, as Div. 2 to Art. III of Ch. 2, §§ 2-321—2-329, was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance not being specifically amendatory of the Code. 
Cross reference— Purchasing procedures, § 2-216 et seq.; disclosure statement by cable TV franchisees and grantees, § 7.5-203 et seq.; interest of village employees, advisors, etc., in cable TV franchisees, § 7.5-206 et seq. 
State Law reference— Open Meetings Act, Ch. 102, § 41 et seq.; Freedom of Information Act, Ch. 116, § 201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the words and terms listed below shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Confidential or privileged information means any of the following: 
(1)  Public records and information exempt from inspection and copying under any provision of the state Freedom of Information Act. 
(2)  Public records and information presented or discussed during an executive session. 
Executive session means any closed session of the president and board of trustees of the village held and conducted pursuant to the state Open Meetings Act. 
Public official or employee means the president of the village, trustees of the village, the village manager, the village attorney, the village clerk, or any employee of the village who attends an executive session. 
Public records means any and all records, minutes, reports, forms, writings, letters, memoranda, books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings, electronic data processing records, recorded information and all other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having been prepared, or having been received or under the control of the village or any of its officials, appointed or elected, or employees. 
Village staff means all employees of the village and the village attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-322. - Penalty. 
Any violation of a provision of this division shall be a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for a term of less than thirty (30) days. Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to preclude prosecution under any applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 9, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-323. - Disclosure of confidential or privileged information. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no public official or employee, as defined in this division, shall disclose, without the consensus of a majority of the president and board of trustees of the village, or without proper legal authorization, confidential or privileged information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the village. Nothing contained in this division shall prevent, regulate or otherwise preclude any public official or employee from engaging in any public discussion or debate concerning the subject matter of any final action taken by the president and board of trustees in open session, which subject was previously discussed in executive session. Nothing contained in this division shall prevent public officials or employees from communicating with or disclosing to other public officials or employees concerning confidential or privileged information as may be necessary to the proper discharge of their respective duties and responsibilities. In order that he may discharge his duties as the chief executive officer and administrative head of the village and to discharge his responsibility for the efficient administration of all the departments within the village, the village manager, in his sole discretion, may determine which, if any, village staff needs access to any confidential or privileged information to discharge their respective duties and responsibilities. The village manager may, in his sole discretion, authorize the dissemination or disseminate to village staff such confidential or privileged information as the village manager may determine is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 2, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-324. - Statement of economic interests—When required. 
All elected officials (or any persons appointed to fill an unexpired term of an elected official), the village manager, village attorney, director of public works, chief of police, chief of the fire department, director of finance, director of building and zoning, and director of parks and recreation, shall file verified written statements of economic interest as provided in this division, on the form attached to Ordinance No. 2323 as Exhibit A, incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 3, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-325. - Same—Contents. 
The statement of economic interests required by this division shall include the economic interests of the person making the statement as provided in this section. The interest (if constructively controlled by the person making the statement) of a spouse or any other party, shall be considered to be the same as the interest of the person making the statement. 
The following interests shall be listed by all persons required to file: 
(1)  Any interest in real property within the village and the beneficial interest in any state land trust, the corpus of which is located within the village or contiguous thereto; the person shall provide the nature of the interest in said real property, the location of the real property (for improved property provide the street address; for unimproved property state its location in relation to existing streets); and the property's permanent real estate tax identification number. 
(2)  The name and instrument of ownership in any entity doing business with the village during the preceding fiscal year of the village, if the entity does business with the village in an aggregate amount in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) during that fiscal year. No time or demand deposit in a financial institution nor any debt instrument need be listed. 
(3)  Except for professional service entities, the name of any entity and any position held therein, from which income was derived during the preceding fiscal year of the village, if the entity does business with the village in an aggregate amount in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) during that fiscal year. No time or demand deposit in a financial institution, nor any debt instrument, need be listed. 
(4)  The name of any entity and the nature of the governmental action requested by any entity which has applied to the village for any liquor license other than Class G, J, K and X licenses, franchise or permit for annexation, zoning or rezoning of real estate during the fiscal year of the village preceding the date of filing, if the person filing has an ownership interest at the time of filing or if income or dividends were received by the person filing from the entity during the fiscal year of the village preceding the date of filing. 
(5)  The name of any person or entity from which a political contribution valued singly or in the aggregate in excess of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) was received during the preceding calendar year unless campaign disclosure is on file with the county clerk with respect to said contributions. 
(6)  The name and address of any commercial or industrial entity within the corporate limits of the village to which the person making this statement is financially indebted in excess five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). No indebtedness due on account of: 
a.  Any credit card; 
b.  Loans from any bank, savings and loan, credit union, thrift, life insurance company, qualified pension or profit sharing plan, or other institution whose regular business includes loaning money; or 
c.  Any other financial institution; 
need be listed. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 4, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 4025 , § 2, 4-23-18)  
Sec. 2-326. - Same—Filing; public examination. 
The statement of economic interests required under this division shall be filed with the village clerk on the form attached to Ordinance No. 2323 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. By July 31 of each year, a statement must be filed by each person whose position at that time subjects him to the filing requirements of this section. All statements filed under this division shall be available for examination and copying by the public. Each person examining a statement must fill out a form prepared by the village clerk identifying the examiner by name, occupation, address and telephone number and listing the date of examination. The village clerk shall promptly notify each person required to file a statement under this division of each such examination of his statement by providing a copy of the identification form filled out by the person examining his statement. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 5, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-327. - Acceptance of gifts, loans, etc. 
No member of the village board of trustees or the village president may solicit, accept or agree to accept gifts, loans, gratuities, discounts, favors, hospitality or services having an aggregate value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more in any calendar year from any person known to have legislative interests pending in the village under circumstances from which it could reasonably be inferred that the donor intended to influence said person in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 6, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-328. - Charging or accepting excessive price, fee, or other consideration. 
No member of the village board of trustees or village president may charge to or accept from a person known to have a legislative interest a price, fee, compensation or other consideration for the sale or lease of any property or the furnishing of services which is substantially in excess of that which any of said officials would charge in the ordinary course of business. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 7, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-329. - Statement of ownership interest. 
Within fifteen (15) days after adoption of Ordinance No. 2323, all applications for any liquor license other than Class G, J, K, and X licenses, franchise, or permit for annexation, zoning or rezoning of real estate shall contain the following provision for completion by applicant: 
"The undersigned hereby represents and warrants to the Village of Villa Park that none of the individuals specified in section 1 of "An Ordinance Regulating Ethical Conduct of Elected and Appointed Officers and Officials of the Village of Villa Park" (a current listing of these individuals is attached hereto and made a part of this application) has any ownership interest of five (5) percent or more in the entity making this application or the real estate which is the subject of this application, nor is any of the foregoing individuals an officer, director or employee of the entity making the application. If the foregoing representation and warranty is inaccurate, state the names of any such individuals who are officers, directors, or employees of the applicant or who have an ownership interest in the applicant and the nature of such interest." 
Any person receiving such an application shall immediately forward a copy of same to the village manager or his designee and the village manager shall promptly notify the village board of any person named by applicants in response to the foregoing inquiry. 
Any person who executes an application knowing that the statement set out above or any part thereof is false shall be in violation of this division and subject to the penalties set out in section 2-322. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 8, 1-23-89)  
Sec. 2-330. - Board to act as body. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall act in all matters as a body and individual trustees shall not seek to influence the official acts of the village manager, or any other officer, or to interfere in any way with the performance by such officers of their duties. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not prevent the board from: 
(1)  Appointing all or any one of its members to any board, committee, or commission; or 
(2)  Appointing any of its members to act as a liaison to any board, committee or commission, organization, group of individuals, or other governmental body or agency. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent any trustee from requesting from the manager such information as may be proper and necessary to the performance of the trustees duties, whether the trustee acts as a trustee, or as a liaison, or as a member of any board, committee or commission. 
(b)  Trustees shall not initiate or engage in discussions, conversations, or communications, whether written or oral, with any employee of the village, other than the manager, concerning conditions of employment. Whenever any employee, other than the manager, initiates such discussions, conversations, or communications, whether written or oral, with a trustee concerning conditions of employment, the trustee shall refrain from further discussion, conversation, or communication and refer the employee to either the manager or the appropriate department head. Any written communications concerning conditions of employment shall be forwarded by the trustee to the manager. 
(c)  "Conditions of employment," as used herein, shall mean any aspect of the working environment or working conditions of any employee or group of employees of the village. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent any trustee, when acting either as a trustee or as a member of any committee or commission, at any meeting of the board of trustees, or of any committee or commission, from engaging in discussion with any employee concerning conditions of employment. 
(Ord. No. 2333, § 1, 4-17-89) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2333, § 1, adopted April 17, 1989, amended Ord. No. 2323 by adding thereto a section 8.A. Such section, pertaining to the board acting as a body, has been designated herein as § 2-330 by the editor.  
DIVISION 3. - ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3242, § 2, adopted May 10, 2004, amended div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said division pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
Sec. 2-331. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein: 
Campaign for elective office. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Candidate: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3). 
Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). 
Compensated time: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this Division, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location. 
Compensatory time off: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment. 
Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4). 
Employee: A person employed by the Village of Villa Park, whether on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor. 
Employer: The Village of Villa Park. 
Gift: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
Leave of absence: Any period during which an employee does not receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit toward pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
Officer: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity. 
Political activity: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Political organization: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk. 
Prohibited political activity: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event. 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fund raiser, political meeting, or other political event. 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution. 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls. 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office. 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires. 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention. 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
Prohibited source: Any person or entity who: 
(1)  Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(2)  Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(3)  Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
Sec. 2-332. - Prohibited political activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity. 
(b)  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
(c)  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this division. 
(e)  No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
Sec. 2-333. - Gift ban. 
(a)  Except as permitted by this division, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. Section 2-333(a) is not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public. 
(2)  Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or member, pays the fair market value. 
(3)  Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or (ii) activities associated with a fund-raising event in support of a political organization or candidate. 
(4)  Educational materials and missions. 
(5)  Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business. 
(6)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee. 
(7)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members. 
(8)  Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means. 
(9)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances. 
(10)  Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this Act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity. 
(11)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
(12)  Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. 
(c)  Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this Division if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
Sec. 2-333.1. - Sexual harassment. 
All village officers and employees shall be subject to the policy on sexual harassment or stated in section 4.02 of section 4 of the employee handbook, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 4010 , § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 2-334. - Ethics advisor. 
(a)  The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall designate an ethics advisor for the village. The duties of the ethics advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the village unless the position has been created as an office by the village. 
(b)  The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this division and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
Sec. 2-335. - Ethics commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics Commission of the Village of Villa Park. The commission shall be comprised of the village president, the village clerk and the most senior trustee. In the event of a conflict of interest, the remaining trustees, in order of seniority, shall serve as alternate commissioners. 
(b)  The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with section 2-336 of this division and refer violations of section 2-332 or 2-333 of this division to the village prosecutor for prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this division and not upon its own prerogative. 
(3)  To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of this division. 
(4)  To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the village to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge. 
(5)  The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
Sec. 2-336. - Complaints/hearings. 
(a)  Complaints alleging a violation of this division shall be filed with the ethics commission. 
(b)  Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed. 
(c)  Upon not less than forty-eight (48) hours' public notice, the commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this division, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. The commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint. 
(d)  If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-333 of this division and there is a determination of probable cause, then the commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the receipt of the complaint. Alternatively, the commission may elect to notify in writing the village prosecutor and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public. 
(e)  If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-332 of this division, then the commission shall notify in writing the village prosecutor and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation. 
(f)  On the scheduled date and upon at least forty-eight (48) hours' public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings Act. 
(g)  Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either (i) dismiss the complaint or (ii) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public information. 
(h)  If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least forty-eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. 
(i)  If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (g) within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible. 
(j)  The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-333 of this division in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this division in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including discharge. 
(k)  A complaint alleging the violation of this Act must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
Sec. 2-337. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-332 of this division may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-333 of this division is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(c)  Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this division to the local enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(d)  A violation of section 2-332 of this division shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the village prosecutor by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(e)  A violation of section 2-333 of this division may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the village prosecutor, or, if an ethics commission has been created, by the commission through the designated administrative procedure. 
(f)  In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of sections 2-332 or 2-333 of this division is subject to discipline or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 3242, § 2, 5-10-04)  
ARTICLE IV. - CORPORATE AUTHORITIES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— On April 19, 1977, the voters elected to elect trustees by districts pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/3-5-6. See Ord. No. 1714 adopted April 25, 1977. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-400.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2277, § 1, adopted March 28, 1988, repealed §§ 2-400.1 and 2-400.2, pertaining to districts and election of trustees, which derived from Ord. No. 1817, §§ 1—4, adopted Nov. 13, 1978. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 2277, enacted § 2-400.2 to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 2-400.2. - Election of trustees. 
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Villa Park shall consist of the President of the Village of Villa Park and six (6) trustees. Each trustee shall be a qualified elector of the Village of Villa Park and shall have resided within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park for at least one (1) year next preceding the trustee's election. All trustees shall be elected on a village-wide basis. Three (3) trustees shall be elected at the consolidated election held in each odd numbered year. All trustees elected shall hold office for a term of four (4) years and until their successor's are elected and have qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2277, § 2, 3-28-88) 
Note— See editor's note at § 2-400.1.  
Sec. 2-400.3. - Commencement of terms of office. 
The term of office of each municipal elected officer shall commence on date of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities in the month of May following each general municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 2067, § 1, 4-4-83)  
Sec. 2-401. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Village Hall. 
(b)  The village clerk shall give public notice of the schedule of regular meetings at the beginning of each calendar year and shall state the regular dates, times, and places of such meetings. An agenda for each regular meeting shall be posted at Village Hall and at the location of the meeting at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the holding of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 2, 12-15-75; Ord. No. 1911, § 1, 5-19-80; Ord. No. 2355, § 1, 6-26-89; Ord. No. 3229, § 2, 3-8-04; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 5-11-09; Ord. No. 3771, § 2, 11-11-13; Ord. No. 3987 , § 1, 8-14-17) 
State Law reference— Power of board to prescribe times and places of board meetings, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25; public notice of meetings, Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/2.02, 120/2.03.  
Sec. 2-402. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the board of trustees shall be held upon call and pursuant to law upon request of the president or any three (3) or more trustees provided such request is in writing duly signed and presented to the village clerk who shall then proceed immediately to prepare notices concerning the same and cause them to be served upon the corporate authorities at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of such meetings, except a meeting held in the event of a bona fide emergency, which notice shall also include the agenda for the special, rescheduled, or reconvened meeting. Notice of an emergency meeting shall be given as soon as practicable, but in any event prior to the holding of such meeting, to any news medium which has filed an annual request for notice under 5 ILCS 120/2.02. Such notices shall describe briefly the nature or object of the call. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 2, 12-15-75; Ord. No. 1911, § 1, 5-19-80; Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 5-11-09) 
State Law reference— Power of board to prescribe times and places of board meetings, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25; public notice of meetings, Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/2.02, 120/2.03.  
Sec. 2-403. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2096, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 1983, repealed § 2-403. Said former section, relative to required voting, derived from Ord. No. 1608, § 5, adopted Dec. 15, 1975.  
Sec. 2-404. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-405. - Reconsideration of votes. 
No vote of the board of trustees shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless there are present at the special meeting as many trustees as were present when the vote was taken. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-4.  
Sec. 2-406. - Order of business. 
The following order of business shall be followed in all meetings of the board of trustees: 
(a)  At the hour selected for the meeting, the village clerk, if present, or in the clerk's absence, someone appointed to fill his/her place, shall proceed to call the roll of members, mark the adsentees and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present, the board shall be called to order, and the president shall take the chair; if the president is absent, the board shall appoint a temporary chairman. If a quorum does not appear, the meeting shall be cancelled. 
(b)  The standing order of business for all regular meetings of the board shall be: 
(1)  Call to order—Roll call. 
(2)  Pledge of allegiance. 
(3)  Public comments on agenda items. 
(4)  Amendments to the agenda. 
(5)  Proclamations. 
(6)  Consent agenda: 
a.  Minutes. 
b.  Bill listing. 
(7)  First reading on ordinances to be codified—Introduction (no vote). 
(8)  Second reading on ordinances to be codified. 
(9)  Ordinances, resolutions, motions. 
(10)  Public comments on non-agenda items. 
(11)  Village clerk's report. 
(12)  Village trustee's report. 
(13)  Village president's report. 
(14)  Village manager's report. 
(15)  Executive session, if necessary. 
(16)  Adjournment. 
(c)  Consent agenda shall be defined as those items on the board agenda which are considered routine by the village manager and village president, e.g., reports of administrative actions and proposals, approval of minutes, referral of items to committees, acceptance of reports from departmental heads, setting of dates for hearings, request for fund drives. These items so marked shall be approved, adopted, accepted, etc., by motion of the board and roll call vote. Those items approved under the heading "consent agenda" will appear in the board minutes in their proper form, i.e., resolution accepting grant, deed or easement, adoption of ordinance upon final reading, etc. Any item shall be removed from the consent agenda upon the request of any trustee or the president. Yeas and nays shall be taken by roll call vote on approval of the consent agenda and recorded in the minutes. 
(d)  At the time of consideration of approval of the agenda, upon passage of a motion by a majority of the quorum present, the agenda may be amended to add or delete specific items. If new items are added, only discussion of such items may occur during the meeting, and no action on the new items may take place until a subsequent meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1757, § 1, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 1989, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 2270, § 1, 2-8-88; Ord. No. 3323, § 2, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 3368, § 2, 7-12-06; Ord. No. 3424, § 2, 6-11-07; Ord. No. 3681, § 1, 12-19-11; Ord. No. 3771, § 1, 11-11-13; Ord. No. 3987 , § 2, 8-14-17)  
Sec. 2-407. - Decorum. 
Upon being ruled out of order a trustee shall remain quiet. The decision of the chair in such case shall be subject to Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 1, 12-15-75)  
Sec. 2-408. - Public concerns and comments. 
(a)  Persons wishing to speak during any portion of a board meeting shall sign in before the start of the meeting stating name, address and topic to be discussed or identify themselves and provide their current address at the podium before beginning their comments. Speakers shall speak their position on the issue and provide any supporting documentation. The speaker shall refrain from engaging in debates, directing threats or personal attacks at the board, staff, other speakers or members of the audience. 
(b)  Members of the audience shall refrain from applauding, cheering or booing during or at the conclusion of remarks made by any speaker, staff member or member of the board. 
(c)  Groups of residents should, whenever possible, consolidate their comments and avoid repetition through the use of representative speakers. 
(d)  Persons other than the village president, the trustees, village officials or persons invited by a majority of the board present shall address the board subject to the following additional rules and regulations: 
(1)  Public comments on agenda items shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes unless extended for a time certain by a majority of the board present. All speakers shall limit their comments to no more than three (3) minutes. Speakers who are residents shall be allowed to speak before nonresidents. 
(2)  Public comments on non-agenda items shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes unless extended for a time certain by a majority of the board present. All speakers shall limit their comments to no more than three (3) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 7, 12-15-75; Ord. No. 1989, § 2, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 2270, § 2, 2-8-88; Ord. No. 3681, § 2, 12-19-11)  
Sec. 2-409. - Compensation. 
The compensation of each trustee of the village is hereby set at three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year and shall be paid in twenty-six (26) bi-weekly installments. 
(Ord. No. 851, § III, 2-4-63; Ord. No. 1967, § 3, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 3065, § 2, 11-13-00) 
State Law reference— Compensation of trustees, 65 ILCS 5/5-4-1.  
Sec. 2-410. - Robert's Rules. 
Except to the extent as otherwise provided for by law the parliamentary practice and procedure to be conducted at meetings of the board of trustees shall be those rules set forth in Robert's Rules of Order. Said rules, however, may be temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the village trustees then holding office. If notice concerning the possible suspension of said rules is provided at least twenty-four (24) hours to the board of trustees, then such rules may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of the trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 6, 12-15-75) 
State Law reference— Authority of board to determine its rules of proceedings, 65 ILCS 5/3-11-11.  
Secs. 2-411—2-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRESIDENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— President generally, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-1—5-3-5. 
 
Sec. 2-421. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The president shall be recognized as the official head of the village. He shall be so recognized by the governor for all legal purposes, and by the courts for serving civil process. He shall have all the powers and perform all the duties hereinafter set forth and as is provided by the laws of the state. 
(b)  The president shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  He shall preside at all regular or special meetings of the board of trustees, preserve order and decorum and decide points of order and in case of disturbance or disorderly conduct, order that the council chambers or meeting room be cleared by those persons causing said disturbance or disorderly conduct. 
(2)  To act as liquor commissioner, subject to state statute, and in accordance with village ordinance. 
(3)  Make all appointments to boards and commissions pursuant and according to law with the advice and consent of the trustees. 
(4)  Sign all commissions and permits granted by authority of the board of trustees and grant all licenses as provided by law. The president may revoke such licenses pursuant to law and perform such other and further acts as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 4, 12-15-75)  
Sec. 2-422. - Right to vote. 
(a)  The president shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion except: 
(1)  Where the vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie; or 
(2)  Where one-half of the trustees then holding office have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or 
(3)  Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by the Illinois Municipal Code to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion. 
In each instance specified, the president shall vote. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall deprive an acting president or president pro tem from voting in his capacity as trustee, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his capacity as acting president or president pro tem. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 4, 12-15-75) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILSC 5/5-3-5.  
Sec. 2-423. - Veto power. 
The president shall have veto power over all ordinances, resolutions and motions: 
(1)  Which create any liability against the village, or 
(2)  Which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or 
(3)  To sell any village property. 
All ordinances, resolutions or motions passed by the village board shall be deposited with the village clerk. If the president approves of them, he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves he shall return to the board, with his written objections, at the next regular meeting of the board occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The president may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the president may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. If the president fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his signature. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 4, 12-15-75) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-1, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-2.  
Sec. 2-424. - Reconsideration; passage over veto. 
Every resolution and motion specified in section 2-423 of this Code, and every ordinance, which is returned to the board of trustees by the president shall be reconsidered by the board. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the trustees then holding office on the village board agree to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the president's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the president's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-3.  
Sec. 2-425. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the president of the village is hereby set at four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500.00) per year and shall be paid in twenty-six (26) equal biweekly installments. 
(Ord. No. 851, § I, 2-4-63; Ord. No. 1967, § 1, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 3065, § 3, 11-13-00) 
Cross reference— Compensation of president as local liquor control commissioner, § 3-203. 
State Law reference— Compensation of president, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 5-4-1.  
Sec. 2-426. - Designation of person to sign instruments. 
The mayor may designate another to affix the signature of the president to any written instrument, which is required to be signed by the president. The president shall send written notice of this designation to the board of trustees, stating the name of the person whom he has selected and, what instrument the person will have authority to sign. A written signature of the president executed by the person so designated, with the signature of the person so designated underneath, shall have attached to the notice. The notice, with the signature attached, shall be recorded in the journal of the board of trustees and then filed with the village clerk. When the signature of the president is placed on a written instrument at the direction of the president in the specified manner, the instrument, in all respects, shall be as binding on the village as if signed by the president in person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-11-5.  
ARTICLE V. - VILLAGE MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Village manager, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 5-3-7. 
 
Sec. 2-501. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of village manager, an administrative office of the village. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 1, 7-11-60)  
Sec. 2-502. - Appointment and term of office. 
The village manager shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees, voting jointly. He shall be the chief executive officer and administrative head of the village government, and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments. He shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs, and need not be a resident of the village when appointed. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his proven education, training, knowledge and ability in the field of municipal administration. The village manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 2, 7-11-60)  
Sec. 2-503. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the village manager shall be: 
(1)  To enforce the laws and ordinances within the village. 
(2)  To plan and direct the operation of all village departments according to the objectives described by the village president and board of trustees. He shall hire and discharge all department heads and all other village employees except those under the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners, at such compensation as set by the board. All employees shall perform their duties subject to the direction of the village manager or that of the superior designated by the manager. The village manager shall perform all of his duties subject to the control and direction of the village president and board of trustees. 
(3)  To prepare and submit to the board of trustees an annual budget pursuant to ILCS 65, 5/8-2-9.3 and have said budget adopted pursuant to ILCS 65, 5/8-2-9.4. 
(4)  To attend all meetings of the board of trustees with the right to take part in the discussions, but with no right to vote. 
(5)  To recommend to the board of trustees for the adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(6)  To enforce the faithful performance of all contracts or public utility franchises so that the village and its inhabitants will receive full benefits thereunder. 
(7)  To make, in the ordinary course of business, all purchases of equipment, material and supplies necessary for the village as provided for in the annual appropriation ordinance; provided, that on purchases in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), he shall first procure the approval of the board of trustees. In all cases he shall comply with all applicable statutory and ordinance provisions regarding contracts or purchase orders and shall submit all expenditures for payment to the board of trustees. 
(8)  To cause to be prepared and submit to the board of trustees each month a statement of the financial condition of the village as of the end of the preceding month. 
(9)  To have and exercise the power, authority and duties of any head or director of a department or division thereof prescribed by this Code or any amendment thereof, during the time when the office of any such department or division shall be vacant. 
(10)  To issue all licenses and permits, authority for issuance of which is not otherwise provided for by the statutes of the state. 
(11)  To prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of the various departments of the village and the divisions thereunder. 
(12)  To devote full time to the performance of his duties. The manager shall not engage in any other gainful employment or business while he holds the office of village manager. 
(13)  To perform such other duties as may be required by him by ordinance or resolution or as directed by the president or the board of trustees, to the end that the policies of the board shall be faithfully and efficiently administered. 
(14)  To suspend, without pay, a department head, chief of the police department, or chief of the fire department for a period of not more than five (5) days, but he shall notify the corporate authorities in writing of such suspension. During the term of any suspension made by the village manager, the village manager may appoint an acting department head, chief of the police department, or chief of the fire department to carry out the duties of the suspended officer. 
(15)  To have the authority to dispose of personal property or equipment that is no longer necessary or useful to the Village of Villa Park and that has little or no resale value. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 4, 7-11-60; Ord. No. 1968, § 1, 2-23-81; Ord. No. 2511, § 5, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 2762, § 2, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 3334, § 2, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 3667, § 2, 8-22-11; Ord. No. 4005 , § 2, 12-4-17)  
Sec. 2-504. - Absence or disability. 
During the absence or disability of the manager, the president by and with the consent of the board of trustees, may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of his office. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 2, 7-11-60) 
State Law reference— Absence or disability of manager, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-7.  
Sec. 2-505. - Removal. 
The village manager may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the president and board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 2, 7-11-60) 
State Law reference— Removal of manager, 65 ILCS 5/5-3-7.  
ARTICLE VI. - VILLAGE ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-601. - Generally. 
There is hereby created and established the office of attorney for the village. The village attorney shall be the head of the village's in-house legal department and under the supervision and control of the village manager, and shall be responsible and report directly to the manager. The village attorney shall be appointed by the village manager and may be removed from office by the manager with the advice and consent of a majority of the corporate authorities. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his proven education, training, knowledge and ability in the field of law. 
(Ord. No. 2633, § 1, 5-17-93) 
State Law reference— President to appoint city attorney with advice and consent of board of trustees, 65 ILCS 5/3-7-3.  
Sec. 2-602. - Suits and actions. 
The attorney for the village shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, an officer of the village on behalf of the village, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 9-15-69)  
Sec. 2-603. - Judgment and orders. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney for the village to see the full enforcement of all judgments, decrees or awards rendered or entered in favor of the village, and of all similar interlocutory orders. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 3, 9-15-69)  
Sec. 2-604. - Legal advice. 
The attorney for the village shall be the legal advisor of the village, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the village, whenever requested to do so by any elected village official or the village manager or the presiding officer of any official board or commission. Upon specific request by the president, the manager or any trustee, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 4, 9-15-69)  
Sec. 2-605. - Special assessments and condemnations. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney for the village to see the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 6, 9-15-69)  
Sec. 2-606. - Ordinances and documents. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney for the village to draft or supervise the drafting, and/or to approve as to form any contract, lease or other document or instrument to which the village may be a party. Upon request by the board of trustees, he shall draft ordinances covering any subjects, as required. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 7, 9-15-69)  
Sec. 2-607. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the village attorney shall be as established by the village board following recommendation to the board by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 8, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 2633, § 2, 5-17-93)  
Sec. 2-608. - Additional counsel. 
The village manager may employ or may authorize the attorney for the village to employ additional counsel to aid the village in its affairs whenever they deem it necessary or expedient. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 5, 9-15-69)  
ARTICLE VII. - VILLAGE CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-701. - Selection. 
The village clerk shall be elected. 
Editor's note— As the village was apparently subject to the aldermanic form of government at the time of adoption of the managerial form, the village clerk apparently is to be elected and is not to be appointed by the manager. See Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 5-3-7(4).  
Sec. 2-702. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the village clerk of the village is hereby set at three thousand five hundred ($3,500.00) dollars per year and shall be paid in twenty-six (26) equal biweekly installments. 
(Ord. No. 851, § II, 2-4-63; Ord. No. 1967, § 2, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 3065, § 4, 11-13-00) 
State Law reference— Salary of clerk, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-13-2.  
Sec. 2-703. - Functions. 
The duties and privileges of the village clerk shall be as follows: 
(a)  To provide and perform all duties and functions provided for by law, including, but not limited to, those duties and functions as set forth in Articles 3 and 5 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(b)  To attend the following meetings: 
(1)  All regular and special meetings of the corporate authorities. 
(2)  All executive sessions which are called during any meeting which the clerk is otherwise required to attend. 
(3)  All public meetings called by the corporate authorities. 
(4)  All meetings of the board of local improvements. 
(5)  Such other meetings as the corporate authorities may direct, but not including attendance at committee of the whole meetings of the corporate authorities. 
The clerk shall take minutes of such meetings and transcribe them and distribute and disburse them as directed by the corporate authorities prior to the next scheduled meeting of the corporate authorities. 
(c)  To provide the village manager's office upon request with appropriate documentation which are in the clerk's possession including but not necessarily limited to certified copies of minutes, certified copies of ordinances, certified copies of resolutions and agreements, and certified and noncertified copies or originals of such other documents as may be requested. The manager's office shall provide for the distribution of said copies. The clerk shall refrain from directly dispersing and distributing said copies except through the manager's office as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1608, § 8, 12-15-75; Ord. No. 3390, § 2, 10-16-06) 
State Law reference— Duties of clerk generally, 65 ILCS 5/5-10-7.  
Sec. 2-704. - Deputy village clerk. 
(a)  Appointment. The village clerk is hereby authorized from time to time to appoint a deputy village clerk for such period or term within the term of office of the village clerk as the village clerk shall determine. Such appointment shall be evidenced by a written certificate of appointment, a copy of which shall be presented to the board of trustees and shall be made a matter of record. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  The deputy village clerk may execute any document required by law to be executed by the village clerk and may affix the seal of the clerk wherever required. In signing any document, the deputy village clerk shall sign the name of the clerk followed with the word "By" and the deputy clerk's own name and the words "deputy clerk." 
(2)  The deputy village clerk shall, in the absence of the village clerk, perform the duties set forth in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90 and in section 2-703 of the Villa Park Code. Such powers shall be exercised only in the absence of the village clerk from the office and only when either written direction has been given by the clerk to the deputy clerk to exercise a power or the president and board of trustees have determined by resolution that the village clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform that function. 
(Ord. No. 3367, § 2, 7-10-06)  
ARTICLE VIII. - VILLAGE TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-801. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of village treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 1, 5-21-28)  
Sec. 2-802. - Selection. 
The village treasurer shall be appointed by the village manager with the consent of the trustees. 
Editor's note— As the village apparently was subject to the aldermanic form of government at the time of the adoption of the managerial form of government and the treasurer previously had been appointed by the corporate authorities ( See 65 ILCS 5/3-8-1) the manager now appoints the treasurer. See 65 ILCS 5/5-3-7(4)).  
Sec. 2-803. - Supervision and control. 
The village treasurer shall be under the supervision and control of the village manager and shall be responsible, and report directly, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 1504, § 1, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 2-804. - Service as finance officer. 
The village treasurer and village finance officer may be the same person. 
(Ord. No. 1504, § 2, 10-21-74)  
Sec. 2-805. - Functions generally. 
(a)  The village treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the village, and shall keep his books and accounts in the manner prescribed by ordinance. These books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection of any member of the corporate authorities. 
(b)  He shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the debits and credits belonging thereto. 
(c)  He shall give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon what account paid. He shall file copies of these receipts with the clerk, with his monthly reports. If he has in his possession money properly appropriated to the payment of any warrant lawfully drawn upon him he shall pay the money specified in this warrant to the person designated by the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 7-5-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-10-1.  
Sec. 2-806. - Monthly statements and register of warrants. 
At the end of every month, and oftener if required by the corporate authorities, the village treasurer shall render an account under oath to the corporate authorities, or to such officer as may be designated by ordinance, showing the state of the treasury at the date of the account, and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall accompany the account with a statement of all money received into the treasury, and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him. On the day he renders an account, these warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be delivered to the municipal clerk and filed, together with the account, in the clerk's office. He shall return all warrants paid by him marked "paid." He shall keep a register of all warrants, which shall describe each warrant, showing its date, amount and number, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid, and when paid. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-10-2.  
Sec. 2-807. - Personal use of funds. 
The village treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the municipality in his custody separate and distinct from his own money, and he shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the village's money or warrants in his custody for his own use and benefit, or that of any other person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-10-4.  
Sec. 2-808. - Annual statement. 
(a)  Within six (6) months after the end of the fiscal year, the village treasurer shall annually prepare and file with the village clerk an account of all monies received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as required by Section 3.1-35-65 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such account from the village treasurer, the village clerk shall publish the account at least once, in one or more newspapers published in the village, or, if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more newspapers having a general circulation within the village. 
(c)  Within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year the treasurer shall file with each town or county collector of taxes who collects taxes levied by the village, a copy of such annual account, together with an affidavit of the clerk of such village stating that such copy is a true and correct copy of such annual account filed with him, that it was published as required by Section 3.1-35-65 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the date of such filing and publication, and the newspaper in which it was published. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 7-5-35; Ord. No. 4025 , § 6, 4-23-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, §§ 3-10-5.1, 3-10-5.2.  
Sec. 2-809. - Special assessment funds. 
All money received on any special assessment shall be held by the village treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other purpose, except to reimburse the village for money expended for such improvement. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 3-10-6.  
ARTICLE IX. - VILLAGE COLLECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-901. - Duties. 
The duties of the village collector and deputy village collector shall be as follows: 
(a)  To preserve all warrants returned to him. 
(b)  To keep and preserve all books and accounts in the manner as the corporate authorities may prescribe. 
(c)  To make available for examination and inspection by the corporate authorities all warrants, books and vouchers and all papers and documents concerning the office of collector or deputy collector. 
(d)  To weekly or oftener if required by the president and board of trustees to pay over to the village treasurer all money collected by him from any source whatsoever. 
(e)  To take the village treasurer's receipt for said deposits in duplicate and file one (1) of said receipts immediately with the village clerk. 
(f)  To make written reports to the corporate authorities of all money collected by him as the corporate authorities may designate. 
(g)  To file those statutory statements required pursuant to law and otherwise to perform those general duties associated with said office. 
(Ord. No. 1259, § 5, 8-9-71)  
Sec. 2-902. - Compensation of collector and deputy collector. 
The village collector shall receive the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month as compensation and the deputy village collector shall receive no compensation or salary for said position. 
(Ord. No. 1259, § 4, 8-9-71)  
ARTICLE X. - PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-1001. - Position established. 
There is hereby established by the position of public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1923, § 1, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2619, § 1, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 2-1002. - Appointment and qualifications. 
The public works director shall be appointed by the village manager. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his proven education, training, knowledge, and ability in the field of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1923, § 2, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2619, § 2, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 2-1003. - Functions. 
The public works director shall be subject to the supervision of the village manager and shall direct the operation and maintenance of the water supply and distribution system, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, drainage facilities, streets, sidewalks, street lighting, forestry section, vehicle and equipment garage, public buildings and grounds, and all other matters that may be delegated to him by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 1923, § 3, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2619, § 3, 2-8-93) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25.  
ARTICLE XI. - VILLAGE ENGINEER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; zoning, App. C. 
 
Sec. 2-1101. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of village engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1924, § 1, 8-18-80)  
Sec. 2-1102. - Appointment. 
The village engineer shall be appointed by the village manager. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his proven education, training, knowledge, and ability in the field of civil engineering. 
(Ord. No. 1924, § 2, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2619, § 4, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 2-1103. - Functions. 
The village engineer shall perform the following functions under the direction and supervision of the public works director: 
(a)  Maintain village zoning, street, and utility maps. 
(b)  Prepare or review study and design reports, cost estimates, construction plans, and specifications for improvements or extensions to the village street, water, sewer, and drainage systems. 
(c)  Monitor and inspect the construction of all improvements or extension to the village street, water, sewer, and drainage systems. 
(d)  Assist the community development department by reviewing building site development plans for drainage, utility connections, and driveway access. 
(e)  Any other duties or responsibilities assigned by the village manager or public works director. 
(f)  The village engineer shall also be the assistant public works director and act as the director in this absence, at the discretion of the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 1924, § 4, 8-18-80) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2619, adopted Feb. 8, 1993, repealed § 2-1103, which pertained to qualifications of the village engineer and derived from Ord. No. 1924, § 3, adopted Aug. 18, 1980 and renumbered § 2-1104 as § 2-1103.  
ARTICLE XII. - BUDGET OFFICER 
 
Sec. 2-1201. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of the budget officer. 
(Ord. No. 2762, § 3, 4-10-95)  
Sec. 2-1202. - Designation, term and removal. 
The president shall, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, designate a village budget officer, who shall serve for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the president. The village budget officer may be removed at any time, with or without cause, by the president. 
(Ord. No. 2762, § 3, 4-10-95)  
Sec. 2-1203. - Qualifications. 
The village budget officer shall be, at the time of designation, a person having knowledge and experience of accepted practices in respect of municipal finance, budgeting, and accounting, and particularly, in respect of the functions and duties of the office, as hereinafter specified. The village budget officer may hold another village office or position, either elected or appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2762, § 3, 4-10-95)  
Sec. 2-1204. - Oath, bond. 
The village budget officer, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall take the oath prescribed by law, and shall execute and file with the village clerk a surety bond to the village in a penal sum determined by the president and board of trustees at the time of designation. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2762, § 3, 4-10-95)  
Sec. 2-1205. - Powers and duties. 
The village budget officer shall have the powers and duties provided by state law to prepare the budget for each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2762, § 3, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4025 , § 4, 4-23-18)  
ARTICLE XIII. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-1301. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Villa Park Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08)  
Sec. 2-1302. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the parks and recreation advisory commission to advise the village board of trustees on matters relating to the administration, operation and conditions of recreation programs; and to advise the board of trustees on matters relating to facilities, including the recreation buildings, swim pools, skate park, playgrounds, etc.; and to discuss and advise the board of trustees on issues referred to the commission by the board of trustees; and to assist the director of parks and recreation and other staff on developing and maintaining comprehensive recreation programs and opportunities for the village residents. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08)  
Sec. 2-1303. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of seven (7) members all of whom shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees and shall serve without compensation. The members of the commission shall be residents of the village. Members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years with the terms of three (3) members expiring in the same year and the terms of four (4) members expiring the next year. The director of parks and recreation shall serve as the liaison to the commission, but shall not be a voting member of the commission. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which they were appointed, which resignation shall be in the manner provided in section 2-1403. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08; Ord. No. 3626, § 2, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 4089 , § 1, 6-24-19)  
Sec. 2-1304. - Officers. 
(a)  Annually in April a chair, vice-chair and secretary of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of one (1) year. 
(b)  Should any office become vacant before the end of its term the commission shall elect a successor by the second subsequent commission meeting after the vacancy was created. 
(c)  The chair, vice-chair and secretary shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive terms in their respective offices unless at least one (1) year has elapsed since their previous term ended. Nothing in this article shall deprive the chair, vice-chair or secretary of any duties or obligations as a commission member. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08; Ord. No. 3626, § 2, 11-8-10)  
Sec. 2-1305. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission created herein shall be held at least monthly on a certain day and time as determined by the chairperson. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of four (4) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08)  
Sec. 2-1306. - Expenditures. 
The commission created herein may recommend to the village board the expenditure of such monies as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08)  
Sec. 2-1307. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed and the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit approved minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meetings, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regarding matters or issues of concern to the village board of trustees and village manager. The commission shall prepare an annual report covering the commission's activities each year in April. 
(Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 11-10-08; Ord. No. 3626, § 2, 11-8-10)  
Sec. 2-1308. - Task force. 
The parks and recreation advisory commission may recommend to the village board of trustees the formation of a task force, which shall operate under the direction and oversight of the commission. 
(a)  A task force shall be a subcommittee formed with the approval of the board of trustees for the purpose of assisting the commission and/or village staff in analysis, research/study or assistance with special projects, programs or assignments given by or approved by the board of trustees. 
(b)  A task force membership shall be comprised of volunteer residents or business residents who have the expertise, skills, talents and/or resources applicable to the purpose of the task force. 
(c)  A task force shall be formed for a predetermined period of time, which may be extended by the board of trustees. Members of the task force shall be appointed by the parks and recreation advisory commission, all of whom shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 3626, § 2, 11-8-10)  
ARTICLE XIV. - APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
Sec. 2-1401. - Identification cards. 
The village clerk shall issue to each duly appointed member of each board and commission of the Village established by the provisions of state law or municipal ordinance an identification card containing the following information: photo of commission member, name of commission member, commission name and expiration date of the commissioner's term. A registry of each identification card issued and of the signature of each member and commissioner shall be maintained by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3396, § 2, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 3441, § 2, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 2-1402. - Swearing in. 
Each duly appointed member of each board and commission of the village established by the provisions of state law or municipal ordinance shall be sworn in at the meeting of the village board where his/her appointment is made by the president and consented to by the village board or at a prearranged time and place within thirty (30) days of such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 3396, § 2, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 3441, § 3, 10-8-07)  
Sec. 2-1403. - Resignation from village board or commission. 
Upon resignation from a village board or commission, the commission/board member shall forward a letter of resignation to the village president reflecting the effective date of such resignation. The board or commission member's identification card as described in section 2-1401 and any other indicia of office shall be returned to the village president or the village clerk prior to the effective date of such resignation. 
(Ord. No. 3441, § 4, 10-8-07)  
ARTICLE XV. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-1501. - Generally. 
In making a local improvement by special assessment, the board of local improvements and the corporate authorities shall follow the procedures as set forth in Division 2 of Article 9 of the Illinois Municipal Code as amended from time to time. The board of local improvements and the corporate authorities shall have all of the dues and powers set forth in such Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 1731, § 2, 8-15-77; Ord. No. 2267, § 1, 12-28-87; Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 3-19-90)  
Sec. 2-1502. - Board of local improvements. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of local improvements consisting of three (3) members as follows: 
(1)  The president; 
(2)  Six (6) trustees; 
(b)  The village clerk shall be a nonvoting member who shall act as secretary of the board. 
(c)  Three (3) nonvoting members as follows: 
(1)  The village engineer; 
(2)  Two (2) members of the planning and zoning commission, both of whom shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
These three (3) nonvoting members shall merely advise and assist the board. 
(d)  There shall be such other nonvoting members as may be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1731, § 1, 8-15-77; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 2267, § 2, 12-28-87; Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 3-19-90)  
ARTICLE XVI. - ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2177, adopted March 3, 1986, provided that the "functions of planning and enforcement of the zoning regulations" be combined in "a single body serving both functions," thereby created a zoning and planning commission in lieu of the plan commission and the zoning board of appeals. The provisions of Ord. No. 2177, have been included herein as superseding Art. XVI, relative to the plan commission, and Art. XVII, relating to the zoning board of appeals, with the exception of §§ 2-1607 and 2-1702 which have been renumbered §§ 2-1605 and 2-1607, respectively. Former Art. XVI was derived from Ord. No. 1165, §§ 1, 3, 5—7, adopted Jan. 5, 1970. Art. XVII was derived from Ord. No. 1195, § 6.3(A), (C), (D), adopted Sept. 28, 1970. 
As pages in the Code are necessarily reprinted, reference to the "plan commission" and the "zoning board of appeals" will be changed to "zoning and planning commission," as provided in § 2 of Ord. No. 2177. 
Cross reference— Rules of construction and definitions, § 1-102; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; planning and development, Ch. 18; planning and zoning guidelines, § 18-201 et seq.; official plan and subdivision regulations, App. B; basic zoning ordinance, App. C; function of zoning and planning commission under zoning ordinance, App. C, § 6.4; floodplain zoning, App. D. 
 
Sec. 2-1601. - Created; designated zoning board of appeals. 
There is hereby established a zoning and planning commission for the village which shall also be known as the zoning board of appeals. Any reference in this Code or any appendix thereto to the "planning and zoning commission" for the village shall be a reference to the commission duly created and authorized under the provisions of this Article XVI and shall also mean the zoning and planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 2725, § 1, 8-22-94)  
Sec. 2-1602. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of nine (9) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that the members first appointed to the commission shall serve as follows: three (3) for one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years and three (3) for three (3) years. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such absence shall be considered as cause for termination of commission membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(B), 3-3-86; Ord. No. 2983, § 2, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1603. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(C), 3-3-86; Ord. No. 3474, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1604. - Powers and duties generally. 
The zoning and planning commission hereby created shall have the powers and duties designated by 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq. and 5/11-13-1 et seq., and as specified by ordinance in section 2-1605, as to planning, and in section 2-1607 as to zoning. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(A), 3-3-86)  
Sec. 2-1605. - Planning powers of the commission. 
The zoning and planning commission shall have the power: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the village. Such plan may be developed in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the municipality. This plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds and other improvements hereinafter specified. The plan, as recommended by the zoning and planning commission and as thereafter adopted by ordinance may be made applicable, by the terms thereof, to land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (1½) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. The zoning and planning commission may implement such plan by recommending such ordinances: 
(a)  Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined; 
(b)  Establishing reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment. 
The zoning and planning commission may also implement such plan by designating land suitable for annexation to the village and the recommending zoning classification for such land upon annexation. 
(2)  To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive plan. 
(3)  To conduct hearings and thereafter make recommendations to the corporate authorities as required on matters referred to the zoning and planning commission including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Applications for zoning amendments; 
(b)  Applications for special use permits; 
(c)  Annexation agreements; 
(4)  To prepare and commend to the corporate authorities, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive plan. 
(5)  To give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of projects for improvement embraced within the official plan and, generally, to promote the realization of the official plan. 
(6)  To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by state law as may be conferred by the corporate authorities. 
(7)  To adopt rules and regulations regarding all matters coming before it which are not inconsistent with this Code, any appendix thereto, or any provision of state law, except that any rule or regulation which may have an impact upon services to be furnished by employees of the village shall not be adopted except following a recommendation of the director of community development. 
(8)  To conduct a development concept review upon the request of an applicant. The purpose of the concept review is to allow the applicant to broadly acquaint the commission with the applicant's development proposal and to provide the applicant with any preliminary views, concerns or recommendations that the members of the commission may have with respect to the proposed development. 
(a)  Not less than ten (10) days prior to the commission meeting, the director of community development shall mail a notice by first class mail to the owners of property within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the proposed project site, excluding public rights-of-way. This notice shall include the date, time and place of the commission meeting where the concept plan is to be reviewed and shall include a general description of the proposed development. The information shall also be mailed to the park and school districts in which the property is located and to other persons or entities that may have jurisdiction over the project. 
(b)  Upon completion of the commission's concept review process, the applicant may request a similar review by the village board of trustees. 
(c)  Any views expressed during the course of the review of any development concept shall be deemed to be preliminary and advisory only, and only the individual view of the member expressing them. Nothing said or done during the course of such review shall be deemed to create or to prejudice any rights of the applicant or to obligate the village, or any representative of it, to approve or deny any formal application following full consideration thereof as required by the Municipal Code of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 2725, § 2, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 3499, § 2, 7-28-08)  
Sec. 2-1606. - Jurisdiction generally. 
The zoning and planning commission shall have the jurisdiction as to planning as set forth in section 2-1605. The zoning and planning commission shall have the jurisdiction sitting as the zoning board of appeals as set forth in section 2-1607. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(D), 3-3-86)  
Sec. 2-1607. - Zoning authority and jurisdiction. 
The zoning and planning commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  To hear and recommend appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building commissioner under this ordinance, in the manner and subject to the standards set out in Section 6.3C of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  To hear and recommend upon applications for variations from the terms provided in this ordinance in the manner and subject to the standards set out in Section 6.7B of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  To hear and pass upon all matters upon which it is required to hear under the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1195, § 6.3(B), 9-28-70; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 2-1608. - Meetings and rules of procedure. 
Meetings shall be regularly held the second Thursday evening of each month at 7:30 p.m.; and in addition, the zoning and planning commission shall hold meetings at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as such commission or the corporate authorities may determine. All hearings required by this article to be conducted by said commission shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. All testimony shall be given under oath. The chairperson or vice-chairperson, or his or her designate, shall administer oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. No hearing shall be held without a quorum of the commission being present which shall consist of a majority of the members. Any formerly absent member who certifies that he or she has read the transcript of the proceedings before the commission may vote upon any question presently before the commission. 
Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirements decision or determination of the commission shall be filed immediately in the office of the building commissioner and shall be a public record. The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this article or with village resolutions and ordinances or with Illinois Statutes, and may select or appoint such other officers as it deems necessary. 
The concurring vote of five (5) members of the commission shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or the village basic zoning ordinance or to affect any variation or to recommend any variation or modification in the basic zoning ordinance of this article to the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(E), 3-3-86; Ord. No. 2725, § 3, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 3474, § 4, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-1609. - Recommendations of the commission. 
All recommendations and findings of the zoning and planning commission shall be forwarded to the village board within fifteen (15) days of the action, except those pertaining to preliminary development and final development plans or plats of subdivision for which the specified times for recommendation shall be thirty (30) and sixty (60) days, respectively, and further excepting recommendations as to the zoning of annexed areas which shall be submitted within six (6) months of the effective date of annexation. Such recommendations are advisory only and are not binding upon the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(F), 3-3-86)  
Sec. 2-1610. - Records; publication. 
The zoning and planning commission shall submit such recommendations in writing to the president and board of trustees, within fifteen (15) days of any public hearing or public meeting where such recommendation is required. The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be available at the Village Hall for public inspection during ordinary business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(G), 3-3-86)  
Sec. 2-1611. - Annual report. 
The chairman of the zoning and planning commission shall report annually, by April 30 of each year, in writing, to the corporate authorities, setting forth the work of such commission for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 1(H), 3-3-86)  
ARTICLE XVIII. - FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 9-301 et seq.; police department, Ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 2-1801. - Created. 
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners.  
Sec. 2-1802. - Members—Generally. 
(a)  The board of fire and police commissioners shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the president with the consent of the board of trustees for terms of office of three (3) years and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified, except as otherwise provided. No such appointment, however, shall be made by any president within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office. 
(b)  Vacancies on the board of fire and police commissioners shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, §§ 10-2.1-1, 10-2.1.2.  
Sec. 2-1803. - Same—Qualifications, oath, removal, etc. 
(a)  The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be considered officers of the village, and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may be required by the corporate authorities. 
(b)  No person holding a lucrative office under the United States, this state or any political subdivision thereof, or a municipality, shall be a member of the board of fire and police commissioners or the secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such lucrative office by a member of the board shall be treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the board or the secretary thereof. No person shall be appointed a member of the board of fire and police commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of such municipality. No more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same political party existing in such municipality at the time of such appointments and as defined in Section 10-2 of The Election Code. If only one or no political party exists in such municipality at the time of such appointments, then state or national political party affiliations shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the board. 
(c)  A member shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his own defense, before a regular meeting of the corporate authorities. A majority vote of the elected members of the corporate authorities shall be required to remove any such member from office. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-3.  
Sec. 2-1804. - Appointment of firemen and policemen. 
The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the fire and police departments, except the chief of police, the deputy chief(s) of police, and the chief of the fire department, which appointments shall be made as provided by law and in the number of officers and in the rank thereof as may be provided from time to time by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3664, § 2, 7-25-11) 
State Law reference— Power to make appointments, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-2.1-4.  
Sec. 2-1805. - Promotions generally. 
All promotional appointments made by the board of fire and police commissioners shall be made from the next lowest rank. 
State Law reference— Promotion from next lowest rank required, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-4.  
Sec. 2-1806. - Appointments; competitive examinations. 
Appointments in the fire and police departments, both original and promotional, shall be made only after competitive examinations in accordance with state law. With respect to original police appointments, the board of fire and police commissioners may prepare and keep a second register of persons who have previously been full-time sworn officers of a regular police department in any municipal, county, university, or state law enforcement agency, provided they are certified by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board and have been with their respective law enforcement agency within the state for at least two (2) years. The persons on this list shall take rank upon the register as candidates in the order of their relative excellence as determined by members of the board of fire and police commissioners. Applicants who have been awarded a certificate attesting to their successful completion of the minimum standards basic law enforcement training course, as provided in the Illinois Police Training Act, may be given preference in appointment over noncertified applicants. 
(Ord. No. 3623, § 2, 11-8-10) 
State Law reference— Appointments to be after competitive examinations, and nature of such examination, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6, 5/10-2.1-14.  
Sec. 2-1807. - Regulations governing examinations; availability to examiners. 
The board of fire and police commissioners shall make rules governing the conduct of original and promotional examinations; such rules shall be made available to all persons seeking to take such examination. The board of fire and police commissioners may, by its rules, waive portions of the required examination for police applicants who have previously been full-time sworn officers of a regular police department in any municipal, county, university, or state law enforcement agency, provided they are certified by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board and have been with their respective law enforcement agency within the state for at least two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 3623, § 2, 11-8-10) 
State Law reference— Rules authorized, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-5, 5/10-2.1-6.  
Sec. 2-1808. - Hearings; discharges. 
The board of fire and police commissioners shall conduct all hearings on charges brought against any member of the police or fire department, and shall designate the penalty or punishment to be applied. No person other than the chiefs shall be discharged, except on charges brought, and after a hearing before the board. 
State Law reference— Removal and discharge of members, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-17.  
Sec. 2-1809. - Limitations on authority. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by ordinance, the board of fire and police commissioners shall have no authority to make rules and regulations governing the conduct of members, or the operation of the fire or police department. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, ILCS 5/10-2.1-5.  
Sec. 2-1810. - Authority to appoint secretary; duties. 
The board of fire and police commissioners may employ a secretary, or may designate one (1) of its own members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings, be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the board, keep a record of all examinations held, and perform such other duties as the board may prescribe. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 10-2.1-20.  
ARTICLE XIX. - DuPAGE WATER COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-135-1 et seq., the DuPage Water Commission has been organized and the Village of Villa Park participates in same by appointing a commissioner who serves for a term of six (6) years and until his successor in office has been appointed and qualified. See Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-135-2. By statute such commission has authority to acquire and manage the water supply source. Such commission is authorized to issue revenue bonds to finance water source acquisition (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-135-4 et seq.) and may exercise eminent domain to acquire property. (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-135-6). 
Cross reference— Water system, Ch. 25, Art. III. 
 
Sec. 2-1901. - Generally. 
Appointments to the DuPage Water Commission shall be made in the manner provided by statute.  
ARTICLE XX. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2584, adopted July 6, 1992, repealed Art. XX, Park and Recreation Advisory Commission, in its entirety. Article XX formerly consisted of §§ 2-2001—2-2003, which derived from Ord. No. 1979, §§ 2—4, adopted June 8, 1981; Ord. No. 2176, § 1, adopted March 3, 1986; and Ord. No. 2182, § 1, adopted May 19, 1986. 
 
Secs. 2-2001—2-2003. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - GOLF COURSE ADMINISTRATION BOARD[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 2-2101. - Generally. 
The creation, membership, organization and functions of the Sugar Creek Golf Course Administrative Board shall be as provided in the agreement between the village and the Elmhurst Park District.  
Sec. 2-2102. - Expenditures. 
(a)  The Sugar Creek Golf Course Administrative Board shall have authority to spend up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) without prior consent from the political subdivisions for expenses, services and contractual obligations which arise from the administration, operation and maintenance of the golf course. These expenditures shall constitute a legal debt of the representative subdivisions. 
(b)  The authorization and delegation contained in this ordinance is conditioned upon and subject to the following: 
(1)  That no expense or contract shall be made by said administrative board unless an appropriation has been previously made concerning said expense or contract. 
(2)  Said expense or contract indicates that the same is not sole and exclusive responsibility of the village, to the exclusion of the park district, nor the sole and exclusive responsibility of the park district, to the exclusion of the village; and expenses and contractual obligations shall be the joint undertaking and obligation of the village and park district. 
(3)  No expense, contract or obligation shall be entered into by said administrative board, even though the amount of said expense, contract or obligation is not in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) where said expense, contract or obligation would otherwise, in the normal course and conduct of business, include other expenses, obligations and contracts which, when included, would exceed the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and where said other expenses, obligations and contracts are entered into for the purpose of reducing the total expense or obligation to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less. 
(4)  Where any expense, obligation or contract which otherwise requires competitive bidding by law is let or attempted to be let without said bidding and contrary to law, said authorization will be withheld. All such bids, regardless of amounts, must be approved and accepted by the president and board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1545, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1572, 8-11-75; Ord. No. 2550, §§ 1, 2, 2-10-92)  
Sec. 2-2103. - Members. 
Members of the golf course administrative board may be members of the Village of Villa Park Board of Trustees or the Elmhurst Park District Board of Commissioners or the administrative staff of either board; or members of the respective communities. Each member, with the exception of full-time staff members employed by either municipality, must reside within the corporate boundaries of the governmental body from which the member is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2983, § 3, 4-19-99)  
ARTICLE XXII. - TRAFFIC AND SAFETY COMMISSION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 2-2201. - Established. 
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the traffic and safety commission. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1, 5-4-64)  
Sec. 2-2202. - Intent; function. 
The commission created herein shall act in an advisory capacity to the corporate authorities in all matters of traffic and safety which are referred to the commission or which are initiated or investigated by the commission on its own motion. 
(Ord. No. 892, §§ 1—3, 5-4-64; Ord. No. 2983, § 4, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 3477, § 2, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2203. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist nine (9) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that the members first appointed to the commission shall serve as follows: Three (3) for one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years and three (3) for three (3) years. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 3, 5-4-64; Ord. No. 3477, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2204. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 4, 5-4-64; Ord. No. 3477, § 4, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2205. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission created here in shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month in the Village Hall at such time as may be established by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of five (5) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 4, 5-4-64; Ord. No. 3477, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2206. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 6-30-75; Ord. No. 2794, § 1, 10-2-95; Ord. No. 3477, § 6, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2207. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 4, 5-4-64; Ord. No. 3477, § 7, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2208. - Advice from certain officers. 
The village manager, the village attorney, the police chief and the fire chief shall serve the commission created herein in an advisory capacity when requested to do so by the commission's chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 3477, § 8, 4-14-08)  
ARTICLE XXIII. - POLICE PENSION BOARD[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Police pension fund, § 19-107 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-2301. - Generally. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board, composed of five (5) members who shall constitute a board of trustees to administer the pension fund and to designate the beneficiaries thereof. The board shall be known as the "Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the Village of Villa Park. 
(b)  Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the village president. The third and fourth members of the board shall be elected from the regular police force by the active members thereof. The fifth member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the fund. 
(c)  Member terms shall be for two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The terms for members appointed by the village president shall begin on the second Tuesday in May and shall be staggered so one (1) term shall begin every other year. The terms for the two (2) members elected by the active participants and the term of the member elected by the beneficiaries shall begin on the second Tuesday in May after the election for those members which shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April. 
(d)  The election provided for in this section for elected board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April, at such place or places in the municipality and under the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board. 
(e)  All members of the regular police force shall be entitled to vote only for the police force members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age shall be entitled to vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one (1) ballot at such election. The members shall be elected for a term of two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after such election. 
(f)  Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any member of the board elected under this section, his successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election. 
(Ord. No. 3708, §§ 1—3, 7-9-12; Ord. No. 3787, § 1, 4-28-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 40 ILCS 5/3-128.  
Sec. 2-2302. - Rooms. 
Suitable rooms for offices and meetings of the board of trustees of the police pension fund shall be assigned by the board of trustees of the village. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 40 ILCS 5/3-129.  
Sec. 2-2303. - Meetings, officers, etc. 
(a)  The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of July, October, January and April annually, and special meetings as called by the president. 
(b)  At the regular July meeting, the board shall select from its members a president, vice-president, secretary, and assistant secretary to serve for the period of one (1) year and until his respective successor is elected and qualified. 
(c)  The vice-president of the board shall perform the duties of president during any vacancy in that office, or during such time as the president is absent from the village, or for any other reason is disqualified or by reason of illness or other causes is unable to perform his duties. 
(d)  The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of such office. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 40 ILCS 5/3-130.  
Sec. 2-2304. - Powers and duties. 
The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall have the powers and duties stated below in addition to the other powers and duties granted it by law. 
(1)  To control and manage, exclusively, the pension fund, and all moneys donated, paid or assessed for the relief or pensioning of disabled, super-annuated and retired members of the police department, their widows, minor children and dependent parents. All such moneys shall be placed by the village treasurer to the credit of the fund, subject to the order of the pension board. 
(2)  To order and direct the payment of pensions and other benefits provided by law and to issue certificates signed by its president and secretary to the persons entitled thereto of the amount ordered paid to such persons from the fund, which certificates shall state the purpose of the payment. 
(3)  To submit annually to the village or board of trustees at the close of the fiscal year, a list of persons entitled to payments from the fund, stating the amount of the payments, and their purpose, as ordered by the board. It shall also include items of income accrued to the fund during such fiscal year. Such list shall be signed by the secretary and president of the pension board, and attested under oath. No resolution or order for the payment of money shall be valid unless approved by a majority of the members of the board, and any order for such payment shall be signed by the president and secretary of the board. 
(4)  To draw such pension funds from the treasurer or other officials of the village, and invest any part thereof in the name of the board of the police pension fund in: Interest bearing bonds or tax anticipation warrants of the United States, of the state or of any county, township or municipal corporation of the State of Illinois; insured withdrawable capital accounts of federal chartered federal savings and loan associations if the withdrawable capital accounts are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation; insured investments in credit unions if the investments are insured by the National Credit Union Administration; and in savings accounts or certificates of deposit of a national or state bank. All securities shall be deposited with the village treasurer and be subject to the order of the pension board. Interest on such investments shall be credited to the account of the pension fund. 
(5)  To compel witnesses to attend and testify before it, upon all matters connected with the administration hereof, in the manner provided by law for the taking of testimony before the circuit court. The president, or any member of the board, may administer oaths to such witnesses. 
(6)  To appoint a clerk and define his duties. No person drawing a pension under this article shall be employed by the board. 
(7)  To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses, including clerk hire, printing and witness fees. 
(8)  To keep a public record of all its proceedings. 
(9)  To make necessary rules and regulations in conformity with the provisions of law, which shall be published by the board and copies transmitted from time to time to all pensioners and contributors. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 3-131 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2305. - Reports by pension board. 
(a)  The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall report to the board of trustees of the village on the condition of the police pension fund. The report shall be made prior to the meeting of the village board held for the levying of taxes for the year for which such report is made. 
(b)  The board shall certify to the board of trustees of the village: 
(1)  The assets in its custody at such time; 
(2)  The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from deductions from the salaries of policemen, and from all other sources; and 
(3)  The estimated amount required during said calendar year to pay all pensions and other obligations provided by law, and maintain the reserve fund provided by law. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. 108½, § 3-143.  
ARTICLE XXIV. - FIREMEN'S PENSION BOARD[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 9-301 et seq.; Firemen's pension fund, § 9-321 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-2401. - Generally. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of trustees to be known as the "board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund", consisting of two (2) members appointed by the village president, two (2) members chosen from the active firemen and one (1) other member who shall be chosen from the firemen thereof who have been retired under the "Firemen's Pension Fund Act of 1919" or this article. 
(b)  The members of the board to be chosen from the active and retired firemen shall be elected by ballot at elections to be held on the third Monday in April of the applicable years under the Australian ballot system, at such place and places, in such municipality, and under such regulations as shall be prescribed by the board. 
(c)  No person shall cast more than one vote at such election for each candidate for whom he is eligible to vote. In the elections for board members to be chosen from the active firemen, all active firemen and none others may vote. In the elections for board members to be chosen from the firemen who have been retired, the firemen who have been so retired and none others may vote. 
(d)  Each member of the board so elected shall hold office for a term of three (3) years and until his successor has been duly elected and qualified. 
(e)  The board shall canvass the ballots at each election and declare the results as to which person or persons have been elected and for what term or terms respectively. In case of a tie vote between any two (2) ore more candidates, the board shall determine by lot which candidate or candidates have been elected and for term or terms respectively. In the event of the failure, resignation, or inability to act of any member of the board, his successor shall be elected for the unexpired time at a special election which shall be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as a regular election hereunder. 
(f)  The board shall elect from its number a president and a secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1353, § 1, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 8-17-75; Ord. No. 3338, § 2, 2-13-06)  
Sec. 2-2402. - Powers and duties. 
The board created herein shall have the powers and duties stated below in addition to the other powers and duties granted it by law, including 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.: 
(1)  To control and manage the pension fund and all money donated, paid, assessed or provided by law for the relief or pensioning of disabled, superannuated and retired firefighters, their widows, minor children and dependent parents; 
(2)  To hear and decide all applications for relief or pensions and to order and direct the payment of pensions and other benefits hereunder; 
(3)  To make all rules and regulations necessary for the discharge of its duties; 
(4)  To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses of the board; 
(5)  To invest the money in the pension fund in permitted investments pursuant to 40 ILCS 5/1-113.2, as now existing or hereafter amended; and 
(6)  To keep a record of all its meetings and proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 8-15-75: Ord. No 3671, § 2, 9-26-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 4-122 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2403. - Treasurer. 
(a)  The treasurer of the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund shall be the custodian of the pension fund and shall secure and safely keep the same, subject to the control and direction of the board; and shall keep his books and accounts concerning such fund in such manner as may be prescribed by the board; and the books and accounts shall be subject to the inspection of the board or any member thereof. 
(b)  The treasurer shall, within ten (10) days after his election or appointment, execute a bond to the municipality, with good and sufficient securities, in such penal sums as the board shall direct, to be approved by the board, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office, and that he will safely keep and well and truly account for all moneys and property which may come into his hands as treasurer; and that on the expiration of his term of office he will surrender and deliver over to his successor all unexpended moneys and property which have come to his hands as treasurer of the fund. 
(c)  The bond shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. In case of a breach of the bond, or the conditions thereof, suit may be brought thereon in the name of the village for the use of the board, or of any person injured by such breach. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 4-130.  
Sec. 2-2404. - Compensation. 
Members of the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund shall not receive or have any right to receive any money or moneys from a pension fund as salary for service performed as a member of such board. 
(Ord. No. 1353, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1574, § 1, 8-15-75) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 4-137.  
ARTICLE XXV. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS COMMISSION[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2483, § 1, adopted May 28, 1991 amended the Code by repealing Ord. No. 1778, adopted Mar. 20, 1978; consequently, §§ 2-2501—2-2509 pertaining to the environmental control board were deleted, since they derived from §§ 1—10 of Ord. No. 1778. Said former sections also derived from Ord. No. 2286, §§ 1 and 2, adopted May 23, 1988. Section 2 of Ord. No. 2483 added new §§ 2-2501—2-2508 as herein set forth. 
Cross reference— Garbage and trash, Ch. 10; detergents containing phosphates, § 16-109; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 2-2501. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Villa Park Environmental Concerns Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 2-2502. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the environmental concerns commission to advise the president and board of trustees on matters relating to the preservation, protection and improvement of the environment, including the quality of land, air and water affecting the village and its residents, and thereby provide information that will assist the president and board of trustees in addressing environmental issues. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 2-2503. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of seven (7) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years with staggered terms so that the terms of two (2) members shall expire the first and second years and the terms of three (3) members shall expire the third year. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2983, § 5, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 3321, § 2, 10-10-05; Ord. No. 3472, § 2, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3865 , § 1, 5-11-15)  
Sec. 2-2504. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3472, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2505. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission created here in shall be held on the fourth Thursday of each month in the Village Hall at such time as may be established by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of four (4) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2941, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 3472, § 4, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3865 , § 2, 5-11-15) 
State Law reference— Open Meetings Act generally, 5 ILCS 120/1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2506. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3472, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2507. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3472, § 6, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2508. - Powers and duties. 
The environmental concerns commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To make recommendations to the president and board of trustees regarding possible ways to improve, preserve and protect the environment, including the quality of land, air and water affecting the village and its residents. 
(2)  To advise the president and board of trustees and the village manager concerning any actual or potential threat of contaminative or noise sources, contamination to public water supplies and refuse disposal sites, or any other threat to the quality of the environment of the village and its residents. 
(3)  To advise the president and board of trustees of the source of any pollution or contamination and the name of any person, firm or entity that may be causing environmental pollution or contamination or that may be violating any statutes, laws, rules, or regulations either of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or of any federal, state, county or local agency. 
(4)  To make recommendations to the president and board of trustees for the adoption of ordinances and to prepare and submit to the president and board of trustees, or to other officials with the advice and consent of the president and board of trustees, resolutions and recommendations concerning local, state and national environmental issues. 
(5)  To make recommendations to the president and board of trustees concerning materials, programs, or other methods of increasing the awareness of the residents of the village on environmental issues. 
(6)  To promote and extend cooperation and assistance to any like agencies created for similar purposes and to promote the formation of similar boards in other communities or areas. 
(7)  With the advice and consent of the president and board of trustees, and in accordance with the directives of the president and board of trustees, to testify or appear before the Illinois Pollution Control Board or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency on any hearing concerning any proposed rule or regulation of those agencies. 
(8)  To create such subcommittees as it deems advisable to carry out the purposes of the commission; appointments to such subcommittee(s) to be made by the chairperson and vice chairperson with the concurrence of a majority of the commission members. 
(9)  To cooperate with other boards and commissions of the village to maintain and improve the quality of life for the residents of the village. 
(10)  To assist the manager and staff, as the manager or his designee requests, on matters relating to the preservation, protection and improvements of the environment. 
(11)  Such other powers and duties as the president and board of trustees, acting jointly, may from time to time designate, whether by way of motion adopted at any regular or special meeting, by resolution, or by ordinance. If by motion, the precise nature of the additional powers and duties shall be accurately described in the minutes and the village clerk shall promptly forward, upon approval of the minutes, a copy to the chairperson of the environmental concerns commission for such action as may be required. 
If in the exercise of these powers and the discharge of these duties it becomes necessary for the commission or its members to interact with employees of the village, such shall be coordinated through the village manager's office and in accordance with the directions of the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 2, 5-28-91)  
ARTICLE XXVI. - SENIOR CITIZENS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-2601. - Created. 
There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the Villa Park Senior Citizens Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 1, 12-22-75)  
Sec. 2-2602. - Intent; function. 
It shall be the intent of this commission to make recommendations to the village board to insure and promote the well-being of the senior population of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 1609, §§ 2—7, 12-22-75; Ord. No. 2243, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. 2983, § 6, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 3475, § 2, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2603. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of eleven (11) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. A majority of members of the commission shall be qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment. All members of the commission shall be fifty-five (55) or older. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 8, 12-22-75; Ord. No. 3475, § 3, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3517, § 2, 11-10-08)  
Sec. 2-2604. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 7, 12-22-75; Ord. No. 3475, § 4, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2605. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission created here in shall be held on the first Monday of each month such place and time as may be established by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of six (6) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1609, § 9, 12-22-75; Ord. No. 3475, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2606. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 3475, § 6, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2607. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 3475, § 7, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2608. - Functions and duties. 
The functions and duties of the commission created herein shall be to: 
(a)  Make recommendations from time to time to the board of trustees with respect to adoption and amendments of ordinances relating to senior citizens; 
(b)  Investigate the needs and concerns of the senior citizens, including income, physical and mental health, housing, employment, education, nutrition, legal aid, retirement roles and activities, spiritual well-being, transportation, government and all other related areas of planning; 
(c)  Analyze complaints of senior citizens of the Village of Villa Park; 
(d)  Consult and cooperate with all agencies of the village, other municipalities, and federal, state and local agencies concerned with senior citizens; 
(e)  Promulgate and effect a program of publicity relating to senior citizens and public education relating to senior citizens; 
(f)  Develop action programs of benefit to senior citizens and exercise such other functions as may be delegated by the corporate authorities; 
(g)  Conduct public hearings, carry on research, or otherwise obtain such factual data and issue such reports and recommendations to the board of trustees and to the public as in the judgment of the commission will effectuate the policies and purpose of the commission; 
(h)  Adopt rules and regulations for the commission's business; 
(i)  Furnish a report covering the activities, direction and any recommendations of the commission to the president and board of trustees every six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 3475, § 8, 4-14-08)  
ARTICLE XXVII. - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2482, § 1, adopted May 28, 1991 amended §§ 2-2701—2-2709 to read as herein set forth. Prior to such amendment, §§ 2-2701—2-2708 pertained to the historical preservation commission and derived from Ord. No. 1691, §§ 1—7, 9, adopted Feb. 14, 1977 and Ord. No. 2231, § 1, adopted April 27, 1987. 
Cross reference— Planning and development, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Historical preservation, 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-2701. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Villa Park Historical Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to establish such a board, 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-3.  
Sec. 2-2702. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the historical preservation commission to advise the president and board of trustees on matters relating to the preservation of areas, places, sites, buildings, structures, monuments, items, memorabilia, works of art and other objects having a special historical, community, or aesthetic interest, value, or significance to the village, including but not limited to, the former Chicago, Aurora and Eligin train stations located at 220 South Villa Avenue (the Villa Avenue Train Station) and 10 West Park Boulevard (the Ardmore Avenue Train Station). 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 2-2703. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of five (5) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment. One (1) commission member shall be a member of the Villa Park Historical Society. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2983, § 7, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 3473, § 2, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3942 , § 1, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 2-2704. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3473, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2705. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission created here in shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month in the Village Hall at such time as may be established by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of three (3) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2941, § 2, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 3473, § 4, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3942 , § 2, 11-14-16) 
State Law reference— Open Meetings Act generally, 5 ILCS 120/1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2706. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3473, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2707. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3473, § 6, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2708. - Powers and duties. 
The historical preservation commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To conduct public hearings upon its own motion, or on a citizen's petition, to implement the intent and purpose of this article as expressed in section 2-2702 of this Code for the purposes and uses set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-1, as originally adopted or subsequently amended. Such hearings shall be pursuant to notice as is otherwise set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-4. Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of such hearing, a written recommendation shall be made to the corporate authorities who shall take such action as they may deem fit. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the president and board of trustees concerning methods of increasing the awareness of the residents of the village of the importance of preserving items, areas, sites, buildings, or any other thing of historical importance or significance to the village. 
(3)  To aid in the development, restoration and preservation of the Villa Avenue Train Station and the Ardmore Avenue Train Station, or other sites or properties designated by ordinance by the corporate authorities in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-2. 
(4)  Such other powers and duties as the president and board of trustees, acting jointly, may from time to time designate, whether by way of motion adopted at any regular or special meeting, by resolution, or by ordinance. If by motion, the precise nature of the additional powers and duties shall be accurately described in the minutes and the village clerk shall promptly forward, upon approval of the minutes, a copy to the chairperson of the historical preservation commission for such action as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference— Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1.  
Sec. 2-2709. - Administrative review. 
Any proceedings of the historical preservation commission shall not be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review Act. 
(Ord. No. 2482, § 1, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-4.  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2147, §§ 1—4, adopted June 3, 1985, being not expressly amendatory of the Code, has been included as Art. XXVIII, §§ 2-2801—2-2804, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-2801. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Villa Park Economic Development Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2147, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 3471, § 2, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2802. - Intent; purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the village economic development commission to prepare and recommend to the village board procedures for the planning, execution and implementation of business district plans, including plans for development of adjacent areas to provide for the housing, social and recreational needs of the business district. 
(Ord. No. 2147, § 2, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 3471, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2803. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of seven (7) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be either qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment, or have a place of business within the corporate limits of the village. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that the members first appointed to the commission shall serve as follows: Two (2) for one (1) year, two (2) for two (2) years and three (3) for three (3) years. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2147, § 3, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 3471, § 4, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2804. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 2147, § 3, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 3471, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2805. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission shall be held the third Wednesday of each month in the Village Hall at such time as may be established by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of four (4) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 3471, § 6, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3724, § 1, 12-10-12; Ord. No. 3782, § 1, 3-24-14)  
Sec. 2-2806. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 3471, § 7, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2807. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 3471, § 8, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2808. - Powers and duties. 
Powers and duties are as follows: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities procedures for the planning, execution and implementation of business district plans, including plans for development of adjacent areas to provide for the housing, social and recreation needs of the developed or redeveloped business district. 
(2)  To act as an agent for the Village of Villa Park for the purposes of business district development and redevelopment. 
(3)  To conduct hearings and thereafter make recommendations to the corporate authorities as required on matters relating to all development and redevelopment proposals for a business district. 
(4)  To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities, from time to time, plans for: 
a.  The use of eminent domain for the acquisition of real and personal property for the purpose of a development or redevelopment project; 
b.  The acquiring, managing, conveying or otherwise disposing of real and personal property acquired pursuant to the provisions of a development or redevelopment plan; 
c.  The application for and acceptance of capital grants and loans from the United States and the State of Illinois, or any instrumentality of the United States or the State of Illinois for business district development and redevelopment; 
d.  The borrowing of funds as it may be deemed necessary for the purpose of business district development and redevelopment, and in this connection, including the issuance of such obligation or revenue bonds as it shall be deemed necessary, subject to applicable statutory limitations; 
e.  The entering into of contracts with any public or private agency or person; 
f.  The selling, leasing, trading or improving such real property as may be acquired in connection with business district development or redevelopment plans; 
g.  The development of areas for housing, recreational, social and commercial uses necessary for the development or redevelopment of a business district. 
(5)  To collect information on opportunities for business and investment in the village. 
(6)  To prepare pamphlets explaining opportunities in the village. 
(7)  To prepare pamphlets outlining village regulations affecting businesses. 
(8)  To prepare pamphlets pointing out village regulations relating to energy conservation and environmental protection. 
(9)  To assist the corporate authorities in plans to expand the tax base of the village. 
(10)  To assist the corporate authorities in plans to increase the opportunity for village residents to obtain local employment. 
(11)  To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by state law as my be conferred by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 3471, § 9, 4-14-08)  
ARTICLE XXIX. - COMMUNITY PRIDE COMMISSION[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2350, §§ 1—8, adopted June 12, 1989, not specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included herein as Ch. 2, Art. XXIX, §§ 2-2901—2-2908, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-2901. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Villa Park Community Pride Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 1, 6-12-89)  
Sec. 2-2902. - Intent; purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the village community pride commission to advise the president and board of trustees on matters relating to the overall image of the village including physical beautification, public relations, and coordination and promotion of volunteers and volunteerism within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 2, 6-12-89)  
Sec. 2-2903. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of eleven (11) members including the chairperson and two (2) junior members, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be either qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment, or have a place of business within the corporate limits of the village (with the exception of the two (2) junior members). Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that the members first appointed to the commission shall serve as follows: three (3) for one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years and three (3) for three (3) years. The term of junior members shall be for one (1) year. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 3, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3470, § 2, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3546, § 2, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 2-2903.1. - Junior members. 
Two (2) junior members shall be appointed to the community pride commission by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. Junior members shall be between the ages of thirteen (13) and seventeen (17) and residents of the village. Junior members under the age of sixteen (16) shall serve only with the consent of parents or legal guardian. The term for junior members shall be one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 3546, § 3, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 2-2904. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 4, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3470, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2905. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission created herein shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of each month in the Village Hall at such time as may be established by the commission. No junior member of the commission shall be required or permitted to violate curfew laws while serving on this commission, either at regularly scheduled meetings or other commission activities. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of five (5) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. Junior members shall not be counted toward a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 5, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 3470, § 4, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3546, § 4, 4-13-09)  
Sec. 2-2906. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 6, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3470, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2907. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 7, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3470, § 6, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-2908. - Powers and duties. 
The village community pride commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities procedures for the planning, execution, and implementation of the intents and purposes of the commission. 
(2)  To solicit donations, either in cash, goods, or services, for the physical beautification and enhancement of the image of the village. Any cash received shall be paid to the village treasurer who shall segregate and deposit said moneys into a special line item account which shall be known as the Community Pride Account. 
(3)  To coordinate a volunteer program and to encourage volunteerism within the village. 
(4)  To recommend to the corporate authorities activities which the commission believes will accomplish its intents and purposes. 
(5)  To prepare pamphlets to educate the citizens of the village concerning the goals and objectives of the commission. 
(6)  As the commission deems appropriate, to sponsor, and coordinate with other boards, commissions, community civic organizations, merchants groups or associations, a village "Clean-Up Week." 
(7)  To encourage neighborhoods to work together through formation of homeowners' associations or neighborhood improvement groups. 
(8)  To undertake such other activities as will promote the goals and objectives of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2350, § 8, 6-12-89)  
ARTICLE XXX. - CABLE TV COMMISSION[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference— Cable communications, Ch. 7.5. 
 
Sec. 2-3001. - Created. 
There is hereby created the Villa Park Cable TV Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 1, 6-12-89)  
Sec. 2-3002. - Intent; purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the village cable TV commission to oversee the training and scheduling of camera operators to televise village board meetings for the benefit of all citizens of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 2, 6-12-89)  
Sec. 2-3003. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall consist of seven (7) members including the chairperson, appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the commission, persons shall be either qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment, or have a place of business within the corporate limits of the village, or be employed within the corporate limits of the village. Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years with staggered terms so that terms of two (2) members shall expire the first and second years and the terms of three (3) members shall expire the third year. 
(b)  All appointments shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year. Any member of the commission may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any member of the commission shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him for appointment to the commission, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the commission without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the commission, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the commission may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 3, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3469, § 2, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3865 , § 3, 5-11-15)  
Sec. 2-3004. - Officers. 
A chairman of the commission created herein shall be elected by the members of the commission for a term of two (2) years. The commission may designate one (1) of its members to act as secretary, together with such other officers as it deems fit. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 4, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3469, § 3, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-3005. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the commission shall be held on the second Monday of each month in the Village Hall at such time as may be established by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the members. 
(d)  The presence of four (4) commission members shall constitute a quorum to transact any commission business at a regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 5, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 2941, § 4, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 3469, § 4, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3865 , § 4, 5-11-15; Ord. No. 4055 , § 1, 10-22-18)  
Sec. 2-3006. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the commission shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved same prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 6, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3469, § 5, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-3007. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The commission created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed, the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the manager. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 7, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 3469, § 6, 4-14-08)  
Sec. 2-3008. - Powers and duties. 
The village cable TV commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities procedures for the planning, execution, and implementation of the intents and purposes of the commission. 
(2)  To receive training to operate television and video cameras and to keep a schedule of operators to use cameras and related equipment for televising public meetings of the village board for broadcast to the citizens of the village. 
(3)  To make such other recommendations to the village board which the commission considers necessary to implement the spirit and intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2352, § 8, 6-12-89)  
Secs. 2-3009—2-3100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXI. - INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 2-3101. - Indemnification of officers and employees. 
To the fullest extent permitted by the Constitution of the State of Illinois and applicable state law and subject to the applicable terms, conditions and exclusions of any liability coverage documents of the village, the following officials or employees: 
(1)  All persons who were, now are, or shall be lawfully elected, appointed or employed officials of the village; 
(2)  All members of commissions, boards or other units operated by and under the jurisdiction of the village; 
(3)  All employees and all persons who perform a service on a volunteer basis for the village and under its direction and control and any persons providing services to the village under any mutual aid or similar agreement; 
(4)  Police and fire pension boards, their trustees, commissioners and public officials; and 
(5)  Employees and public officials of the village serving on the board of any independent governmental or intergovernmental or not-for-profit organization, in which the village has an affiliation, upon the following conditions: service on the board is approved by the village and furthers the interest of the village; 
shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by the village from and against all liabilities, for compensatory damages, expenses of investigation, judgments and amounts paid in settlement which may be imposed upon or reasonably incurred or paid by such official or employee in connection with or resulting from any claim made against him/her, or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which he/she may be involved, by reason of his/her being or having been such official or such employee of the village and acting within the scope of his/her employment or official duties. 
The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any other rights to which such official or employee may be entitled as a matter of law. 
(Ord. No. 3061, § 2, 10-23-00)  
Sec. 2-3102. - Police officer indemnification. 
Indemnification shall be provided by the village to police officers as provided by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 3061, § 2, 10-23-00)  
ARTICLE XXXII. - SPECIAL EVENTS REVIEW COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-3201. - Committee created. 
There is hereby created a standing special events review committee of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3896 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 2-3202. - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of the special events review committee shall be as follows: 
(1)  To advise the president and board of trustees on issues, events and activities relating to the identification of successful special events and make recommendations to improve or restructure existing events to make the village more visible, attract additional attendees and to ensure financial sustainability. 
(2)  To recommend to the president and board of trustees suggestions concerning the financial, event timing, event structure, event needs and location, volunteer involvement and providing recommendations for future successful village events and festivals. 
(Ord. No. 3896 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 2-3203. - Membership. 
(a)  The committee created herein shall consist of nine (9) members including the chairperson, of which six (6) members shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. To be eligible to serve on the committee, the six members shall be either qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment, a member of another committee, a member of the VFW, Chamber of Commerce, Rotary, Lions, or Kiwanis organizations in the village or have a place of business within the corporate limits of the village. The six (6) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that the members first appointed to the committee shall serve as follows: two (2) for one (1) year, two (2) for two (2) years and two (2) for three (3) years. 
The village manager shall select a representative from the police department, fire department, and parks and recreation department to serve as committee members. 
One (1) village trustee shall serve as a liaison to the committee to meet with and consult with the committee. The liaison shall be selected by the village president. 
(b)  Appointments of the six (6) members shall expire the thirtieth (30th) of April of the appropriate year and any member of the committee may resign at any time during the term for which he/she was appointed, which resignation shall be addressed to the village president. Vacancies on the committee shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant in the manner provided herein. 
(c)  If any of the six (6) members of the committee shall cease to maintain the status qualifying him or her for appointment to the committee, or shall fail to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the committee without being excused by a vote of a majority of the members of the committee, such member may be considered as having resigned his membership. Report of such change of status or failure of attendance may be reported to the corporate authorities and, if such report is accepted by the corporate authorities, the membership in question shall be declared vacant and it shall be the duty of the president to appoint a qualified successor to such membership in the manner provided herein. Any member of the committee may be removed for cause by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 3896 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 2-3204. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the committee shall be held not less than quarterly at Village Hall at such time as may be established by the committee. 
(b)  Special meetings of the committee may be called by the chairperson or any two (2) voting members with at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice prior to the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall be posted in the Village Hall. 
(c)  The action of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the committee. 
(d)  The presence of five (5) committee members shall constitute a quorum to transact any committee business at a regular or special meeting of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 3896 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 2-3205. - Expenditures. 
Expenses for the operation and transaction of the affairs of the committee shall be paid from such funds as may be provided for such purpose in the annual appropriation and budget ordinances of the village; provided, however, that the village manager has approved the expenditures prior to the expense being incurred. 
(Ord. No. 3896 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 2-3206. - Reports and records. 
(a)  The committee created herein shall keep permanent minutes of its meetings, which shall include topics discussed and the motions and vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(b)  The committee shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting within a reasonable time after each of its meeting, and the chairperson shall forward copies of the minutes, together with any special reports regard matters or issues of concern, to the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 3896 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 13; alcoholic beverages prohibited on premises of massage clinics, § 13-615; alcoholic liquor in public places, § 16-108; zoning, App. C. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
Whenever reference is made in this chapter to the "Illinois Liquor Control Law," it shall mean and refer to "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, as amended (235 ILCS). The phrase "alcoholic liquors" when used herein shall have the same meaning and shall be synonymous with the phrase "alcoholic liquor" as defined by and used in "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, as amended (235 ILCS). All other words and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as the same or similar words or phrases defined by and used in said "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, as amended (235 ILCS). 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. I, §§ 1—3, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 1, 8-7-89) 
State Law reference— Definitions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3 through 5/1-3.28.  
Sec. 3-102. - Consumption or possession on public property and certain other areas of the village. 
(a)  All persons are hereby prohibited from consuming alcoholic beverages on public property within the village. 
(b)  All persons are hereby prohibited from possessing alcoholic beverages wherein the container containing said alcoholic beverages has had the seal broken, or wherein said container is partially or fully opened and not in its original package form on public property within the village. 
(c)  The local liquor control commission may authorize consumption of beer and/or wine within parks or other recreational areas on designated days, for specified events, at specified hours, and at designated locations, provided that a liquor license is obtained for the event. It shall not be an offense under either subsections (a) or (b) of this section 3-102 if the consumption or possession is both: 
(1)  Pursuant to authorization granted by the local liquor control commission; and 
(2)  Within the scope, terms, and conditions of the authorization. 
The burden of proving the applicability of this subsection (c) shall be on the person claiming same. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcoholic liquor or beverages, except in the original container with the seal unbroken, in any common area, on property, including all yards outside of any rental residential dwelling in an R-4 district, except in areas designated by the owner of a rental residential dwelling. It shall be unlawful for any owner of the rental residential building in an R-4 district to designate such areas unless at the same time he notifies the village in writing of such designation, indicating the property both by common address and by property identification number and specifically designating the common area. Such designation shall not become effective until approved in writing by the village manager or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any owner to designate parking lots or any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles as such an area. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this subsection (d) shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 11, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 27, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2544, §§ 1, 2, 1-6-92; Ord. No. 3341, § 2, 3-13-06)  
Sec. 3-103. - Penalty. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day said violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VIII, § 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 3341, § 3, 3-13-06)  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 3-201. - Generally. 
(a)  The village president shall be the local liquor control commissioner for the village. The commissioner may at his discretion appoint persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of his duties as such commissioner. 
(b)  The local liquor control commissioner shall file a copy of the appointment of the members of the local liquor control commission in the office of the village clerk within five (5) days after their respective appointments if he decides to appoint a commission, otherwise, he alone shall act as the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, §§ 1, 5, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2644, § 1, 7-26-93) 
State Law reference— Local liquor control commissioner, 235 ILCS 5/4-2 et seq.  
Sec. 3-202. - Local liquor control commission created. 
(a)  Created; membership. A local liquor control commission is created which shall be composed of three (3) members. The village president shall be a member of the commission and its chairman. The remaining two (2) members shall be appointed by the village president. The members shall be qualified electors of the village who have resided therein for one (1) year immediately preceding their appointment. 
(b)  Term. The term of the appointed members shall be one (1) year. Members shall hold office for their designated terms and until their successors have been appointed. 
(c)  Meetings, purpose and duties. The chairman shall preside over all meetings of the local liquor control commission. The purpose of the local liquor control commission shall be limited to the conduct of formal disciplinary hearings involving any licensee and in furtherance of that express and limited purpose, the commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To impose suspension, revocation or fine, for cause, on any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  To issue subpoena at the request of any party as part of a disciplinary hearing. 
(3)  To conduct disciplinary hearings on any written formal complaint or formal charge; to issue written orders and findings consistent with the provisions of local ordinance and the laws of the State of Illinois; to exercise such other implied or express powers and duties as may be necessary for the proper conduct of disciplinary hearings and the imposition of any sanction or fee authorized by law. 
(4)  To retain counsel to advise it in connection with its duties. 
(5)  To secure the services of individuals to prepare a verbatim transcript of any proceedings before it. 
(6)  To perform such duties and responsibilities as the village president/local liquor control commissioner may from time to time request in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, § 4, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2644, § 2, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 2983, § 8, 4-19-99)  
Sec. 3-203. - Salary. 
The salary of the local liquor control commissioner shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 3-3-41) 
State Law reference— Compensation of local liquor control commissioner authorized, 235 ILCS 5/4-3.  
Sec. 3-204. - General functions and powers. 
The local liquor control commissioner, in addition to the powers and duties herein given and provided, is charged with the administration of the Illinois Liquor Control Law and this chapter and shall have all the powers and duties as provided for in the Illinois Liquor Control Law. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, § 2, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2644, § 3, 7-26-93)  
Sec. 3-205. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the local liquor control commission may be called by the chairman upon receipt of a written formal complaint against a licensee or at such other times as the chairman deems necessary. Notice of a meeting shall be made in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, § 8, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2644, § 4, 7-26-93)  
Sec. 3-206. - Powers with reference to licenses. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall also have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses: 
(a)  To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause, all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the village. 
(b)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Law, or this chapter, or rule adopted by the commission, are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith. 
(c)  To receive complaint from any citizen within the village, or on his own motion, that any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Law, or this chapter, or rule adopted by the commission have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaint in the manner provided in the Liquor Control Law. 
(d)  To receive local license fees and pay the same to the village treasurer. 
(e)  To examine, or cause to be examined under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas, which shall be effective in any part of the state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. 
(f)  To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation Act, or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that act, has violated this act by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquor without a retailer's license. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, § 7, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, §§ 2—4, 8-7-89)  
Sec. 3-207. - Application of state law. 
All sections of the Illinois Liquor Control Law and any amendments thereto applicable to local liquor control commissions, or the local liquor control commissioners in municipalities of under five hundred thousand (500,000) in population be and the same hereby are adopted and made part of this chapter as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, § 3, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-208. - Rules and regulations. 
The local liquor control commission is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules as may be necessary in the performance of its duties and may prescribe the form of application which each prospective alcoholic liquor licensee shall sign prior to receiving the license. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. II, § 6, 9-11-78)  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-301. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive orders for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail, directly or indirectly, in the village without first having a valid retail liquor license issued by the local liquor control commissioner or, in violation of any of the terms of such license or, in violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, whenever more than five (5) percent of the stock in a corporation which holds a license under this chapter is transferred, it shall be presumed that such transfer amounts to a sale of a substantial portion of the business, and the purchaser of such stock totalling more than five (5) percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation shall make application for a new license under the terms of this chapter, and shall not commence operating said business until such date as a new license has been issued to the corporation. In addition, an original issuance fee and annual fee shall be required in connection with the application and issuance of the new license, in accordance with sections 3-314 and 3-315 of this chapter. 
(c)  No retail liquor license shall be granted by the local liquor control commissioner except as herein provided. 
(d)  All retail liquor licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be signed by the village president, as local liquor control commissioner, and by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, §§ 1, 2, 5, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 5, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 3333, § 2, 1-23-06) 
State Law reference— Authority of village board to require license, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 3-302. - Separate license required for each location. 
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall embrace only one place of business. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 3, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-303. - Classification. 
Village retail alcoholic liquor licenses are hereby divided into classes as follows: 
(a)  Class AAA—Tavern, beer and wine only: Class AAA licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only to patrons for consumption on the premises described in the license and the sale of beer and wine at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises. 
(b)  Class AA—Tavern, unrestricted: Class AA licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises described in the license and the sale of any alcoholic liquor at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  Class A—Tavern, restricted: Class A licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises described in the license but no sales of any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  Class B—Package: Class B licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in original packages only, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(e)  Class C—Club: Class C licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors by a bona fide social or fraternal organization or club organized under the laws of the state, and not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, to its members, their guests, and/or functions officially sanctioned by the organization or club, for consumption with the premises maintained by the club. 
(f)  Class D—Full package, grocery or drug store: Class D licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, and only in the original packages, by persons engaged in the sale of foods and foodstuffs, commonly known as grocers or groceries and only as an incident to such drug or grocery business and not to be consumed on the premises described in the license. 
(f.1)  Class D-1—Full package, convenience store: Class D-1 licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors on the premises specified in their original package and not for consumption on the premises of a retail establishment commonly known as a convenience store subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  That the premises shall be a convenience store which primarily sells food, beverages and convenience items often in conjunction with other uses such as a filling station or restaurant which other uses shall be considered the principal use, 
(2)  The total floor and cooler space dedicated for the display of alcoholic liquor is limited to not more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the convenience store, 
(3)  The display area of alcoholic beverages shall be compact and confined in a single area approved by the local liquor control commissioner, 
(4)  Wine and spirits shall not be sold in containers less than 750 ml, 
(5)  Beer shall not be sold in quantities of less than four (4) cans or bottles to any customer, 
(6)  Each transaction for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be with point-of-sale equipment that shall scan the identification of the customer as to verify age, 
(7)  Window signs used for advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the permitted total widow sign area. 
(g)  Class E—Restaurant, restricted, beer only: Class E licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of beer only to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The beer is to be consumed only in that portion of the premises described in the license, in which food is served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to patrons, provided further that the sale of beer produces less than fifty (50) per cent of the total gross receipts for such restaurants. 
(h)  Class EE—Restaurant, restricted, beer and wine only: Class EE licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of beer and wine only to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The alcoholic beverages are to be consumed only in the portion of the premises described in the license in which food is ordered and served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to said patrons provided that the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) per cent of the total gross receipts for such restaurant. 
(i)  Class EEE—Restaurant, unrestricted: Class EEE licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of alcoholic liquors to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The alcoholic beverages are to be consumed only in the portion of the premises described in the license in which food is ordered and served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to said patrons provided that the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurant. 
(j)  Class F—Package, restricted, beer only: Class F licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer only, and only in the original packages, by persons engaged in the sale of foods and foodstuffs, commonly known as grocers or groceries and only as an incident to such drug or grocery business and not to be consumed on the premises described in the license. 
(k)  Class G—Special events, by the day: Class G licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only by a bona fide educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, or nonprofit organization only, and only on special occasions, and only for consumption on the premises described in the license, and only on the specific dates designated in the license. Such license may be issued by the local liquor control commissioner, but only upon evidence of proper liquor liability insurance coverage. 
(l)  Class H—Package, grocery or drug store: Class H licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only, and only in original packages, and in no event to be consumed on the premises described in the application of said license. 
(m)  Class I—Restaurant sit-down bar, unrestricted: Class I licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in restaurants to patrons, the same to be consumed by patrons only at tables or at a bar on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table or at a bar. 
(n)  Class J—Municipal and/or park district, restricted: Class J licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises owned wholly or jointly by municipalities and/or park districts under their corporate powers to contract or otherwise associate pursuant to Article VII of the 1970 Illinois Constitution and/or the Park District Code (Chapter 105, Section 1-1 et seq., of the Illinois Revised Statutes of 1977) in connection with the operation of an established food service facility during time when food is dispensed for consumption of the premises. 
(o)  Class K —Class K licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to offer to the patrons of the licensed establishment, for the purpose of tasting or sampling, various and sundry different products of alcoholic liquor, free of cost. Such license shall be valid for only one (1) day and may be issued by the local liquor control commissioner upon evidence of proper insurance coverage, the amount to be determined at the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner. Further, Class K licenses may only be issued to licensees holding one (1) of the following other licenses authorized by this section: Class B, Class D, Class J, and Class H. 
(o.1)  Class K-1 —Class K-1 licenses shall authorize the holder of a such license to offer to customers of an establishment, that either (i) is not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor or (ii) is licensed only to sell packaged beer and wine for consumption off the premises, one (1) or more drinks for sampling purposes, free of cost, provided the total quantity of the sampling package, regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is being served, does not exceed one (1) ounce of distilled spirits; seven (7) one (1) ounce tastings or one (1) eight (8) ounce glass of wine; or sixteen (16) ounces of beer. In any event, all provisions of section 3-416 shall apply to an on-premises retail licensee that conducts product sampling, and no more than one (1) sampling package shall be provided to a patron each day. 
(p)  Class X—Exhibition halls, sports arenas, etc.: Class X licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to patrons in exhibition halls and sports arenas, the same to be consumed by the patrons upon the premises described in the license, except as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Within the licensed premises, the licensee may designate a single enclosed area ("lounge area") for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in such lounge area, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, and alcoholic beverages sold in the lounge may be removed from the lounge only if the beverage is dispensed in a proper container. Licensee may, in such lounge area, elect to have alcoholic liquor or beverages dispensed and delivered to purchasers in glass containers. 
(2)  In any area of the licensed premises other than the lounge area, alcoholic liquors shall be dispensed and delivered to purchasers thereof only in cups of soft and lightweight material such as paper cups, polyethylene cups, plastic cups, etc.; except that glassware may be used for dispensing and delivering of alcoholic liquor to patrons in such area, but only while said patrons are seated at tables where food is being served and then only if the event is one where there is not general admission of the public. 
(3)  Upon payment of the annual fee, a master license shall be issued which license shall authorize, without additional fee (except as hereinafter provided), the sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages or liquor within the licensed premises. As part of any bonafide private trade or exhibition show, admission to which is not accorded to the public, any manufacturer of alcoholic beverages holding a valid state manufacturer's liquor license may dispense alcoholic beverages, either for consumption on premises, or as package goods, but only if same is done without charge or fee and provided that the appropriate daily license has been issued. The daily license shall be issued in the name of the licensee and the manufacturer. A daily license shall also be required of any exhibitor offering any free tasting or sampling of various and sundry products of alcoholic liquor and shall be issued in the name of the licenses and the exhibitor. For any exhibition or event held outside of the confines of the exhibition hall wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, a daily license shall be required, and will be issued at the discretion of the liquor commissioner. Application for daily license shall be made specifying the days on which the event or events are to be held for which alcohol is to be served, the location of service, nature of beverages sought to be served, and the times of the day when service will be made. The fee for each day of the daily license shall be as specified in section 3-316. Issuance of any daily license may only be for a specific day or succession of consecutive days. Any conditions or restrictions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare may be imposed by the liquor commissioner as a condition of granting the daily X license. 
(4)  Consumption off-premises. Delivery or dispensing of alcoholic liquor for consumption off-premises shall not be permitted except that as part of any bonafide private trade or exhibition show admission to which is not accorded to the public, package goods may be delivered for consumption off-premises, provided no fee or charge is made in connection with the delivery. 
(q)  Class Y—Billiards room/cafe/lounge: A Class Y license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are used for a combined billiards room/cafe/lounge business, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Alcoholic liquor may be ordered, served and consumed throughout the premises; however, alcoholic liquor may only be drawn or poured in the designated lounge area; and 
(2)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in the lounge area unless accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian. 
(r)  Class Z—Family recreation and entertainment center: A Class Z license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are used for a family recreation and entertainment center business, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Alcoholic liquor shall be ordered only in the designated alcohol service area, and alcoholic liquor shall be consumed only in the designated alcohol service area of the premises; 
(2)  The licensee shall provide both physical limitations and employee supervision to prevent ordering or consumption of alcoholic liquor out of the designated alcohol service area; and 
(3)  The designated alcohol service area shall be delineated on a floor plan on file with and approved by the liquor commissioner, together with a plan to limit service outside of the designated alcohol service area of the premises. 
"Restaurant" as that term is used in any of the provisions of this or any other section relating to alcoholic liquor shall have the same meaning as defined in the 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23. 
Restriction. No "restaurant" license shall be issued or reissued unless the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for any such restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 5, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 1999, § 1, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 2019, § 2, 1-25-82; Ord. No. 2204, § 1, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 2447, § 1, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 2543, § 1, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 2572, § 1, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 2945, § 2, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 3158, §§ 2A, 2B, 9-30-02; Ord. No. 3233, § 2, 3-22-04; Ord. No. 3435, § 2, 8-13-07; Ord. No. 4004 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 4052 , § 1, 9-24-18) 
State Law reference— Power of village board to prescribe classification for local licenses, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 3-304. - Application. 
(a)  An application for any license provided for in this chapter shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all the partners of a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, and verified by oath or affidavit, and filed with the village clerk. Such application shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the application in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation the names and addresses of the officers and directors and if a majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one (1) person or his nominee, the name and address of such person. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed as set forth in the corporate charter. 
(4)  The length of time said applicant has been in business, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)  The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time application is made. 
(6)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(7)  A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(8)  A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in any ordinance or state law. 
(9)  Whether a previous liquor license issued by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons thereof. 
(10)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village, or rule of the local liquor control commission, in the conduct of his place of business. 
(11)  That applicant has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value (other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business), directly or indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor or representative of any such manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor, nor be a party in any way, directly or indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor of Section 5 of Article 6 of an act enacted by the people of the State of Illinois represented in the general assembly, entitled, "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, and acts amendatory thereof. 
(12)  That applicant is not the holder of a federal gaming or wagering stamp. 
(13)  Such other statements and information as may be required on such form. 
In addition to the foregoing information, such application shall, when made, contain such other further information as the Illinois Liquor Control Commission or the board of trustees may, by rule or regulation not inconsistent with law, prescribe. 
(b)  When any applicant for license is a corporation, said application shall be signed by the president and secretary thereof, and should the applicant be a partnership, then each and every member of the partnership including silent or limited partners, if any, shall sign such application. 
(c)  In each instance where business is being conducted by a manager or agent, such person or persons must comply with the applicable provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 22, Art. IV, §§ 1, 3, 4, 9-11-78) 
State Law reference— Application for state license, 235 ILCS 5/7-1.  
Sec. 3-305. - Investigation and fingerprinting of applicant. 
(a)  No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter until the applicant shall have been investigated by the local liquor control commission and a report filed in the records of the commission approving the issuance of such license. As a part of this investigation, all new applicants not heretofore licensed or any manager not heretofore approved shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the village police department. A copy of fingerprint cards and photographs shall be held on record by the police department and a copy of the same shall be held by the local liquor control commission. 
(b)  Completed investigations for license applications shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days after the license applicant has been notified of approval by the local liquor control commissioner. Any applicant who fails to take all required action, including payment of original issuance fee and annual fee, to obtain a license within ninety (90) days after notification shall not be eligible for a license until a new background investigation is completed and additional investigation fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 12, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2447, § 2, 10-11-90)  
Sec. 3-306. - Investigation fee. 
There shall be a five hundred dollar ($500.00) investigation fee for each person who is required to submit to an investigation for every class of local liquor license except the Class G, Class J or Class K licenses. The fee shall be presented with the application. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 22, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 6, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 3341, § 4, 3-13-06)  
Sec. 3-307. - Health certificates to accompany application. 
(a)  Each applicant, at the time of making application for a local liquor license, or renewal thereof hereunder, shall furnish to the local liquor control commission certificates, from a duly licensed physician, showing that the applicant and such of his employees or other persons who will be engaged in the preparation and serving of drinks and food in and about the licensed premises are each free of any communicable skin disease or any infectious or contagious disease. 
(b)  In each instance where business is being conducted by a manager or agent, such person must comply with the provisions of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 22, Art. IV, § 6, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-308. - Certificate of compliance of premises; diagram of premises. 
At the time of the application for a local liquor license, or transfer, or renewal, the applicant shall submit a certification from the county health department and from the community development department that the proposed licensed premises are in conformity with all of the regulations and ordinances of the village, including but not limited to building and fire safety ordinances and codes. The applicant shall also file with the local liquor control commissioner a diagram of the premises showing all exits, windows, rooms and the position of facilities to be used for the serving of liquor on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, §11, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-309. - Persons eligible for license. 
No retail liquor license shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who prior to the making of the application for such license is not a resident of the village; in the case of a corporation which does not have its place of business and in the case of a club which does not have its club quarters located in the village. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States of America. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law if the local liquor control commission determines, after investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust. 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame. 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality. 
(7)  A person whose license, issued under this chapter or under the Illinois Liquor Control Law, has been revoked for cause. 
(8)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(9)  A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof or any limited partnership thereof owning more than five (5) percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder, except that only one partner shall be required to be a resident of the village. 
(10)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence of the village. 
(11)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois. 
(12)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, except for citizenship and residence within the village. 
(13)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor subsequent to the passage of this act or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(14)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereof for the full period for which the licensed is to be issued. 
(15)  Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license. 
(16)  Any person, association or corporation selling or servicing coin-in-the-slot mechanical pinball devices. 
(17)  Reserved. 
(18)  Reserved. 
(19)  Reserved. 
(20)  Any law enforcing public official, including members of the local liquor control commission, the village president, or any member of the village board of trustees; and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor control commission. 
(21)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(22)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of Section 28-1 of, or as prescribed by Section 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(23)  A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(24)  A copartnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(25)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty (20) percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period. 
(26)  Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 21, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 7, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 3905 , § 1, 2-8-16) 
State Law reference— Persons ineligible for state license, 235 ILCS 5/6-2.  
Sec. 3-309.1. - BASSET training required. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section "BASSET program" shall mean a state-certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training program that has been licensed and approved by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), each new and renewal application for a Class A, AA, AAA, B, D, D-1, K, K-1, E, EE, EEE, F, H, I, X, Y and Z liquor license shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a BASSET program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages pursuant to that license. 
(c)  Any new owner, manager, employee or agent of a licensee shall, within ninety (90) days from the beginning of his/her employment with that licensee, complete a BASSET seller/server training program and shall, until completion of the BASSET program, work under the supervision of a person who has completed the BASSET program. 
(d)  A photocopy of a certificate of completion for each owner, manager, employee or agent required by this section to have BASSET training shall be maintained by the establishment in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state and local liquor control authorities. 
(e)  A photocopy of the certificate of completion for each owner, manager, employee or agent required by this section to have BASSET training shall be provided to the Liquor Commissioner of the Village of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 3403, § 2, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 3435, § 3, 8-13-07; Ord. No. 4004 , § 2, 12-4-2017)  
Sec. 3-310. - Insurance. 
No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to any applicant that cannot produce a current valid policy of insurance in a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the state, insuring said applicant against liability during the entire term of the license for which application is made for any injury or death while operating under the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Law, in the amount prescribed by section 6-21 of the Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/6-21), as now existing or hereafter amended. Each applicant shall further furnish the local liquor control commission or village clerk a certificate of such insurance or other evidence satisfactory to said commission; in the event of cancellation, the village clerk shall be notified immediately of such cancellation by said applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. IV, § 8, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 8, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2971, § 2, 1-4-99) 
State Law reference— Dram shop liability, 235 ILCS 5/6-21.  
Sec. 3-311. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred (100) feet of any church or school where the church or school has been established within such one hundred (100) feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors. 
(c)  No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consist of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors. 
(d)  Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 4, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2370, § 9, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2528, § 1, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 3328, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 3957 , § 1, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 4004 , § 7, 12-4-17) 
State Law reference— Location restrictions, 235 ILCS 5/6-11.  
Sec. 3-312. - Bond. 
All licensees under this chapter, except those to whom are issued Glass G and J licenses, shall file a bond with the local liquor control commission, simultaneously with the issuance of the license applied for, with two (2) good and sufficient sureties, or if a surety company bond, then with only one (1) surety, conditioned that licensee shall in all respects, in the conduct of the business for which the license has been granted, obey and observe all the provisions of this chapter and of the act enacted by the people of the state, represented in the general assembly, entitled "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, and acts amendatory thereof. Said bond shall be in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and before the entire term of the license for which application is made. 
If a licensee shall be convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors," approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, and Acts amendatory thereof or his license shall be revoked, and no appeal is taken from said order of revocation; or any appeal taken therefrom is decided adversely to the licensee, said bond shall thereupon be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art, IV, § 9, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 10, 8-7-89)  
Sec. 3-313. - Number of licenses. 
(a)  There shall be in effect at any one time no more than the number of licenses indicated below: 
Class 	Maximum 
Number 
AAA 	0 
AA 	7 
A 	4 
B 	8 
C 	1 
D 	8 
D-1 	2 
EEE 	6 
EE 	8 
E 	0 
F 	0 
G 	Issued at the discretion of the local liquor commissioner 
H 	6 
I 	10 
J 	1 
K 	Issued at the discretion of the local liquor commissioner 
K-1 	1 
X 	1 
Y 	0 
Z 	1 
 
(b)  No new retail license (other than a renewal or reissue as hereinafter provided) shall be granted or issued until the number of licenses in force at the time shall be less than the number described in subsection (a). Such new licenses shall be issued from time to time to lawful applicants upon full compliance by the applicant with the regulations and ordinances of the village in force at the time of the application for such license, until the total number of retail liquor licenses in force shall be issued to such lawful applicants as the local liquor control commission shall, in its discretion, deem most desirable. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, §§ 9, 14, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 1846, § 1, 5-29-79; Ord. No. 1856, § 1, 7-23-79; Ord. No. 1862, § 1, 8-27-79; Ord. No. 1872, § 1, 10-29-79; Ord. No. 1883, § 1, 12-10-79; Ord. No. 1912, § 1, 6-2-80; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 7-7-80; Ord. No. 1978, § 1, 5-21-81; Ord. No. 1996, § 1, 10-21-81; Ord. No. 1999, § 2, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 2006, § 1, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 2013, § 1, 1-4-82; Ord. No. 2020, § 1, 1-25-82; Ord. No. 2026, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 2048, § 1, 10-25-82; Ord. No. 2058, § 1, 1-24-83; Ord. No. 2091, § 1, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 2106, 4-16-84; Ord. No. 2150, 7-15-85; Ord. No. 2162, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 2167, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 2169, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 2204, § 2, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 2205, 9-22-86; Ord. No. 2212, § 1, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 2215, § 1, 1-12-87; Ord. No. 2223, § 1, 3-2-87; Ord. No. 2241, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 2324, § 1, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 2328, § 1, 3-6-89; Ord. No. 2398, § 1, 1-15-90; Ord. No. 2430, § 1, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 2447, § 3, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 2457, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 2543, § 2, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 2603, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 2628, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 2655, § 1, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 2717, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 2746, § 1, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 2751, § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 2780, § 1, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 2794-B, § 1, 11-13-95; Ord. No. 2798, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 1-15-96; Ord. No. 2818, § 1, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 2827, § 1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 2844, § 1, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2849, § 1, 2-14-96; Ord. No. 2851, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 2852, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 2868, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 2873, § 1, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 2876, § 1, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2877, § 1, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2901, § 1, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 2908, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 2920, § 1, 1-26-98; Ord. No. 2935, § 1, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 2945, § 3, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 2955, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 2959, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2961, § 1, 10-12-98; Ord. No. 2973, § 1, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 3009, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 3010, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 3018, § 1, 1-24-00; Ord. No. 3048, § 1, 8-14-00; Ord. No. 3060, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 3077, § 1, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 3079, § 1, 2-19-01; Ord. No. 3103, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 3104, § 2, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 3113, § 2, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 3129, § 1, 4-15-02; Ord. No. 3158, § 3, 9-30-02; Ord. No. 3191, § 1, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 10-13-03; Ord. No. 3240, § 1, 4-26-04; Ord. No. 3252, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 3254, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 3392, § 1, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 3435, § 4, 8-13-07; Ord. No. 3450, § 1, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 3454, § 1, 1-14-08; Ord. No. 3462, § 1, 3-10-08; Ord. No. 3480, § 1, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 3488, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 3492, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 3503, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 3523, § 1, 11-24-08; Ord. No. 3526, § 1, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 3547, § 1, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 3568, § 1, 8-24-09; Ord. No. 3584, § 1, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-22-10; Ord. No. 3600, § 1, 3-22-10; Ord. No. 3601, § 1, 3-22-10; Ord. No. 3607, § 1, 4-26-10; Ord. No. 3608, § 1, 4-26-10; Ord. No. 3624, § 1, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 3625, § 1, 11-8-10; Ord. No. 3648, § 1, 3-28-11; Ord. No. 3654, § 1, 5-23-11; Ord. No. 3695, § 1, 3-26-12; Ord. No. 3730, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 3744, § 1, 5-13-13; Ord. No. 3810, § 1, 8-11-14; Ord. No. 3811, § 1, 8-11-14; Ord. No. 3835, § 1, 10-13-14; Ord. No. 3845, § 1, 12-8-14; Ord. No. 3853 , § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 3855 , § 1, 3-9-15; Ord. No. 3859 , § 1, 3-23-15; Ord. No. 3866 , § 1, 6-8-15; Ord. No. 3873 , § 1, 7-13-15; Ord. No. 3897 , § 1, 1-11-16; Ord. No. 3901 , § 1, 1-25-16; Ord. No. 3924 , § 1, 7-25-16; Ord. No. 3925 , § 1, 8-8-16; Ord. No. 3930 , § 1, 9-12-16; Ord. No. 3934 , § 1, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 3938 , § 1, 10-24-16; Ord. No. 3976 , § 1, 5-22-17; Ord. No. 4003 , § 1, 11-13-17; Ord. No. 4004 , § 3, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 4012 , § 1, 1-22-18; Ord. No. 4040 , § 1, 6-25-18; Ord. No. 4070 , § 1, 2-25-19; Ord. No. 4076 , § 1, 4-8-19; Ord. No. 4086 , § 1, 6-10-19; Ord. No. 4088 , § 1, 6-24-19; Ord. No. 4093 , § 1, 7-22-19; Ord. No. 4094 , § 1, 7-22-19; Ord. No. 4095 , § 1, 7-22-19; Ord. No. 4101 , § 1, 9-9-19) 
State Law reference— Power of village board to fix numbers of local licenses, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 3-314. - Original issuance fee. 
The original issuance fees for all liquor licenses within the village shall be as hereinafter set forth: 
Class of License 	Definition 	Original Issuance Fee 
AAA 	Tavern, beer and wine only: Class AAA licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only to patrons for consumption on the premises described in the license and the sale of beer and wine at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises. 	$1,900.00 
AA 	Tavern, unrestricted: Class AA licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises described in the license and the sale of any alcoholic liquor at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises. 	$3,000.00 
A 	Tavern, restricted: Class A licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises described in the license but no sales of any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. 	$2,500.00 
B 	Package: Class B licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in original packages only, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. 	$2,500.00 
C 	Club: Class C licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors by a bona fide social or fraternal organization or club organized under the laws of the state, and not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, to its members, their guests, and/or functions officially sanctioned by the organization or club, for consumption with the premises maintained by the club. 	$ 750.00 
D 	Full package, grocery or drug store: Class D licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, and only in the original packages, by persons engaged in the sale of foods and foodstuffs, commonly known as grocers or groceries and only as an incident to such drug or grocery business and not to be consumed on the premises described in the license. 	$2,400.00 
D-1 	Full package, convenience store: Class D-1 licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors on the premises specified in their original package and not for consumption on the premises of a retail establishment commonly known as a convenience store subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
  
1. That the premises shall be a convenience store which primarily sells food, beverages and convenience items often in conjunction with other uses such as a filling station or restaurant which other uses shall be considered the principal use; 
  
2. The total floor and cooler space dedicated for the display of alcoholic liquor is limited to not more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the convenience store; 
  
3. The display area of alcoholic beverages shall be compact and confined in a single area approved by the local liquor control commissioner; 
  
4. Wine and spirits shall not be sold in containers less than seven hundred fifty (750) ml; 
  
5. Beer shall not be sold in quantities of less than four (4) cans or bottles to any customer; 
  
6. Each transaction for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be with point-of-sale equipment that shall scan the identification of the customer as to verify age; 
  
7. Window signs used for advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the permitted total window sign area. 	$2,100.00 
EEE 	Restaurant, unrestricted: Class EEE licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of alcoholic liquors to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The alcoholic beverages are to be consumed only in the portion of the premises described in the license in which food is ordered and served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to said patrons provided that the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurant. 	$2,500.00 
EE 	Restaurant, restricted, beer and wine only: Class EE licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of beer and wine only to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The alcoholic beverages are to be consumed only in the portion of the premises described in the license in which food is ordered and served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to said patrons provided that the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurant. 	$2,000.00 
E 	Restaurant, restricted, beer only: Class E licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of beer only to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The beer is to be consumed only in that portion of the premises described in the license, in which food is served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to patrons, provided further that the sale of beer produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurants. 	$1,500.00 
F 	Package, restricted, beer only: Class F licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer only, and only in the original packages, by persons engaged in the sale of foods and foodstuffs, commonly known as grocers or groceries and only as an incident to such drug or grocery business and not to be consumed on the premises described in the license. 	$1,000.00 
G 	Special events, by the day: Class G licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only by a bona fide educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, or nonprofit organization only, and only on special occasions, and only for consumption on the premises described in the license, and only on the specific dates designated in the license. Such license may be issued by the local liquor control commissioner, but only upon evidence of proper liquor liability insurance coverage. 	$75.00 per day 
H 	Package, grocery or drug store: Class H licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only, and only in original packages, and in no event to be consumed on the premises described in the application of said license. 	$2,000.00 
I 	Restaurant sit-down bar, unrestricted: Class I licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in restaurants to patrons, the same to be consumed by patrons only at tables or at a bar on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table or at a bar. 	$2,750.00 
J 	Municipal and/or park district, restricted: Class J licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises owned wholly or jointly by municipalities and/or park districts under their corporate powers to contract or otherwise associate pursuant to Article VII of the 1970 Illinois Constitution and/or the Park District Code (105 ILCS 1-1 et seq.) in connection with the operation of an established food service facility during time when food is dispensed for consumption of the premises. 	No fee 
K 	Class K licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to offer to the patrons of the licensed establishment, for the purpose of tasting or sampling, various and sundry different products of alcoholic liquor, free of cost. Such license shall be valid for only one (1) day and may be issued by the local liquor control commissioner upon evidence of proper insurance coverage, the amount to be determined at the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner. Further, Class K licenses may only be issued to licensees holding one (1) of the following other licenses authorized by this section: Class B, Class D, Class J, and Class H. 	$10.00 per day 
K-1 	Class K-1 licenses shall authorize the holder of a such license to offer to customers of an establishment, that either (i) is not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor or (ii) is licensed only to sell packaged beer and wine for consumption off the premises, one (1) or more drinks for sampling purposes, free of cost, provided the total quantity of the sampling package, regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is being served, does not exceed one (1) ounce of distilled spirits; seven (7) one (1) ounce tastings or one (1) eight (8) ounce glass of wine; or sixteen (16) ounces of beer. In any event, all provisions of section 3-416 shall apply to an on-premises retail licensee that conducts product sampling, and no more than one (1) sampling package shall be provided to a patron each day. 	$1,000.00 
X 	Exhibition halls, sports arenas, etc.: Class X licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to patrons in exhibition halls and sports arenas, the same to be consumed by the patrons upon the premises described in the license, except as hereinafter provided. 
  
1. Within the licensed premises, the licensee may designate a single enclosed area ("lounge area") for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in such lounge area, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, and alcoholic beverages sold in the lounge may be removed from the lounge only if the beverage is dispensed in a proper container. Licensee may, in such lounge area, elect to have alcoholic liquor or beverages dispensed and delivered to purchasers in glass containers. 
  
2. In any area of the licensed premises other than the lounge area, alcoholic liquors shall be dispensed and delivered to purchasers thereof only in cups of soft and lightweight material such as paper cups, polyethylene cups, plastic cups, etc.; except that glassware may be used for dispensing and delivering of alcoholic liquor to patrons in such area, but only while said patrons are seated at tables where food is being served and then only if the event is one where there is not general admission of the public. 
  
3. Upon payment of the annual fee, a master license shall be issued which license shall authorize, without additional fee (except as hereinafter provided), the sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages or liquor within the licensed premises. As part of any bona fide private trade or exhibition show, admission to which is not accorded to the public, any manufacturer of alcoholic beverages holding a valid state manufacturer's liquor license may dispense alcoholic beverages, either for consumption on premises, or as package goods, but only if same is done without charge or fee and provided that the appropriate daily license has been issued. The daily license shall be issued in the name of the licensee and the manufacturer. A daily license shall also be required of any exhibitor offering any free tasting or sampling of various and sundry products of alcoholic liquor and shall be issued in the name of the licenses and the exhibitor. For any exhibition or event held outside of the confines of the exhibition hall wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, a daily license shall be required, and will be issued at the discretion of the liquor commissioner. Application for daily license shall be made specifying the days on which the event or events are to be held for which alcohol is to be served, the location of service, nature of beverages sought to be served, and the times of the day when service will be made. The fee for each day of the daily license shall be as specified in section 3-316. Issuance of any daily license may only be for a specific day or succession of consecutive days. Any conditions or restrictions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare may be imposed by the liquor commissioner as a condition of granting the daily X license. 	$2,700.00 
	4. Consumption off-premises. Delivery or dispensing of alcoholic liquor for consumption off-premises shall not be permitted except that as part of any bona fide private trade or exhibition show admission to which is not accorded to the public, package goods may be delivered for consumption off-premises, provided no fee or charge is made in connection with the delivery. 	
Y 	Billiards room/cafe/lounge: A Class Y license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are used for a combined billiards room/cafe/lounge business, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
  
1. Alcoholic liquor may be ordered, served and consumed throughout the premises; however, alcoholic liquor may only be drawn or poured in the designated lounge area; and 
  
2. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in the lounge area unless accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian. 	$2,700.00 
Z 	Family recreation and entertainment center: A Class Z license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are used for a family recreation and entertainment center business, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
  
1. Alcoholic liquor shall be ordered only in the designated alcohol service area, and alcoholic liquor shall be consumed only in the designated alcohol service area of the premises; 
  
2. The licensee shall provide both physical limitations and employee supervision to prevent ordering or consumption of alcoholic liquor out of the designated alcohol service area; and 
  
3. The designated alcohol service area shall be delineated on a floor plan on file with and approved by the liquor commissioner, together with a plan to limit service outside of the designated alcohol service area of the premises. 	$2,700.00 
 
Said original issuance fee shall be payable upon the original issuance of the liquor license by the local liquor control commissioner and shall not be prorated in any manner. Said original issuance fee shall be in addition to the annual fee as herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 6, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 1999, § 3, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 2204, § 3, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 2370, § 11, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2447, § 4, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 2543, § 3, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 2945, § 4, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 3158, § 4, 9-30-02; Ord. No. 3435, § 5, 8-13-07; Ord. No. 3962 , § 1, 3-13-17; Ord. No. 4004 , § 4, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 4104 , § 1, 9-9-19) 
State Law reference— Power of village board to set liquor license fee, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 3-315. - Expiration and renewal generally. 
(a)  Each local liquor license shall terminate on the last day of December of each year. All applications for renewal of any license shall be made on or before thirty (30) days prior to the expiration thereof. 
(b)  The owner or his legal representative, of a retail liquor license, shall have and be given the privilege of renewal or reissuance of a village liquor license at the same or a different place of business upon the payment of an annual fee as stated in section 3-316 of this Code upon compliance with the regulations and ordinances of the village now in force of which may hereafter be passed, governing the issuance of retail liquor licenses. The privilege of renewal or reissuance provided by this section shall apply only so long as the license in each case shall have been kept in force continually and uninterruptedly in the name of the licensee or his successor in interest. The suspension of a license shall not be construed to be an interruption and shall in no way affect a renewal or reissuance. 
(c)  Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the president and board of trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction or from otherwise further regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor in the village. 
(d)  Reduction in number of licenses. If a license of any class is revoked by the local liquor control commission, expires without renewal, or is surrendered by the licensee, the total number of licenses of that class of license shall automatically and immediately be reduced by one (1) license until the number of licenses is increased by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, §§ 5, 17, Art. V, § 2, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, §§ 12, 13, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 4048 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 3-316. - Annual fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for liquor licenses in the village shall be as follows commencing January 1, 2019: 
Class 	Definition 	Annual Fee 
AAA 	Tavern, beer and wine only: Class AAA licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only to patrons for consumption on the premises described in the license and the sale of beer and wine at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises. 	$1,900.00 
AA 	Tavern, unrestricted: Class AA licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises described in the license and the sale of any alcoholic liquor at retail in original packages for consumption off the premises. 	$3,000.00 
A 	Tavern, restricted: Class A licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises described in the license but no sales of any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. 	$2,500.00 
B 	Package: Class B licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in original packages only, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. 	$2,500.00 
C 	Club: Class C licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors by a bona fide social or fraternal organization or club organized under the laws of the state, and not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, to its members, their guests, and/or functions officially sanctioned by the organization or club, for consumption with the premises maintained by the club. 	$ 750.00 
D 	Full package, grocery or drug store: Class D licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, and only in the original packages, by persons engaged in the sale of foods and foodstuffs, commonly known as grocers or groceries and only as an incident to such drug or grocery business and not to be consumed on the premises described in the license. 	$2,400.00 
D-1 	Full package, convenience store: Class D-1 licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors on the premises specified in their original package and not for consumption on the premises of a retail establishment commonly known as a convenience store subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
  
1. That the premises shall be a convenience store which primarily sells food, beverages and convenience items often in conjunction with other uses such as a filling station or restaurant which other uses shall be considered the principal use; 
  
2. The total floor and cooler space dedicated for the display of alcoholic liquor is limited to not more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the convenience store; 
  
3. The display area of alcoholic beverages shall be compact and confined in a single area approved by the local liquor control commissioner; 
  
4. Wine and spirits shall not be sold in containers less than seven hundred fifty (750) ml; 
  
5. Beer shall not be sold in quantities of less than four (4) cans or bottles to any customer; 
  
6. Each transaction for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be with point-of-sale equipment that shall scan the identification of the customer as to verify age; 
  
7. Window signs used for advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the permitted total window sign area. 	$2,100.00 
EEE 	Restaurant, unrestricted: Class EEE licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of alcoholic liquors to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The alcoholic beverages are to be consumed only in the portion of the premises described in the license in which food is ordered and served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to said patrons provided that the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurant. 	$2,500.00 
EE 	Restaurant, restricted, beer and wine only: Class EE licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of beer and wine only to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The alcoholic beverages are to be consumed only in the portion of the premises described in the license in which food is ordered and served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to said patrons provided that the sale of liquor produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurant. 	$2,000.00 
E 	Restaurant, restricted, beer only: Class E licenses shall authorize the sale at retail in restaurants of beer only to patrons at tables on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table. The beer is to be consumed only in that portion of the premises described in the license, in which food is served to patrons, and then only as part of the food ordered by and served to patrons, provided further that the sale of beer produces less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross receipts for such restaurants. 	$1,500.00 
F 	Package, restricted, beer only: Class F licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer only, and only in the original packages, by persons engaged in the sale of foods and foodstuffs, commonly known as grocers or groceries and only as an incident to such drug or grocery business and not to be consumed on the premises described in the license. 	$1,000.00 
G 	Special events, by the day: Class G licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only by a bona fide educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, or nonprofit organization only, and only on special occasions, and only for consumption on the premises described in the license, and only on the specific dates designated in the license. Such license may be issued by the local liquor control commissioner, but only upon evidence of proper liquor liability insurance coverage. 	$75.00 per day 
H 	Package, grocery or drug store: Class H licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only, and only in original packages, and in no event to be consumed on the premises described in the application of said license. 	$2,000.00 
I 	Restaurant sit-down bar, unrestricted: Class I licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in restaurants to patrons, the same to be consumed by patrons only at tables or at a bar on the premises described in said license. Patrons are to be served only if they are seated at a table or at a bar. 	$2,750.00 
J 	Municipal and/or park district, restricted: Class J licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises owned wholly or jointly by municipalities and/or park districts under their corporate powers to contract or otherwise associate pursuant to Article VII of the 1970 Illinois Constitution and/or the Park District Code (105 ILCS 1-1 et seq.) in connection with the operation of an established food service facility during time when food is dispensed for consumption of the premises. 	No fee 
K 	Class K licenses shall authorize the holder thereof to offer to the patrons of the licensed establishment, for the purpose of tasting or sampling, various and sundry different products of alcoholic liquor, free of cost. Such license shall be valid for only one (1) day and may be issued by the local liquor control commissioner upon evidence of proper insurance coverage, the amount to be determined at the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner. Further, Class K licenses may only be issued to licensees holding one (1) of the following other licenses authorized by this section: Class B, Class D, Class J, and Class H. 	$10.00 per day 
K-1 	Class K-1 licenses shall authorize the holder of a such license to offer to customers of an establishment, that either (i) is not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor or (ii) is licensed only to sell packaged beer and wine for consumption off the premises, one (1) or more drinks for sampling purposes, free of cost, provided the total quantity of the sampling package, regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is being served, does not exceed one (1) ounce of distilled spirits; seven (7) one (1) ounce tastings or one (1) eight (8) ounce glass of wine; or sixteen (16) ounces of beer. In any event, all provisions of section 3-416 shall apply to an on-premises retail licensee that conducts product sampling, and no more than one (1) sampling package shall be provided to a patron each day. 	$1,000.00 
X 	Exhibition halls, sports arenas, etc.: Class X licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to patrons in exhibition halls and sports arenas, the same to be consumed by the patrons upon the premises described in the license, except as hereinafter provided. 
  
1. Within the licensed premises, the licensee may designate a single enclosed area ("lounge area") for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in such lounge area, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, and alcoholic beverages sold in the lounge may be removed from the lounge only if the beverage is dispensed in a proper container. Licensee may, in such lounge area, elect to have alcoholic liquor or beverages dispensed and delivered to purchasers in glass containers. 
  
2. In any area of the licensed premises other than the lounge area, alcoholic liquors shall be dispensed and delivered to purchasers thereof only in cups of soft and lightweight material such as paper cups, polyethylene cups, plastic cups, etc.; except that glassware may be used for dispensing and delivering of alcoholic liquor to patrons in such area, but only while said patrons are seated at tables where food is being served and then only if the event is one where there is not general admission of the public. 
  
3. Upon payment of the annual fee, a master license shall be issued which license shall authorize, without additional fee (except as hereinafter provided), the sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages or liquor within the licensed premises. As part of any bona fide private trade or exhibition show, admission to which is not accorded to the public, any manufacturer of alcoholic beverages holding a valid state manufacturer's liquor license may dispense alcoholic beverages, either for consumption on premises, or as package goods, but only if same is done without charge or fee and provided that the appropriate daily license has been issued. The daily license shall be issued in the name of the licensee and the manufacturer. A daily license shall also be required of any exhibitor offering any free tasting or sampling of various and sundry products of alcoholic liquor and shall be issued in the name of the licenses and the exhibitor. For any exhibition or event held outside of the confines of the exhibition hall wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, a daily license shall be required, and will be issued at the discretion of the liquor commissioner. Application for daily license shall be made specifying the days on which the event or events are to be held for which alcohol is to be served, the location of service, nature of beverages sought to be served, and the times of the day when service will be made. The fee for each day of the daily license shall be as specified in section 3-316. Issuance of any daily license may only be for a specific day or succession of consecutive days. Any conditions or restrictions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare may be imposed by the liquor commissioner as a condition of granting the daily X license. 	$2,700.00 (with any other liquor license) for master license plus $50.00 for a one-day license and $100.00 for a two- to seven-day license 
	4. Consumption off-premises. Delivery or dispensing of alcoholic liquor for consumption off-premises shall not be permitted except that as part of any bona fide private trade or exhibition show admission to which is not accorded to the public, package goods may be delivered for consumption off-premises, provided no fee or charge is made in connection with the delivery. 	
Y 	Billiards room/cafe/lounge: A Class Y license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are used for a combined billiards room/cafe/lounge business, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
  
1. Alcoholic liquor may be ordered, served and consumed throughout the premises; however, alcoholic liquor may only be drawn or poured in the designated lounge area; and 
  
2. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in the lounge area unless accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian. 	$2,700.00 
Z 	Family recreation and entertainment center: A Class Z license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are used for a family recreation and entertainment center business, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
  
1. Alcoholic liquor shall be ordered only in the designated alcohol service area, and alcoholic liquor shall be consumed only in the designated alcohol service area of the premises; 
  
2. The licensee shall provide both physical limitations and employee supervision to prevent ordering or consumption of alcoholic liquor out of the designated alcohol service area; and 
  
3. The designated alcohol service area shall be delineated on a floor plan on file with and approved by the liquor commissioner, together with a plan to limit service outside of the designated alcohol service area of the premises. 	$2,700.00 
 
(b)  The annual fee shall be established in the following amount as to those licenses issued by the local liquor control commissioner after the following dates: 
(1)  After January 1 but before April 1, one hundred (100) percent of fee. 
(2)  After April 1 but before July 1, seventy-five (75) percent of fee. 
(3)  After July 1 but before October 1, fifty (50) percent of fee. 
(4)  After October 1 but before January 1, twenty-five (25) percent of fee. 
(c)  The annual fee shall be due and payable in full on or before January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, §§ 7, 8, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 1992, § 1, 9-21-81; Ord. No. 1999, § 3, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 2204, § 4, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 2370, § 14, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 10-22-90; Ord. No. 2543, § 4, 12-23-91; Ord. No. 2945, § 5, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 3158, § 5, 9-30-02; Ord. No. 3435, § 6, 8-13-07; Ord. No. 3962 , § 1, 3-13-17; Ord. No. 4004 , § 5, 12-4-17; Ord. No. 4104 , § 2, 9-9-19) 
State Law reference— Power of village board to set renewal fee, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 3-317. - Personal nature of license. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be a purely personal privilege, valid for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked or expired as provided by ordinance, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors or administrations of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under the license in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. V, § 3, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 15, 8-7-89) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-1.  
Sec. 3-318. - Change of location. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only when and upon the written permission to make such a change is issued by the local liquor control commission. Application for such transfer shall be made upon forms approved by the local liquor control commission, with the same requirements for issuance of a license for the original premises. An application for such transfer is accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 4, Art. V, § 1, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-319. - Display. 
The village certificate of license issued in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent place in the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 9, 9-11-78) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 43, § 139.  
Sec. 3-320. - Forfeiture of license for failure to conduct business. 
If a retail liquor license is issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and held by the licensee for a period exceeding ninety (90) days without having been in actual operation of said business or without having premises approved by the local liquor control commission for the operation of said business at any time during the course of said ninety (90) days, the license so issued shall automatically become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 15, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-321. - Refund of fees; transfer of location. 
No refund shall be made of any portion of the license fee paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for any period during which the licensee shall not have operated under such license, excepting, however, that if the holder of a liquor license shall cease to operate his place of business, he shall, within ninety (90) days after the date on which he so ceased operating said place of business, or on or before the expiration of his existing license, whichever is the earlier, file with the local liquor control commissioner, an application for a renewal and transfer to a new location of said business and license and in the event said holder of a liquor license fails to make and file such an application for a renewal or transfer to a new location within said time, or in the event the local liquor control commissioner disapproves of any such new location submitted by the applicant, then the local liquor control commissioner may revoke and cancel the said license; and in the event the said license is so revoked and cancelled, the said holder of said license shall be notified thereof within ten (10) days of such revocation or cancellation, and there shall then be refunded to said holder of said license that pro-rata portion of the license fee paid by him that the period during which said business has ceased operation bears to the period for which said license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 16, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-322. - Disposition of fees. 
All license fees shall be paid to the local liquor control commissioner at the time application is made, and shall be turned over to the treasurer forthwith. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the board of trustees, by proper action. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 20, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-323. - Licenses subject to change, rules, etc. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any and all changes or amendments which may be hereafter made, and any and all rules adopted by the local liquor control commissioner or local liquor control commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. IV, § 7, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-324. - Record of licenses issued. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued under this chapter and said list shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours at the village hall. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 10, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-325. - Notice to village officers of license issuance or revocation. 
The village clerk, treasurer and chief of police shall be individually furnished with a copy of the list of the local liquor control commissioner of licenses issued by him. Upon the issuance of any new license or the revocation of any old license the local liquor control commissioner shall give written notice of any such action to each of those officers individually within forty-eight (48) hours of such action. Failure to notify the above-mentioned officials shall not affect the validity of a license. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 10, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-326. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3766, § 2, adopted Oct. 14, 2013, repealed § 3-326, entitled "Inventory upon sale or transfer", which derived from Ord. No. 2554, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 1992.  
Secs. 3-327—3-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Revocation or suspension of licenses, 235 ILCS 5/7-5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-361. - Generally; fine in lieu of suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or may be suspended by the local liquor control commissioner for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for the violation of any part of portion of this chapter, or of the Illinois Liquor Control Law, or for any violation of any state or federal law. During such period of suspension, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold on said licensed premises. In addition to suspension, the liquor commissioner may also levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first violation within a twelve-month period; one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve-month period; and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve-month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund. 
(b)  Upon a complaint being made of the violation of the Illinois Liquor Control Law or this chapter, the commission shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VI, § 2, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 16, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2797, § 2, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 3341, § 5, 3-13-06)  
Sec. 3-362. - Notice. 
Notice as herein required shall be by registered mail, postage prepaid, or by leaving a copy of said notice at said licensed place of business at least three (3) days before the date of hearing. This procedure shall be followed in any hearing for revocation or suspension of a license or the imposition of any fine on any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VI, § 11, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 17, 8-7-89)  
Sec. 3-363. - Specific grounds. 
(a)  No licensee or through his agents or employees shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Commit any violation of any federal law, state law or ordinance of the village; 
(2)  Suffer or permit a violation of any federal law, state law or ordinance of the village; 
(3)  Harbor or permit any intoxicated person(s) to loiter on the premises; 
(4)  Sell alcoholic liquor in excess of or contrary to the authority granted by the license for the premises or in violation of the laws of the state or ordinances of the village; 
(5)  Permit any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on the premises, unless such alcoholic liquor has been purchased on the premises; 
(6)  Permit the business on the licensed premises to be conducted in a manner inconsistent with the representations on the licensee's application or by the licensee's comments before the commissioner and made a condition of the license; 
(7)  Failure to immediately report any criminal activity or that any person has lost consciousness or is in a state of stupor so as not be competent; 
(8)  Allow the property on which the premises is located and any adjacent property owned by the licensee including the licensee's parking lot(s) and adjacent public ways, to create a nuisance while the licensed premises is open for business or within one (1) hour of the time the business is opened or closed for business. The nuisance shall have a nexus to the operation of the business and be any conduct or activity described in subsection (9) or that violates any federal or state law, or village ordinance; 
(9)  Allow the licensed premises to become a nuisance including, but not limited to violations of any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct defined by federal or state law, or village ordinance: 
a.  Mob action. 
b.  Unlawful assembly. 
c.  Assault. 
d.  Battery. 
e.  Unlawful use of weapons or firearms. 
f.  Unlawful discharge of a firearm. 
g.  Prostitution. 
h.  Soliciting or patronizing a prostitute. 
i.  Keeping a house of prostitution. 
j.  Pandering. 
k.  Obscenity. 
l.  Sexual assault and sexual abuse. 
m.  Public indecency. 
n.  Disorderly conduct. 
o.  Unlawful production, sale, distribution, possession, or use of cannabis. 
p.  Illegal gambling. 
q.  Keeping or maintaining a place of illegal gambling. 
r.  Unlawful possession of gambling devices. 
s.  Arson. 
t.  Criminal damage to property. 
u.  Illegal consumption, sale, or possession of alcohol. 
v.  Theft. 
w.  Interference with public/peace officer. 
x.  Harassment. 
y.  Indecent exposure. 
z.  Public urination 
aa.  Loitering. 
bb.  Unlawful possession, sale, distribution, or use of fireworks. 
cc.  Aiding and abetting. 
dd.  Conspiracy. 
ee.  Drug paraphernalia. 
(b)  The commissioner may revoke or suspend any license for any violation of this division. 
(c)  A violation of subsection (a) may be proved by evidence that the licensee or his agent or employee, has been convicted of a violation of the law of the State of Illinois in the conduct of the licensed business or upon the licensed premises, or has been found guilty of violating any village ordinance of liquor commission rule regulating the sale of alcoholic liquors. 
(d)  Evidence that any person, including but not limited to an agent or employee of the licensee, other than the licensee has been convicted of violating a statute of the state, or found guilty of violating a village ordinance or commission rule regulating the sale of alcoholic liquors while upon the licensed premises, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this division. 
(e)  Proof by a preponderance of evidence before the commissioner of facts which establish a violation of any state statute, or village ordinance or resolution or rule of the commission, shall be sufficient cause for revocation or suspension of any license issued by the commission, irrespective of whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any court. 
(f)  Should any applicant for license make a false or fraudulent statement in such application, the same shall be sufficient cause for revocation or suspension by the local liquor control commissioner of such license. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VI, §§ 1, 2—7, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 3766, § 1, 10-14-13)  
Sec. 3-364. - Hearing and decision. 
No local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commissioner with written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VI, § 8, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 18, 8-7-89)  
Sec. 3-365. - Reports to state. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall report in writing to the state liquor control commission within five (5) days after any hearing has been had before such local liquor control commissioner for a violation by any retail alcoholic liquor licensee of any state law or village ordinance. Such report shall specify the time and place where said hearing was held; whether a suspension, or revocation order was entered therein, or what other disposition was made or entered, in such local liquor control commissioner's records. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VI, § 9, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 19, 8-7-89)  
Sec. 3-366. - Appeals. 
An appeal from an order or action of the liquor control commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/7-9. A certified official record of the proceedings before the commission taken and prepared by a certified court reporter and filed by the local liquor control commissioner within five (5) days after notice of the filing of an appeal shall be filed if the appellant-licensee pays the cost of the transcript. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VI, § 10, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2370, § 20, 8-7-89)  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of village board to regulate alcoholic liquor, 235 ILCS 5/4-1. 
 
Sec. 3-401. - Sales during certain hours unlawful; closing hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to permit consumption of any alcoholic liquor on licensed premises in the village between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Mondays through Friday; except that: 
(1)  On January 1, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(2)  On Saturdays between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and on Sundays between 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m., except as provided in subsection (a)(3) below; provided, however, that in the case of restaurants, family recreation and entertainment center businesses, such establishments may be kept open during such closing hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold or consumed during such hours; and 
(3)  On Sundays between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor at establishments holding Class B, D, D-1, F, or H licenses within the village. 
In the computation of time under this section, it shall be in accordance with whichever schedule of time is then in effect, be it Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for patrons to remain, during the closing hours specified in this chapter, on the premises operated under a Class AAA, Class AA, Class A, or Class B license, or in the bar area under a Class I license, in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The closing hours must be posted and prominently displayed on the premises. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to remove and dispose of all alcoholic beverages which have been served for consumption on the premises at closing time. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for patrons of said licensed premises to remain on the premises operated under a Class Y license during the closing hours specified in this chapter except for special events, e.g., billiard tournaments, which have received prior approval as per ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 18, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2390, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 2945, § 6, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 3158, § 6, 9-30-02; Ord. No. 3573, § 2, 9-28-09; Ord. No. 3713, § 1, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 4004 , § 6, 12-4-17)  
Sec. 3-402. - Sanitation generally. 
The licensed premises shall at all times be kept in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the laws and ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. If at any time during the period that the license is in effect the operating permit issued by the county health department is revoked, said revocation shall constitute cause to suspend or revoke and the local liquor control commissioner is empowered, after hearing, to suspend or revoke the liquor license issued. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 1, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-402.1. - Billiards room/cafe/lounge. 
Due to the unique combination of activities associated with a billiards room/cafe/lounge use and the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises, the licensee shall provide adequate security personnel at all times during operation. The liquor commissioner shall approve the security plan for the establishment and periodically review the licensee's security measures to determine whether adequate security is being provided as required herein. In addition, the liquor commissioner shall conduct an annual review of the business and may recommend elimination of the Class Y liquor license category if the business is not operated in accordance with the applicable codes and ordinances of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 7, 6-22-98)  
Sec. 3-402.2. - Family recreation and entertainment center. 
Due to the unique combination of activities associated with a family recreation and entertainment center use and the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises, the licensee shall provide adequate security personnel at all times during operation. The liquor commissioner shall approve the security plan for the establishment and periodically review the licensee's security measures to determine whether adequate security is being provided as required herein. In addition, the liquor commissioner shall conduct an annual review of the business and may recommend elimination of the Class Z liquor license category if the business is not operated in accordance with the applicable codes and ordinances of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3158, § 7, 9-30-02)  
Sec. 3-403. - Health certificates for employees. 
(a)  No person holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, during the period of his license, engage, hire, employ, or secure the services of any person who will be engaged in the preparation and serving of drinks and food in and about the licensed premises if such licensee does not secure a certificate from a duly licensed physician which shows that such person is free of any communicable skin disease or any infectious or contagious disease. 
(b)  In each instance where business is being conducted by a manager or agent, such person or persons must comply with the provisions of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 22, Art. IV, § 6, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-404. - Employment of diseased persons. 
The employment by the licensee, his agent, or employee of any person who is afflicted with, or is a carrier of any contagious, infectious, or venereal disease is prohibited and any person who is afflicted with, or is a carrier of any such disease is prohibited from engaging in any way in the distribution, preparation, or handling of alcoholic beverages or working or about any premises licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 6, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-405. - Separate toilets required. 
In all places in the village licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises there shall be a separate toilet on the premises for the male patrons, and a separate toilet on the premises for the female patrons. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. III, § 19, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-406. - Prostitution or lewdness. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to permit or allow any lewd person or prostitute to remain in and about such premises, or to allow or permit any soliciting to prostitution practices, to prostitution, or lewdness. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 2, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-407. - Intoxicated persons on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, individually or through his agents or employees, to allow intoxicated persons to loiter on or about that part of the premise described in the license which part is in use by or in view of the general public, or permit any conduct which shall tend to disturb the people or quiet of the neighborhood or the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 3, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-408. - Sales, purchases or possession by minors, drunkards, etc. 
(a)  No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by said licensee to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, or person who is mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental treatment. 
(b)  No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. 
(c)  For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity, and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty-one (21) years. Adequate written evidence of age and identity of a person is a document issued by federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, or has reason to believe, that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the lack of proper age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. Proof that the licensee, or his agent or employee, demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction, forbidden by this section, is competent evidence and may be considered in any criminal prosecution therefor, or in any proceeding for the suspension or revocation of any license based thereon. 
(d)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification, or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. 
(e)  Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years evidence of age an identification of any other person is guilty of an offense. 
(f)  Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who presents or offers to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, or fraudulent, or expired, or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverages, or who has in his possession false or fraudulent, or expired written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and/or identity, is guilty of an offense. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess any alcoholic beverage on any street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public. This subsection does not apply to possession by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years while making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment. 
(h)  Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited under this section because of age shall not purchase, accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor, or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession. 
(i)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited. The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of such person or persons standing in loco parentis to such person in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this chapter. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a liquor license which permits the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or his agent or employee, to allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years in any room, or any portion or compartment in any room where alcoholic beverages are dispensed or consumed, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian, provided that this subsection shall not apply to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of services or commodities other than alcoholic liquor. 
(k)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited from attending bar, selling, drawing, pouring, mixing, conveying, delivering, or in any way serving any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail establishment, which serves or sells alcoholic liquor. 
(l)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited from attending bar, selling, drawing, pouring, mixing, conveying, delivering, or in any way serving any alcoholic liquor or other beverage or food, or being employed in any capacity whatsoever by any licensee to whom one of following classes of license has been issued: Class AAA, Class AA, Class A. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to permit any unemancipated child of which he is the parent or legal guardian to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(n)  No misrepresentation by any minor or other person shall excuse or relieve any licensee from any of the obligations or restrictions of this chapter or from the penalties of any violation thereof except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(o)  Every retail licensee in the village shall display at all times in a prominent place, a placard which shall be supplied by the village clerk and which shall read substantially as follows: 
WARNING. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $500.00 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AND ARE UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURCHASING OR OBTAINING OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. 
(p)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit a gathering at a residence which he or she occupies of two (2) or more persons where any one (1) or more of the persons is under eighteen (18) years of age and the following factors also apply: 
(1)  The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under the age of eighteen (18) is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage; and 
(2)  The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under eighteen (18) is not otherwise permitted by this act [chapter]; and 
(3)  The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the age of eighteen (18) leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition. 
For the purposes of this subsection, where the residence has an owner and a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is occupied only by the tenant or lessee. 
(q)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rent a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
The fines set forth herein shall be in addition to the civil penalties, including revocation or suspension of the retail dealer's license, otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, §§ 5, 5A, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 1853, § 1, 6-25-79; Ord. No. 2370, §§ 21—25, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 3341, § 6, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12) 
Cross reference— Parental responsibility for consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors, § 3-415.  
Sec. 3-409. - Gambling, entertainment and dancing. 
(a)  Gambling. Gambling in any form or of any kind is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter, or his agent or employee, to permit gambling in any place for which a retail liquor license is issued under provisions of this chapter unless said licensee has obtained a license to operate a video gaming terminal at his or her licensed premises from the Illinois Gaming Board and a license and video gaming sticker from the village in accordance with subsections (c) and (d) below. Any licensee who has actual or constructive knowledge that gambling has been or is being conducted on the licensed premises in violation of this section shall report same to the village police department within twenty-four (24) hours and shall take all such other and further action as may be necessary to prevent gambling from continuing or recurring. 
(b)  Entertainment and dancing. The following regulations shall apply with respect to entertainment and/or dancing within any licensed establishment: 
(1)  All ordinary sounds of music, dancing, singing or entertainment within the premises shall be prevented from being heard on adjoining premises or on the public street. 
(2)  All of the licensed premises, especially any area where dancing or entertainment is occurring, shall be reasonably lighted at all times when any patrons shall be therein. 
(3)  Any and all dancers, performers, or entertainers shall at all times comply with the provisions of section 3-412 of this chapter concerning nudity and obscenity, and with all other provisions of state and local laws. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit video gaming in an establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board pursuant to the Video Gaming Act (230 1LCS 40/1 et seq.) and in compliance with subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Video gaming. 
(1)  Any establishment within the village which holds a liquor license and has obtained a license to operate a video gaming terminal from the Illinois Gaming Board at such premises shall be required to apply for and obtain a license and video gaming sticker from the village. 
(2)  No establishment shall operate a video gaming terminal without having obtained a license and video gaming sticker from the village pursuant to the application procedures of this Code. 
(3)  The fee to operate a video gaming terminal in the village shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(4)  Video gaming terminals may not be operated on any premises that is: (i) located within 1,000 feet of a horse racing or riverboat gambling facility; or (ii) located within 100 feet of a school or a place or worship. 
(5)  There shall not be more than five (5) video gaming terminals on any premises. 
(6)  Video gaming terminals must be located in an area that is restricted to persons over twenty-one (21) years of age. The entrance to such area must be within the view of at least one (1) employee. 
(7)  No licensee may cause or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to use or play a video gaming terminal. 
(8)  Each establishment that desires to operate a video gaming terminal must possess a valid liquor license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and the village. 
(9)  Those establishments that are licensed establishments, licensed fraternal establishments and licensed veterans establishments, all pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act, may operate video gaming terminals only during the hours of operation for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at that establishment. 
(10)  Annual fees to be paid shall be for a calendar year without proration should the video gaming terminal operate for any portion of any calendar year. 
(11)  Any licensee must also follow any rules and further restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 5, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 2447, § 5, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 3718, § 1, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 3841, § 2, 10-27-14)  
Sec. 3-410. - View from street. 
(a)  In premises, upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed other than in restaurants, hotels or clubs, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises, nor inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view of the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road, or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen partition, or other obstruction or any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises, and the entire space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full view of the same from the street, road, or sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continually lighted during business hours by natural or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. 
(b)  In the case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provision shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee, his agent, or employee or wilfully suffered to be obscured or obstructed, the liquor license may be revoked in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 7, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-411. - "B-girls" and similar activities. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection: 
(1)  Employee: The term "employee" means any agent, manager, employee, entertainer, barkeeper, host, hostess, waiter, waitress, or other such person employed on any contractual basis by such an establishment, or receiving any remuneration for services in such an establishment. 
(2)  Licensed establishment: The term "licensed establishment" means any place of business which has been issued a village license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Patron: The term "patron" means any patron, customer or visitor of a licensed establishment who is not employed by such establishment. 
(b)  No licensee or his employee shall: 
(1)  Solicit, induce, or request any patron of the licensed establishment to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for himself or any other employee of the licensed establishment; or 
(2)  Knowingly serve to any employee any alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverage which was purchased by any patron. 
(c)  No licensee, manager, or barkeeper of a licensed establishment shall permit any employee to remain on the premises of the licensed establishment who solicits, induces, or requests a patron to purchase an alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for any employee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits the above activities where the patron and employee are related by blood or marriage. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 12, 9-11-78)  
Sec. 3-412. - Nudity, obscenity, etc. 
The following kinds of conduct on premises in the village licensed to sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited: 
(1)  The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any other sexual acts. 
(2)  The performance of acts of public indecency prohibited by section 16-110.1. 
(3)  The displaying of moving pictures or photographic slide presentations depicting the acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any other sexual act. 
(4)  The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, nipples, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, or genitals. 
(5)  The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(6)  The licensee, or his agent or employee, permitting any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes top public view any portion of his or her entire breast or buttocks. 
(7)  The licensee, or his agent or employee, permitting any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to view any portion of his or her genitals, vulva or anus. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 10, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 3355, § 3, 5-22-06)  
Sec. 3-413. - Political contributions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder individually or through his agent or employee, to become liable for, pay, or make any contribution directly or indirectly toward the campaign fund or expenses of any political party, or candidate for public office, or for nomination of any candidate for any public office. 
(Ord. No. 1811, Art. VII, § 8, 9-11-78) 
Cross reference— Ethical conduct for public officials and employees, § 2-321 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 43, § 132.  
Sec. 3-414. - Locking doors of licensed premises with patrons inside prohibited. 
If, during hours at which time the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited, any licensee shall continue to use the licensed premises for any lawful and permitted purpose (i.e., a restaurant), it shall be unlawful to lock or bar the door through which the public gains access to the licensed premises, so long as any one or more patrons remain thereon. During hours at which time the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted and one or more patrons are on the licensed premises, it shall be unlawful to lock or bar the door or doors through which the public gains access to the licensed premises. At all times when the licensee, employees, or patrons are present on the licensed premises, the licensee and the licensee's employees shall permit any officer of the police department, while on duty, free and unobstructed access to the premises. Licensee shall afford all county, and municipal inspectors access to the premises upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 2023, § 1, 2-1-82; Ord. No. 2370, § 26, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-15-90)  
Sec. 3-415. - Parental responsibility for consumption of alcoholic liquor by minors. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state, or any person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, but shall not include any person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor. 
(2)  Parents shall include the father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption, or shall be deemed the parent having legal custody of the minor in the event the parents are divorced or separated. The term "parent" as used in this section may also be deemed to mean "legal guardian." 
(3)  Minor shall mean any unemancipated person over seven (7) years of age, but not yet twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(4)  Intentionally shall mean conduct engaged in by a person with the conscious objective to accomplish that result or engage in that conduct. 
(5)  Knowingly shall mean conduct engaged in by a person when he is consciously aware of the nature of attendant circumstances of his conduct which constitutes an offense under this section. 
(6)  Recklessly shall mean conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and where such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(7)  Negligence shall mean conduct engaged in by a person where such person fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and where such failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(b)  No parent shall give or deliver alcoholic liquor to his minor child for the minor's consumption unless the consumption of alcoholic liquor by such minor is in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or such consumption takes place under the direct supervision and approval of the parent of the minor or such person standing in loco parentis to the minor in the privacy of a home. 
(c)  No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently give or deliver alcoholic liquor to, or permit possession of alcoholic liquor by, his or her minor child, or any other person under the age of twenty-one (21), unless such minor or person under the age of twenty-one (21) is making a delivery of such alcoholic liquor pursuant to order of his parent, in pursuance of his employment, or otherwise as allowed by subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently give, deliver, invite or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by any minors on or about any premises owned, leased or controlled by such parent, except as otherwise allowed by subsection (b) hereof. 
(e)  Parents shall restrain or prevent their minor children from consuming alcoholic liquor where the parent knows, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of a substantial probability that his or her minor child is or will consume alcoholic liquor under circumstances which would violate the provisions of this section, the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments thereto. 
(f)  Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or will consume alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section, the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments thereto, or as allowed under subsection (b) hereof, shall restrain or prevent their minor child from operating or driving a motor vehicle on the public streets and ways of the Village of Villa Park in violation of any ordinances, laws or statutes. 
(g)  Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or will consume alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section, the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments thereto, or as allowed under subsection (b) hereof, shall restrain or prevent their minor child from committing acts which constitute vandalism, theft, disorderly conduct, or other unjustifiable use of force in violation of any ordinance, law or statute. 
(Ord. No. 2161, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12) 
Cross reference— Sales, purchases or possession of alcoholic liquor by minors, § 3-408.  
Sec. 3-416. - Prohibited and permitted happy hours. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Dedicated event space means a room or rooms or other clearly delineated space within a retail licensee's premises that is reserved for the exclusive use of party package invitees during the entirety of a party package. Furniture, stanchions and ropes, or other room dividers may be used to clearly delineate a dedicated event space. 
(2)  Meal package means a food and beverage package, which may or may not include entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an accompaniment to the food, including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting, or any combination thereof for a fixed price by a retail licensee or any other licensee operating within a sports facility, restaurant, winery, brewery or distillery. 
(3)  Party package means a private party, function, or event for a specific social or business occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a defined number of individuals, that is not open to the general public and where attendees are served both food and alcohol for a fixed price in a dedicated event space. 
(b)  All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises more than one (1) establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment. 
(c)  No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall: 
(1)  Sell more than one (1) drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one (1) drink of alcoholic liquor; 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the general public or as provided in 235 ILCS 5/6-28.5; 
(3)  Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink on that day; 
(4)  Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or 
(5)  Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections (c)(1) through (c)(4) hereof. 
(d)  A retail licensee may: 
(1)  Offer free food or entertainment at any time; 
(2)  Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package; 
(3)  Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the retail licensee: 
a.  Offers food in the dedicated event space; 
b.  Limits the party package to no more than three (3) hours; 
c.  Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or any other such wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees may be granted access to the dedicated event space; and 
d.  Excludes individuals not participating in the party package from the dedicated event space. 
(4)  Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package; 
(5)  Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package; 
(6)  Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel; 
(7)  Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits; 
(8)  Advertise events permitted under this subsection; 
(9)  Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment package where the licensee is separately licensed by a license that: (A) restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an adjacent stadium; (B) restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to two (2) hours before the event and one (1) hour after the event; (C) restricts alcoholic liquor sales to beer and wine; (D) requires tickets for admission to the establishment; and (E) prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event and permits the sale of admission tickets for single events only; and 
(10)  Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time period only if: 
a.  The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed during the time that it is discounted; 
b.  The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed four (4) hours per day and fifteen (15) hours per week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner; 
c.  The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and 
d.  Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee's publicly available website at least seven (7) days prior to the specified time. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's license in addition to any other penalties otherwise provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3305, § 2, 7-11-05; Ord. No. 3877 , § 1, 8-10-15)  
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, Appendix C. 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to license tax and regulate amusements, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1 through 5/11-42-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Definitions. 
For purposes of Articles I and II of this Chapter 4, the following definitions shall apply: 
Admission fees or other charges includes but is not limited to fees, charges, or other consideration paid for the right to participate in a recreational activity or entertainment, as well as fees charged for entrance to an amusement or the right to view an amusement. 
Amusement means any and all participatory, spectator, and exhibitive entertainment, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following activities; any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectator performance; any motion picture show, movie, video, videotape, or digital versatile disc (DVD), including rentals; video or DVD game or DVD game system, including rentals; carnival; circus; rodeo; animal act; amusement ride; amusement attraction; athletic contest; sport or similar exhibition; sports; games; animal shows; flower shows; skating; dancing; swimming; racing or riding on animals or vehicles; basketball; softball; football; tennis; hockey; track and field games; bowling; billiard and pool games; video games; pinball games; boxing; wrestling. 
Amusement attraction means any game of skill, show, exhibition or nonamusement ride entertainment device; or an enclosed building or structure, including electrical equipment which is an integral part of the building or structure, through which people walk without the aid of any moving device, that provides amusement, thrills, entertainment or excitement. 
Amusement ride means any mechanized device or combination of devices, including any electrical equipment which is an integral part of the device or devices, which carries passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted course for the primary purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills or excitement. 
Carnival means an enterprise to offer amusement or entertainment to the public by means of amusement attractions or amusement rides. 
Gross receipts means all fees or charges received in the form of fees or charges for admission to any facility and/or use or rental of any facility or equipment for the purpose of witnessing, participating in, or utilizing any amusement regardless of whether such fees or charges are characterized as admission fees, membership fees, use charges, rental or service charges. Gross receipts shall be exclusive of any tax imposed by the United States Government, the State of Illinois, or any other governmental unit. A fee or charge which entitles the patrons in any amusement operated within the corporate limits of the village to bona fide services in addition to, or unrelated to the witnessing or participating in the amusement, shall not be subject to the tax provided for in this chapter, except however: 
(1)  Where a fee or charge is comprised of identifiable components, packages or tiers, the tax provided for herein shall be imposed on any such components, packages or tiers which provide solely for admission to any facility and/or the use of any facility or equipment for the purposes of witnessing or participating in any amusement, and 
(2)  Where a single fee or charge for admission to any facility and/or the use of any facility or equipment for the purpose of witnessing or participating in any amusement also entitles the patron of the amusement to the incidental use of parking, restaurant, bar, refreshment, locker room, changing room, washroom and/or shower facilities or services, the tax provided for herein shall be imposed on such fee or charge, provided the predominant activity of such facility is an amusement. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture corporation, but shall not include governmental entities or not-for-profit corporations. 
(Ord. No. 1441, § 1, 12-10-73; Ord. No. 1443, § 1, 1-14-74; Ord. No. 2043, § 1, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 10-11-93; Ord. No. 3606, § 2, 4-26-10)  
Sec. 4-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1994, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1981, repealed § 4-102. Said former section prohibited coin-operated amusement devices.  
Sec. 4-103. - Carnivals. 
The fee for carnival permits required by Article 11, Division 54.01 of the Illinois Municipal Code shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant files with the village clerk a memorandum of insurance coverage in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person for personal injuries and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injuries per occurrence and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. 
(Ord. No. 1185, 7-13-70) 
State Law reference— Carnival permits, 65 ILCS 5/11-54.1-1 et seq.  
Sec. 4-104. - Amusement tax. 
(a)  Imposed; amount. 
(1)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons operating amusements, and upon persons operating places of amusement within the corporate limits of the village in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the gross receipts collected in the form of fees or charges for admission to any facility and/or the use of any facility or equipment for the purpose of witnessing or participating in any amusement, irrespective of whether such fees or charges are characterized as admission fees, membership fees, service or use charges or rent. Gross receipts as defined herein shall be exclusive of any tax imposed by the United States, the State of Illinois, or any other governmental unit. 
(2)  Any person subject to the amusement tax imposed herein may separately itemize and charge to patrons in addition to any admission fee, the amount of amusement tax attributable to such admission fee. 
(3)  In addition to all other taxes due on account of the amusement, any tax not paid when due, there shall be added an additional amusement tax equal to an amount of 1.25 percent for each month or fraction of a month that the payment is past due. 
(4)  The tax herein imposed shall not apply: 
a.  To any coin operated amusement device as set forth in Article III of this Chapter 4; or 
b.  To any amusement(s) whenever both of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The amusement is operated by a municipality, park district, school district, or any other unit of local government, whether individually or jointly; and 
2.  The place the amusement is conducted is owned by a municipality, park district, school district, or any other unit of local government, whether individually or jointly. 
(b)  Time of payment. The tax herein imposed shall be due and payable on the tenth day of the following month for the preceding calendar month, provided however that the tax herein imposed upon amusements not conducted as a continuing and permanent amusement but as a temporary or one time event shall be due on the day following the holding of said event. Said tax shall be payable to and collected by the village manager or his designee. 
(c)  Reports. At the time of tendering the final payment of the tax due, the person responsible for payment of the tax shall file with the village manager or his designee a written report in such form as the finance director of the village from time to time provide, requiring such information regarding the business enterprise for which the amusement is conducted as the village manager or his designee deems appropriate. The report shall be verified under oath by any person authorized in the State of Illinois to administer oaths. Acceptance by the village of any amount tendered in payment of the amusement tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand, or right on account of any deficiency in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Books and records. There shall at all times be maintained all canceled admission tickets, a complete and accurate record of all receipts and disbursements, and books and accounts which provide a detailed and accurate record of all receipts together with a description of the nature and type of receipt. These books and records shall be kept at the place of amusement or such other place in the village as may be designated by the person liable for the tax, in writing, addressed to the village manager or some person designated by him. All authorized agents or employees of the village shall have the right at all reasonable times to inspect and examine the books and records of either the amusement or the business enterprise conducting the amusement. Such reasonable times shall include, but not be limited to, Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(e)  Enforcement. The village manager is hereby authorized to develop, adopt and implement such forms and procedures as may be necessary and/or appropriate to enforce and administer the terms of Chapter 4 of this Code and to collect all monies due to the village. 
(Ord. No. 1441, §§ 6—8, 12-10-73; Ord. No. 1534, § 1, 3-17-75; Ord. No. 2661, § 1, 10-11-93) 
State Law reference— Licensing and taxation of athletic contests and exhibitions for gain authorized, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-54-1.  
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-201. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, carry on or conduct an amusement without a license issued by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1441, § 4, 12-10-73)  
Sec. 4-202. - Application. 
A person desiring the license required by the provisions of this article shall make written application to the village clerk upon a form furnished by the clerk giving the information required on the form. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 3, 2-6-28)  
Sec. 4-203. - Fee. 
Prior to the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this article the license applicant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, whichever is less.  
Sec. 4-204. - Revocation. 
An amusement license may be revoked by the board of trustees upon ten (10) days notice to the licensee. Upon receipt of such notice, said licensee may request in writing within an additional ten (10) day period, a hearing before the board of trustees or such other person, persons or committee as it may designate. Within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the receipt of said request for a hearing, a hearing shall be conducted on said licensees appeal and within ten (10) days thereafter, said licensee shall be notified of the decision of said hearing in writing. No license shall be revoked or suspended except for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 1441, § 5, 12-10-73)  
Sec. 4-205. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to amusements conducted solely for religious, charitable or not-for-profit purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1441, § 3, 12-10-73)  
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1992, § 2, adopted Sept. 28, 1981, added a new Art. III, §§ 4-301—4-315 to the Code. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2028, § 1, adopted March 22, 1982, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out in Div. 1, §§ 4-301—4-315. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-301. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this section, words and phrases used in this article shall have their commonly understood meaning. As used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Coin-operated amusement device means any machine or device which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk may be operated by the public generally by manipulating special equipment whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special number or numbers or a total score, whether a prize is offered or not, and any machine where the operator of the device pays or gives consideration for the privilege of using the amusement device. Each individual coin slot shall be considered a separate device. 
Coin-operated amusement device license means a license for a coin-operated amusement device or devices, issued in accordance with the regulations of this Article III of Chapter 4 of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Coin-operated amusement device supplier's license means a license issued to an individual, firm, or corporation, in the business of selling, placing, keeping or maintaining a coin-operated amusement device on a premises other than a premises owned, operated, or maintained by the supplier. 
Evasion of taxes means a violation of 26 U.S.C., section 7201, et seq., or a violation of 35 ILCS 620/13, or a violation of the laws of any state if the elements necessary to sustain a conviction of that law would sustain a conviction pursuant to 35 ILCS 620/13. 
Gambling means a violation of 18 U.S.C., section 1081, et seq., or a violation of 720 ILCS 5/28-1.1 or 28-3, or a violation of the laws of any state if the elements necessary to sustain a conviction of that law would sustain a conviction pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/28-1.1 or 28-3. 
Liquor licensee means the holder of a valid liquor license issued by the Village of Villa Park. 
Member of organized crime means any person who is a member of a nationwide crime organization. The identification of a person by any branch of the United States Department of Justice or any law enforcement agency or commission which has been organized to investigate organized crime shall create a rebuttable presumption that the person so identified is in fact a member of organized crime. 
Nonresidential district means any zoning district in the Village of Villa Park not designated for single family, multifamily, or duplex residences. 
Nonself-contained devices means any coin-operated amusement device which contains any instrument or object not wholly and entirely enclosed and not inaccessible to the player. By way of example and not by way of limitation, such devices shall include dart games, basketball games, pool tables, billiard tables, bowling games, shuffleboard, and foosball games. 
Person means any individual, firm, or corporation, or any shareholder of a corporation who owns or controls five (5) percent or more of the stock of that corporation. 
Premises means a building or part thereof. 
Principal business activity means for purposes of Articles III and IV of this Chapter 4, principal business activity shall mean the display for public patronage or keeping for operation more than two (2) coin-operated amusement devices at any one time in any establishment not covered by section 4-313(c)(1). 
Proprietor means any person or corporation, who, as the owner or lessee, has under his control the premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement device is placed. 
Student means any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger who regularly attends any elementary school, junior high school or high school. 
School hours means any period between 7:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day, Monday through Friday, except legal holidays, during which elementary school, junior high school or high school classes are being conducted. 
Supplier means any person, firm, corporation, or partnership which owns, leases, or places any coin-operated amusement device. 
Temporary coin-operated amusement device license means a license granted under the authority of division 3 of Article III of this chapter for one (1) or more coin-operated amusement devices issued in accordance with the provisions of division 3 and governed by the provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 2043, § 1, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2730, § 1, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-302. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall display for public patronage or keep for operation any coin-operated amusement device within the village without first having obtained a coin-operated amusement device license. 
(b)  No supplier shall sell, place, keep or maintain any coin-operated amusement device within the village without first having obtained a coin-operated amusement device supplier's license. No supplier shall be eligible to hold a coin-operated amusement device license, but shall be limited to maintaining a coin-operated amusement device supplier's license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, maintain or purchase any coin-operated amusement device from any person who does not possess a current coin-operated amusement device supplier's license. 
(d)  The term of any license issued hereunder shall commence on April 15 of any calendar year, or upon the issue date of the license if the license is issued after April 15. All licenses shall expire on April 14. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 2—4, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3385, § 2, 9-18-06)  
Sec. 4-303. - Application. 
(a)  Original applications. An application for an original coin-operated amusement device license or coin-operated amusement device supplier's license shall be in writing, under oath or affirmation, and on a form provided by the village. The application shall be filed with the village manager and shall be accompanied by the proper fee as set forth in section 4-309. Incomplete applications shall not be accepted. 
(b)  Specifications. Applications for either the original issuance or renewal of a license shall specify: 
(1)  Whether the application is for a coin-operated amusement device license or for a coin-operated amusement device supplier's license. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant, or the names and addresses of all partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the name and the principal place of business if the applicant is a corporation. 
(3)  The social security number for each person listed in subsection (b)(2). 
(4)  The name, address and social security number of every shareholder who owns or controls five (5) percent or more of the stock of a corporate applicant. 
(5)  The name of any other political subdivision within the state wherein the applicant maintains or has within the last five (5) years maintained or has kept or placed into service a coin-operated amusement device. 
(6)  In the case of a coin-operated amusement device supplier's license, the name and address of each and every location within the village of each and every coin-operated amusement device supplied by the supplier, the trade name of the device, a general description of the device, and the serial number of each device. 
(7)  In the case of a coin-operated amusement device license, the name and address of the supplier, the name and address of the premises for which the license is issued and the devices are kept, the trade name of the device, a general description of the device, and the serial number of each device. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant, or in the case of a corporation, the president and secretary, has read and understands all ordinances of the village regulating coin-operated amusement devices and agrees to abide by all rules, regulations, and ordinances of the village including ordinances regarding coin-operated amusement devices. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 5—7, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 4-304. - Investigation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall investigate all applicants, or in cases of a corporation, all officers and persons who own or control five (5) per cent or more of the corporate stock, and employees of the applicant to determine the truthfulness of each statement made in the application. 
(b)  The building and zoning department shall inspect the premises to determine if the same complies with the electrical code of the village and determine the zoning for the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 4-305. - Granting or denial of a license. 
(a)  The village manager shall grant or deny the issuance of a coin-operated amusement device license. The basis of denial of a coin-operated amusement device license shall be: 
(1)  The zoning of the premises is improper; 
(2)  The premises violate the electrical code of the village; 
(3)  A liquor license has been issued for the premises and the person applying for the coin-operated amusement device license is not eligible for a liquor license; 
(4)  The person, or in the case of a corporation any person owning or controlling five (5) per cent or more of its stock, has been convicted of: 
a.  Gambling; or 
b.  Evasion of taxes; 
(5)  The person, or in the case of a corporation any person owning or controlling five (5) per cent or more of its stock is a member of organized crime; or 
(6)  The person, or in the case of a corporation any person owning or controlling five (5) per cent or more of its stock, has made a false statement of a material fact in any application for a license from the village. 
(7)  The premises already has licensed the maximum number of coin-operated amusement devices. 
(8)  The application contains false information. 
(b)  The denial of a coin-operated amusement device license shall be in writing and shall state the basis for denial. 
(c)  The race, color, creed, national origin or sex of the applicant shall not be considered in the granting or denial of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 8, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 4-306. - Review of denial or revocation. 
(a)  A denial or revocation of a coin-operated amusement device license shall be reviewable by the corporate authorities. The person who is denied a license shall be granted an administrative hearing before the corporate authorities. The right to an administrative review shall be waived by the applicant unless he files a notice of review with the office of the village clerk during normal business hours within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the denial or revocation. A notice of review shall be deemed to have been filed on the date which it is deposited in the U.S. mail as evidenced by the stamp of the U.S. Post Office. 
(b)  The hearing before the corporate authorities shall be in the same manner as other administrative hearings. The person seeking the administrative review shall bear the burden of proving he was wrongfully denied a license or his license was wrongfully revoked. 
(c)  The decision of the corporate authorities shall be reviewable in the Circuit Court, 18th Judicial Circuit, pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 110, Paragraph 264 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 4-307. - Revocation of license. 
The village manager shall revoke any license issued pursuant to section 4-305 if the licensee becomes ineligible for a license pursuant to section 4-305. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 4-308. - Renewal. 
A coin-operated amusement device license or a coin-operated amusement device supplier's license may be renewed by any licensee who is qualified pursuant to section 4-305. A renewal application, in writing, under oath or affirmation, on a form provided by the village, shall be filed with the village manager on or before April 1 of each year. Failure to file a renewal application in proper form with all required information being submitted and pay the appropriate fee(s) by April 1 shall relieve the village of any obligation to issue the renewal license by May 1. Denial of renewal is reviewable in accordance with section 4-306. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 9, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 4-309. - Fees. 
(a)  The following fees shall be collected by the village pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Original issuance fee. There shall be collected for each original application for a license for a coin-operated amusement device, license for a game room, or license for a coin-operated amusement device supplier a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(2)  Annual renewal fee. There shall be collected for each renewal of a license for a coin-operated amusement device, license for a game room, or license for a coin-operated amusement device supplier a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(3)  Exchange transfer fee. There shall be collected for each exchange or transfer, without regard to the number of machines transferred on each occasion, as described in section 4-311(c) below, a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  The fees set forth above shall be in addition to the following fees, which shall be paid at the time of original application or renewal: 
(1)  The license fee for each coin-operated amusement device maintained, operated or kept in any game room, liquor license premises or nonresidential premises per year or part of a year, not prorated, shall be one hundred ten dollars ($110.00). 
(2)  The license fee for each game room license per year or part of a year, not prorated, shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(3)  The license fee for each coin-operated amusement device supplier per year or part of a year, not prorated, shall be one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00). 
(c)  In the event any license fee set forth herein has not been paid to the Village prior to May 1, a late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the fee due, whichever amount is greater, shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 10, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 3385, § 3, 9-18-06)  
Sec. 4-310. - Gambling prohibited. 
(a)  No gambling or individual wager on any coin-operated amusement device shall be permitted by a licensee. 
(b)  No device to remove replays shall be allowed in conjunction with coin-operated amusement devices. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 4-311. - Contents of license; display; transferability/nontransferability. 
(a)  Contents of license. The license issued for each premises for a coin-operated amusement device shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the establishment to whom the license is issued. 
(2)  The amount of the original application or renewal fee. 
(3)  The total number of coin-operated amusement devices authorized pursuant to the license. 
(4)  The amount of fees paid for those coin-operated amusement devices. 
(5)  In addition, either on the license or on a supplemental schedule attached to the license in a form approved by the village manager, there shall be a schedule of the machines or devices containing the following information: 
a.  The serial number or other identification number of the machine. 
b.  The date the machine was placed in service. 
c.  The name and address of the supplier, if the device is not owned by the licensee. 
d.  The name and address of the owner of the machine. 
e.  A brief description of the machine, either generic or by trade name. 
The supplemental schedule shall be issued under the seal of the village and shall not be valid unless such seal is affixed and shall reference the license for which it is issued. 
(b)  Display. The license issued for each establishment shall be posted permanently in a conspicuous place, together with any supplemental schedule and shall be provided on request for inspection to any police officer or any other authorized agent or employee of the village. 
(c)  Transferability/nontransferability. 
(1)  One (1) machine or coin-operated amusement device may be exchanged for another machine or coin-operated amusement device; provided that the original license or supplemental schedule is tendered to the village manager's office, together with the appropriate fee provided by section 4-309, above, and a new license or supplemental schedule shall be issued for the establishment. It shall be the responsibility of each licensee licensed pursuant to this article to notify the village of exchange of machines or the placement of new machines into operation, and upon failure to do so, the license may be revoked and all fees forfeited. 
(2)  More than one (1) machine may be operated under one (1) license, but the applicant or licensee shall be required shall be required to submit and pay to the village the appropriate fee for each and every machine kept, maintained, displayed or operated by him. The licensee shall at all times keep the village informed of the information required under subsection (a)(5) of this section for each and every device authorized by the village to be on the premises. 
(3)  A license shall not be transferable from person to person or from place to place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 11, 5-28-91)  
Sec. 4-312. - Evidence of ownership to be filed with clerk. 
Any proprietor who owns or has any interest in such device or devices shall file with the village clerk evidence of such ownership prior to the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 4-313. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  Distance from churches, schools, playgrounds. 
(1)  No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit the playing of coin-operated amusement devices within six hundred (600) feet of any church, school or playground. 
(2)  The distance required, as provided in paragraph (1) hereinabove, between establishments operating coin-operated amusement devices and any church, school or playground shall be measured by determining the exact distance on a straight line between the nearest portion of the premises upon which coin-operated amusement devices are being operated to the nearest portion of any church building, school building or playground building. For the purposes of this measurement, athletic fields, spectator stands, stadiums, field houses or other incidental buildings shall not be considered a "building." A church building shall be a principal building in which religious services are regularly conducted; a school building shall be a principal building in which classes or other instructions are regularly conducted; a playground building shall be a principal building in which recreational activities are regularly conducted. The measurement shall not be determined from the boundary line of one (1) property to the boundary line of the other. 
(b)  No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any coin-operated amusement device at any place or in any manner which will disturb the peace or quiet of persons outside the licensed premises, and it shall be a violation of this article for any licensee to permit the operation of a coin-operated amusement device in any manner or at any place so as to disturb the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises, or to create a nuisance. 
(c)  Devices licensed hereby are permitted only in the following locations and in the following numbers: 
(1)  Establishments possessing a valid village retail alcoholic liquor license of the following classes shall be permitted an unlimited number of licenses; provided, however, that the liquor commissioner shall have the right to be notified of any request for six (6) or more coin-operated amusement devices, and the liquor commissioner, at his or here sole discretion, shall have the right to refuse a request for coin-operated amusement devices totaling six (6) or more or may place such restrictions as may be consistent with the size, location, class of license, square footage of the establishment, number of rooms of the establishment, type of establishment (whether or not minors are permitted in the establishment), proximity of coin-operated amusement devices to one another, as will serve to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village. Having six (6) or more coin-operated amusement devices shall be a privilege and not a right. On renewal of a coin-operated amusement device license, the liquor commissioner may increase or decrease the number of permitted devices, except that the liquor commissioner may not decrease the number of permitted devices to less than five (5). 
a.  Class AAA. 
b.  Class AA. 
c.  Class A. 
d.  Class C. 
e.  Class EEE. 
f.  Class EE. 
g.  Class E. 
h.  Class I. 
i.  Class X. 
(2)  Establishments where the devices constitute the principal business activity pursuant to section 4-314 of this article shall be permitted such numbers of devices as is allowed in article IV of this chapter. 
(3)  If any nonresidential district, two (2) devices. 
(d)  No student shall be permitted in the licensed premises during school hours. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2031, § 2, 6-21-82; Ord. No. 2057, § 1, 1-24-83; Ord. No. 2166, 11-18-85; Ord. No. 2316, § 1, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 2481-B, §§ 12, 13, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2543, § 5, 12-23-91)  
Sec. 4-314. - Where devices constitute principal business activity. 
If the coin-operated amusement devices constitute the principal business activity, then a license may be issued only on the following conditions: 
(1)  If the premises is located: 
a.  Within a planned unit development containing those uses allowed in a C-3 service business district; or 
b.  Within a C-3 service business district, as a conditional use. 
(2)  After a public hearing has been held by the planning and zoning commission of the village pursuant to the provisions relating to "electronic game rooms." 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2481-B, § 14, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2526, § 1, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-315. - Special restrictions concerning nonself-contained devices. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any licensee to keep, place, or operate more than two (2) nonself-contained, coin-operated amusement devices on any single premises, and it shall be unlawful for any supplier to supply or place into service more than two (2) such devices on any single premises; provided, however, more than two (2) such devices may be permitted in establishments possessing a valid retail alcoholic liquor license when the size, location, class of license, square footage of the establishment (whether or not minors are permitted in the establishment), and proximity of the devices to one another are consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. No license permitting more than two (2) nonself-contained, coin-operated amusement devices on a single premises shall be issued until the premises have been inspected by the village fire department and community development department to assure that the foregoing criteria have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2481-B, § 15, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2777, § 2, 7-24-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2481-B, § 15, adopted May 28, 1991 amended § 4-315 in its entirety to read as set forth herein. Prior to such amendment, § 4-315 pertained to the number of coin-operated amusement devices permitted and derived from Ord. No. 2028, § 1, adopted Mar. 22, 1982.  
Sec. 4-316. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 4-316, entitled "Violations and penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 2481-B, § 16, adopted May 28, 1991.  
Secs. 4-317—4-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOVIE AND VIDEO BOOTHS 
 
Sec. 4-320. - Number of movie or video booths limited. 
No business enterprise may use, permit the use of, keep, own, maintain or possess more than five (5) movie and video booths or stands at any one (1) business location. The term "business location" shall mean and include any one (1) or more areas operated by a business enterprise within a distance of five hundred (500) feet whether said areas are one (1) continuous open space or separate spaces, contiguous or noncontiguous, and whether separated by solid walls with or without means of access from one (1) area to the other. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 9-13-82)  
Secs. 4-321—4-329. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TEMPORARY COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSES 
 
Sec. 4-330. - Temporary license in lieu of annual license. 
In lieu of securing any licenses required by division 1 of article III or article IV of this chapter, any person desiring to display for public patronage or keep for operation not more than fifty (50) coin-operated amusement devices for the periods described in this division may make application in writing to the village manager on a form provided by the village. The application shall be submitted under oath and shall be accompanied by the proper fee as set forth hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-331. - Specifications of applications. 
Applications for a temporary coin-operated amusement device license shall specify the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or the names and addresses of all partners if the applicant is a partnership or the name and the principal place of business if the applicant is a corporation. 
(2)  The Social Security Number for each person listed in subsection (1). 
(3)  The name, address and Social Security Number of every shareholder who owns or controls five (5) percent or more of the stock of a corporate applicant. 
(4)  A statement that the applicant, or in the case of a corporation, the president and secretary, has read and understand all ordinances of the village regulating coin-operated amusement devices and agrees to be abide by all rules, regulations, and ordinances of the village including ordinances regarding coin-operated amusement devices. 
(5)  A brief description, including any recognized tradename, for each coin-operated amusement device, together with the serial number for each such device. 
(6)  The name and address of the owner or supplier of the amusement device. 
(7)  The time period for which a license is sought (not to exceed a total of fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days). 
(8)  The location at which the coin-operated amusement devices will be installed. 
(9)  The date of installation, if different from the commencement date of the license, which installation date may not be more than two (2) days prior to the commencement of the license. 
(10)  A schematic drawing generally showing the layout of the devices, including spacing between each machine, aisle widths, total floor area. 
(11)  Such other information which in the opinion of the village manager, after consultation with the appropriate department heads, believes is appropriate to provide for the health, safety and welfare of patrons using the devices. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-332. - Qualified applicants. 
No applicant shall be entitled to a temporary coin-operated amusement device license unless the applicant also possesses for the same time period an amusement license issued by the village for the operation of an amusement other than providing for public patronage coin-operated amusement devices. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-333. - Location restrictions; maximum number of devices. 
The temporary coin-operated amusement device license shall be issued for a specific location; provided however, that such location must be located within a building or other permanent structure located in a planned unit development which houses a licensed electronic game room. The number of devices authorized under a temporary coin-operated amusement device license shall not exceed fifty (50). Once a license has been issued, the total number of authorized devices shall not be increased, but different devices may be substituted as provided in subsection 4-337(2). 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-334. - Compliance with codes and regulations. 
The community development department and the fire department shall inspect the premises and location for which the temporary coin-operated amusement license shall be issued to determine whether same complies with the village's electrical code and all other applicable building, zoning and fire codes of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-335. - Operational rules and regulations. 
(a)  Hours of operation. Operation of the coin-operated amusement devices licensed pursuant to this division 3 shall not be permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  Space requirements. 
(1)  No coin-operated amusement devices shall be placed closer than one (1) foot from another coin-operated amusement device. 
(2)  A five-foot wide unobstructed aisle shall be provided at all times whenever a coin-operated amusement device(s) is located along only one (1) side of an aisle, and an eight-foot wide unobstructed aisle shall be provided whenever coin-operated amusement devices are located on both sides of an aisle. 
(c)  Age restrictions. 
(1)  During school hours when school is in session, no person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be permitted within the area wherein coin-operated amusement devices authorized pursuant to a temporary coin-operated amusement device license are displayed or kept. 
(2)  Unless accompanied by a parent or by a guardian who is not less than eighteen (18) years old, no person under the age of eleven (11) years shall be permitted within the area wherein coin-operated amusement devices authorized pursuant to a temporary coin-operated amusement device license are displayed or kept. 
(d)  Signage requirements. A sign containing the following information in letters at least one (1) inch high shall be posted at each entrance to the area wherein coin-operated amusement devices authorized pursuant to a temporary coin-operated amusement device license are displayed or kept: 
(1)  Hours of operation. 
(2)  Age and time restrictions. 
(3)  Curfew laws. 
(e)  Other operational regulations. 
(1)  No pool tables shall be permitted as part of the coin-operated amusement devices authorized by any temporary license issued pursuant to this division 3. 
(2)  Devices may grant free games to a player upon the player attaining a certain score or scores, but shall not pay-off in money, prizes, or other tangible awards. 
(3)  A temporary coin-operated amusement device license shall be issued not more often than once every twelve (12) months for any authorized location. 
(4)  A temporary coin-operated amusement device license shall only be issued for a single consecutive period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days. 
(5)  Not more than two (2) nonself-contained devices shall be authorized as part of the issuance of any temporary coin-operated amusement device license. 
(6)  Upon expiration of the temporary coin-operated amusement device license, the devices listed on the license shall be removed, unless otherwise licensed pursuant to the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-336. - Fee for temporary coin-operated amusement device license. 
The fee for the license shall be an amount equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) multiplied by the total number of coin-operated amusement devices for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 4-337. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  When issued, the license shall specify: the name of the person entitled to display for public patronage or keep for operation more than fifty (50) coin-operated amusement devices; the permitted location for the devices; the name of the owner of the devices, if different from the operator; the serial number and generic description of each device, including tradename where appropriate; the dates for which the license is issued; the total amount of fees paid; and the total number of authorized devices. Only those specific devices listed on the license shall be permitted to be operated on the dates specified on the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to substitute devices without notification to and approval of the village manager. In such case, the licensee shall surrender the license and the original license shall be amended to reflect the change in authorized devices. 
(Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 10-10-94)  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRONIC GAME ROOMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2526, adopted October 21, 1991, amended Art. IV, §§ 4-401—4-405 to read as set out herein. Prior to such amendment, said sections contained similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 1993, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1981. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-401. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this article, words and phrases used in this article shall have their commonly understood meanings. As used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Electronic game room: Any facility where the principal business activity is the operation of coin-operated amusement devices. 
Person: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association, society, enterprise, club, or other agency. 
All definitions contained in section 4-301 of this chapter are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-402. - Licenses. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain an electronic game room within the corporate limits of the village without first having secured a license therefor, as provided in this section, and the license(s) required by article III of this chapter. 
(b)  Separate license required for each location; change of location. Any license issued pursuant to this article shall apply only to the location designated on said license. Such location may be changed only upon written permission of the village manager when application for such transfer shall have been made upon forms approved by the village manager, and with the same requirements for issuance of a license as for the original premises. An application for such transfer must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00). No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable provision of this Code. 
(c)  Term of license; nontransferability. Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year after issuance unless sooner revoked or expired as provided herein, and shall not constitute property; nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, if an individual, and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution; provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee may continue the business and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the date of the death of such decedent or the filing of such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but in no event longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of such licensee. 
(d)  Display. The license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall at all times be displayed in a prominent place on the licensed premises. 
(e)  Subject to changes. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to any and all changes or amendment which may be hereafter made. 
(f)  Expiration and renewal. 
(1)  Each game room license shall terminate on the 14 th day of April of each year. All applications for renewal of any license shall be made on or before thirty (30) days prior to the expiration thereof. 
(2)  The owner, or his legal representative, of a game room license shall have and be given the privilege of renewal or reissuance of a village game room license at the same or a different place of business upon the payment of an annual fee as stated in section 4-406 of this article upon compliance with the regulations and ordinances of the village, now in force, or which may hereafter be passed governing the issuance of retail liquor licenses. The privilege of renewal or reissuance provided by this section shall apply only so long as the license in each case shall have been kept in force continually and uninterruptedly in the name of the licensee or his successor in interest. The suspension of a license shall not be construed to be an interruption and shall in nowise affect a renewal or reissuance. 
(3)  Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive a license, and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the corporate authorities of the village from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction or from otherwise further regulating the operation of game rooms within the village. 
(g)  Manager's powers with reference to licenses. The village manager shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses: 
(1)  To grant an electronic game room license to any applicant who is qualified, as hereinafter set forth, and to suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause any license issued hereunder. 
(2)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this Code are being violated and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith. 
(3)  To receive complaint from any citizen that any of the provisions of this Code have been or are being violated, and to act upon such complaint, or upon his own motion, in the manner provided herein. 
(4)  To receive license fees and pay same to the village treasurer. 
(5)  To examine, or cause to be examined under oath, any application for a game room license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired under this subsection, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. 
(6)  To make and enforce such reasonable rules as may be necessary in the performance of his duties. 
(7)  To prescribe the form of application which each prospective licensee shall sign prior to receiving a license hereunder. 
(8)  To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued under this article and to cause said list to be available for public inspection during regular business hours at the village hall. 
(9)  To provide a copy of the list of license issued under this article to the village clerk, treasurer and chief of police, and upon the issuance of any new license or the revocation of any old license, to notify each of those officers within forty-eight (48) hours of such action. Failure to notify the above-named officials shall not affect the validity of any license issued hereunder. 
(10)  Such other powers and duties as may from time to time be designated by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 3385, § 4, 9-18-06)  
Sec. 4-403. - Persons eligible for game room license. 
No license to operate a game room within the corporate limits of the village shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person whose game room license has been revoked. 
(2)  A person who does not qualify for or does not possess a coin-operated amusement device license. 
(3)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(4)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States of America. 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law unless, after investigation, the village manager determines that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust. 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of any offense under Article 11 of Chapter 38 of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as prescribed by a statute replacing any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(7)  A person who holds a license for any liquor license establishment within the corporate limits of the village. 
(8)  A person whose liquor license, issued under chapter 3 of this Code, or under the Illinois Liquor Control Law, has been revoked for cause. 
(9)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(10)  A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five (5) percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder. 
(11)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder. 
(12)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois. 
(13)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, except for citizenship and residence within the village. 
(14)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(15)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereof for the full period for which the license is to be issued. 
(16)  Any person, association or corporation selling or servicing coin-in-the-slot mechanical pinball devices. 
(17)  Any person already having game room licenses for any premises within the corporate limits of the village. 
(18)  Any law enforcing public official, including the village president or any member of the village board of trustees. 
(19)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(20)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of Section 28-1 of, or as prescribed by Section 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(21)  A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(22)  A copartnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(23)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty (20) percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period. 
(24)  Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-404. - Investigation and fingerprinting of applicant. 
(a)  No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this article until the applicant shall have been investigated and a report filed in the records of the village approving the issuance of such license. As a part of this investigation, all new applicants not heretofore licensed or any manager not heretofore approved shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the village police department. A copy of fingerprint cards and photographs shall be held on record by the police department and a copy of the same shall be held by the village manager. 
(b)  Completed investigations for license applications shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days after the license applicant has been notified of approval by the village manager. Any applicant who fails to take all required action, including payment of original issuance fee and annual fee, to obtain a license within ninety (90) days after notification shall not be eligible for a license until a new background investigation is completed and additional investigation fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-405. - Investigation fee. 
There shall be a two-hundred-dollar investigation fee for each person who is required to submit to an investigation for a game room license. The fee shall be presented with the application. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-406. - Annual license and annual fee. 
(a)  The annual license fee for all game room licenses within the village shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Said annual license fee shall be payable upon the original issuance of a license by the village manager and shall not be prorated in any manner. Said annual license fee shall thereafter be paid on or before April 15 th of each year and shall accompany each request for renewal of a license. The licensee under any license issued pursuant to this section that expires on January 1, 2007 shall pay a renewal fee of three hundred thirty three dollars ($333.00) for the period January 1, 2007—May 1, 2007. Said fee shall be paid on or before January 1, 2007. 
(b)  In addition to the game room license fees and associated fees imposed by this article, the licensee shall also secure a coin-operated amusement device license and pay the appropriate fee therefore and shall also pay a fee of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) for each coin-operated amusement device, all as set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 3385, § 5, 9-18-06)  
Sec. 4-407. - Disposition of fees. 
All fees shall be paid to the village manager at the time application is made, and shall be turned over to the village treasurer forthwith. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee, with the exception of background investigation fees and other nonrefundable fees, shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-408. - Bond. 
All licensees shall, simultaneously with the issuance of the license applied for, file a surety company bond with the village clerk, conditioned that licensee shall in all respects, in the conduct of the business for which the license has been granted, obey and observe all the provisions of this article. Said bond shall be in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and be for the entire term of the license for which application is made. If, after hearing as provided herein, a licensee shall be found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this article, said bond shall thereupon be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-409. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  The operation of a game room within the village shall be allowed: 
(1)  Within a planned unit development containing those uses allowed in a C-3 service business district; or 
(2)  As a conditional use within a C-3 service business district. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, electronic game rooms shall in no event be allowed: 
(1)  Within six hundred (600) feet of any church or school; 
(2)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any establishment holding any of the following liquor licenses: Class A, AA, or AAA; 
(3)  Within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an establishment holding a game room license within the village. 
The determination of the foregoing distances shall be made by measuring on a straight line from the nearest point of one premises to the nearest point of the other. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Secs. 4-410—4-419. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION 
 
Sec. 4-420. - Fine in lieu of revocation or suspension. 
A license granted pursuant to the provisions of this article may be suspended by the village manager for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for the violation of any part or portion of this article, or for any violation of any state or federal law. During such period of suspension, no business activity may be conducted on the licensed premises. In lieu of, or in addition to a period of revocation or suspension, the village manager may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation; each day on which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. No more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during any annual license period. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-421. - Notice of hearing. 
Upon a complaint being made of a violation of this article or any other article or chapter of this Code or of any state or federal law, the village manager shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee or his agent of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge. Notice as herein required shall be by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, or by leaving a copy of said notice at said licensed place of business at least three (3) days before the date of hearing, or by personal service. No hearing for revocation or suspension of a license or the imposition of any fine on any licensee shall take place without notice having been given in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-422. - Specific grounds. 
(a)  No licensee holding a game room license or his agent or employee shall, in the conduct of the licensed premises or upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Violate any village ordinance or resolution regulating game rooms or coin-operated amusement devices; or 
(2)  Suffer or permit a violation of any state or federal law. 
(b)  The village manager may revoke or suspend any license for any violation of this article or any other article of this Code. 
(c)  A violation may be proved by evidence that the licensee or his agent or employee has been convicted of a violation of any law of the State of Illinois in the conduct of the licensed premises or upon the licensed premises, or has been found guilty of violating any village ordinance regulating the licensed premises. 
(d)  Evidence that any person, including but not limited to an agent or employee of the licensee, other than the licensee, has been convicted of violating a statute of the state, or found guilty of violating a village ordinance or rule regulating the operation of the business on the licensed premises, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(e)  Proof by a preponderance of evidence at any hearing conducted in accordance with this article shall be sufficient cause for revocation or suspension of any license issued hereunder, irrespective of whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any court. 
(f)  Any false or fraudulent statement made on any application for a game room license by any applicant therefor shall be sufficient cause for revocation or suspension by the village manager of such license. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-423. - Hearing and decision. 
No game room license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the village manager with written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. The village manager shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within the said five-day period upon the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-424. - Appeals. 
An appeal from an order or action of the village manager may be made to the president and board of trustees of the village, provided that such appeal is filed with the village clerk within ten (10) days after receipt of the order of the village manager. The determination of the president and board of trustees with respect to any appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Secs. 4-425—4-429. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-430. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any game room licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article to operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-431. - Employees. 
(a)  At all times when any game room licensed pursuant to the provision of this article is open to the public, a manager who is not less than twenty-one (21) years of age shall be on the premises. In addition, if any game room contains more than ten (10) coin-operated amusement devices, a uniformed security guard who has been approved by the village police department must be provided at all times when school is not in session. 
(b)  No person who has been convicted of any offense under Article 11 of Chapter 38 of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions, shall be employed in any capacity in an electronic game room. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-432. - Noise restrictions. 
(a)  Any premises used or proposed to be used as an electronic game room shall meet the following decibel (db) standards as measured with a sound level meter manufactured in compliance with the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association at the property line of the premises on which the game room is located: 
Maximum Levels(db) 
Nature of Noise 	Commercial Areas 	Residential Areas 
Cumulative 30 minutes per hour 	45 	40 
Cumulative 5 minutes per hour 	55 	50 
Cumulative 1 minute or less per hour 	60 	55 
 
(b)  Noise upon adjacent tenants shall not exceed the average interior noise level of adjacent tenant spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-433. - Control of litter. 
Areas in and around game rooms, including parking areas (whether private or shared) shall be cleaned daily and shall remain free from accumulation of litter of any kind and be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Each owner or operator of a game room licensed hereunder shall file with the village manager, as part of his application for a game room license, a statement of responsibility or compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-434. - Structural and space requirements. 
(a)  Restroom facilities shall comply with all regulations required by the state plumbing code or any other plumbing code adopted by the village at any time, including compliance with the minimum number of plumbing fixtures. 
(b)  No coin-operated amusement device shall be placed closer than one (1) foot from another coin-operated amusement device. 
(c)  A five-foot-wide unobstructed aisle shall be provided at all times whenever a coin-operated amusement device(s) is located along only one (1) side of an aisle, and an eight-foot-wide unobstructed aisle shall be provided whenever coin-operated amusement devices are located on both sides of an aisle. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-435. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Requirements for automobile parking. One (1) offstreet parking space shall be provided for each four (4) coin-operated amusement devices, or one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Requirement for bicycle parking. Not less than one (1) space, to be designated as bicycle parking, shall be provided for each coin-operated amusement device. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located so as not to obstruct entrances, exits or walkways, and may not be located within any required parking or landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-436. - Age restrictions. 
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be permitted on the premises of any electronic game room during school hours when school is in session. No person under the age of eleven (11) years shall be permitted on the premises of any electronic game room unless accompanied by a parent or by a guardian who is not less than eighteen (18) years old. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-437. - Signage requirements. 
A sign containing the following information in letters at least one (1) inch high shall be posted at each entrance: 
(1)  Hours of operation; 
(2)  Age and time restrictions; 
(3)  Curfew laws; and 
(4)  Prohibiting eating, drinking or smoking on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Sec. 4-438. - Other operational regulations. 
(a)  Eating, drinking or smoking shall not be permitted in any electronic game room and no cigarette vending machine shall be permitted on any portion of any premises licensed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Pool tables shall not be permitted in electronic game rooms. 
(c)  Coin-operated amusement devices may grant free games to a player upon the player attaining a certain score or scores, but shall not pay off in money, prizes, or other tangible awards. 
(Ord. No. 2526, § 2, 10-21-91)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 15; fence regulations for dog pounds or runs, App. C, Art. 22, § 22.7. 
State Law reference— Animal Control Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 8, § 351 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings: 
Animal: Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by rabies. 
Animal control center: A place designated by the village manager for the housing of animals and the temporary custody of the village. 
Dog: All members of the family Canidae. 
Neutered animal: A male or female animal treated by a licensed veterinarian to render it incapable of reproduction. 
Owner: Any person who has 
(a)  a right of property in an animal or a dog, 
(b)  keeps an animal or a dog, 
(c)  has an animal or dog in his care or custody, 
(d)  who knowingly permits an animal or dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him, or 
(e)  who shall harbor, suffer, or permit any animal or dog to remain on any premises within the village under his charge or control. 
Run at large: A dog or animal free of physical restraint off the premises of its owner. 
Vicious animal: Any animal or dog which bites or in any other manner attacks or attempts to attack, except that any animal or dog that bites, attacks, or attempts to attack any person entering unlawfully upon its owner's premises, or which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious animal. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. I, § 2, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-102. - Enforcement officers. 
(a)  The village manager shall designate a suitable place for housing of dogs and other animals in the temporary custody of the Village of Villa Park, which place shall be a designated animal control center. The village manager shall periodically review and determine whether or not the fees imposed by the center are reasonable. Only such fees as determined by the manager as being reasonable shall be the basis for the impounding fee in subparagraph (e). 
(b)  Police officers and animal control enforcement officers so designated by the village manager shall enforce this chapter. Police officers, as well as animal control enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue citations for violation of this chapter and shall also have the power to impound dogs running at large. Said dogs shall be impounded at a designated animal control center. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. II, §§ 1, 2, 2-18-80; Ord. No. 2604, § 1, 11-23-92)  
Sec. 5-103. - Cruelty to animals. 
No person or owner may abandon, cruelly beat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse animals or dogs in a manner to cause unnecessary suffering. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 1, 2-18-80) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to prohibit cruelty to animals, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-5-6.  
Sec. 5-104. - Keeping poultry, cattle, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any stable or poultry yard, or place for the housing of any poultry, cattle, horses, pigs or goats or similar animals, or to house any such animals in the village. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 12-18-22)  
Sec. 5-105. - Condition of pens and premises. 
No person shall cause or allow any pen, premises or other place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean, filthy or unwholesome. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 12-18-22)  
Sec. 5-106. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the person having charge of any livestock or fowl to permit it to run at large. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous or vicious animal to run at large. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 12-18-22) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to prohibit animals from running at large, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-9.  
Sec. 5-107. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  No owner shall permit any vicious dog to be on any street, alley, or other public place within the village or upon the private premises of any person other than the owner of such dog, unless such dog is securely muzzled or caged. Vicious dogs on the premises of the owner shall be restrained so that they cannot attack persons lawfully on the premises and the premises shall be maintained so that children cannot gain access thereto. Any dog in violation of this section shall be impounded and shall not be returned to the owner until such time as the premises in question of the owner are in compliance with this section. 
(b)  If any vicious dog or other vicious animal cannot be safely taken and impounded when necessary for the protection of any person or property, it may be destroyed by a police officer or by a person authorized by the village to do so; provided, however, that in all cases where any animal so destroyed has bitten any person or caused an abrasion to the skin of any person, no injury shall be done to the head of such animal, and it shall be the duty of the person destroying the dog to immediately deliver the carcass to a licensed veterinarian to prepare the head and brain for delivery to the county rabies control department. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 6, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-108. - Diseased animals. 
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of other animals or man may be affected. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 7, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-109. - Impounding procedures. 
(a)  Police and animal control enforcement officers may impound in an animal control center unlicensed dogs four (4) months of age or over, any dog found running at large; any abandoned animal, or any animal maintained in violation of this chapter. A record shall be made of all impounded animals, entering the breed, color and sex, whether licensed or not, if known, and the name and address of the owner or keeper, if known. Said records shall be maintained at the police department. 
(b)  Immediately upon impoundment of any dog or animal, every effort shall be made to contact the owner of said dog or other animal. If an owner cannot be located, a description of the dog or animal shall be maintained for seven (7) days at the police department for possible inquiry by the public. 
(c)  Dogs or other animals impounded shall be held for a period of seven (7) days. The dog or other animal shall be held at the animal control center so designated by the village manager. The owner of said dog or other animal shall be responsible for the appropriate fees for boarding, impounding and release. In the event that no redemption is made of any dog or other animal thus impounded hereinabove, the chief of police may, at the expiration of seven (7) days from the time of impoundment: 
(1)  Release said dog or animal to a responsible person willing to provide a home for said dog or animal upon payment of all licenses and fees due. 
(2)  Authorize the destruction of said dog or animal by a veterinarian in a humane manner. 
(3)  Place with a humane society licensed under the Animal Welfare Act of the State of Illinois. 
Sundays and holidays shall be counted as "days" for the purpose of this section. The payment of the fees provided for in this section shall be in addition to any fines levied by the Circuit Court of DuPage County. Any dog or animal subject to this chapter not inoculated against rabies shall be taken forthwith by the owner to a licensed veterinarian for rabies inoculation. 
(d)  No person shall without authority interfere with the impounding or shall release any animal that has been impounded by the village. 
(e)  The following fees are applicable for all cases involving impounded dogs and other animals, providing, however, that the village manager has reviewed and approved the fee structure of any designated animal control center: 
(1)  Impounding fee, (first offense), one hundred fifty (150) percent of the fees imposed by the designated animal control center; 
(2)  Impounding fee, (second offense), two hundred (200) percent of the fees imposed by the designated animal control center; 
(3)  Impounding fee, (third offense), two hundred fifty (250) percent of the fees imposed by the designated animal control center; 
(4)  Impounding fee, (fourth offense or any subsequent offense), three hundred (300) percent of the fees imposed by the designated animal control center; 
(5)  Boarding fee, one hundred (100) percent of the fees imposed by the designated animal control center; 
(6)  Releasing fee, one hundred (100) percent of the fees imposed by the designated animal control center. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. IV, §§ 1—7, 2-18-80; Ord. No. 2604, § 2, 11-23-92)  
Sec. 5-110. - Nuisances. 
Any animal that repeatedly violates the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and said animal may be destroyed in a humane fashion. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VI, § 5, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-111. - Pet shops and kennels—License and regulations. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of pet shop operator or kennel operator or any combination thereof without a license issued by the State of Illinois in accordance with the Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq.). 
(b)  No person shall operate a pet shop unless that pet shop is located entirely within a permanent building owned or leased for not less than one (1) year by the pet shop operator and in compliance with this Municipal Code. 
(c)  All pet shop operators and kennel operators shall: 
(1)  Comply with all sections of the Humane Care for Animals Act (510 ILCS 70). 
(2)  Have covered, leak-proof containers available for storage of waste materials before disposal to control vermin and insects. Such containers shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  Take effective control measures to prevent infestation of animals and premises with external parasites and vermin. 
(4)  Provide water from a source having sufficient pressure to properly sanitize and clean the facility and equipment. 
(5)  Provide hand washing facilities. 
(6)  All buildings shall be constructed so as to provide adequate shelter for the comfort of the animals and shall provide adequate facilities for their waste to avoid exposure to healthy and salable animals. 
(7)  Floors of buildings housing or displaying animals shall be able to be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized. Cleaning shall be performed daily, or more often if necessary, to prevent any accumulation of debris, dirt or waste. 
(8)  Cages shall be constructed of a material that is impervious to urine and water and able to withstand damage from gnawing and chewing. The cages must be cleaned and sanitized at least once daily or more often if necessary. All empty cages shall be kept clean at all times. Cages shall be of sufficient size to allow the animal to comfortably stand, sit, or lie and offer freedom of movement. 
(9)  Runs shall be constructed of material of sufficient strength and design to confine the animals. They shall be kept in good repair and condition. For new construction or remodeling, the licensee shall provide runs surfaced with concrete or other impervious material. Surface of the run shall be designed to permit the surface to be cleaned and kept free from excessive accumulation of animal waste. Provisions must be made for adequate drainage, including gutters and discharge of any fluid or content into a sewer, septic tank or filter field, and shall comply with this Code. 
(10)  Cages or aquariums for housing of small animals, birds, or fish shall provide space not less than two and one-half (2½) times the body volume of living creatures contained therein. 
(12)  Sufficient clean water and fresh food shall be offered to each animal daily as prescribed in the rules for the Federal Animal Welfare Act (9 CFR 3.5-3.7; 2006). In the case of young animals, they shall be fed more than once daily. Reptiles, fish or amphibians shall be fed and cared for in accordance with the eating patterns and environmental conditions compatible with each individual species. 
(13)  The licensee or his representative shall be present for general care and maintenance of the animals at least once daily. 
(14)  Aquariums containing fish shall be kept in a clean healthful condition. Live algae shall not be considered an unhealthful condition. Any dead fish shall be removed from aquariums. 
(15)  Adult cats shall be provided with litter pans at all times. The pans shall be cleaned and sanitized at least once daily or more often if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 3716, § 1, 9-24-12)  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
 
Sec. 5-201. - Maximum number. 
No person shall keep or permit more than three (3) dogs to be or remain in or about any single family residence, rooming house building or lot, more than one dog in any unit of a multi-family residence within the village. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 2, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-202. - Prohibited in public buildings and stores. 
It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, to be in or enter any public building, food establishment, or any store except a store for the sale of animals or dogs, anywhere within the village during the time that any of said places are open for the use by the public. This section shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons, nor police-trained dogs utilized by the police for law enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 4, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-203. - Prohibited in posted areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, or otherwise restrained, to go or be upon: 
(1)  Any school or village playground or playing field; 
(2)  Any sidewalk or walkway located within any school site or within village-owned park and recreation areas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash or otherwise restrained, to go or be upon any public property or public place located in the village if said property or place is posted "No Dogs Allowed". 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to leader dogs for the blind, nor police-trained dogs utilized by the police for law enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 5, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-204. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit a dog to use or be upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, public area, or unenclosed premises within the village except on a leash controlled by the owner or other responsible person and obedient to the owner or responsible person's commands. If any dog is found running at large in the village, this fact shall be prima facie evidence that the owner allowed it to run at large in violation of this subsection. No leash shall be longer than eight (8) feet in length. 
(b)  Any person in control of a female dog in heat shall confine such dog in an enclosed area, as to preclude other dogs from being attracted to or coming in contact with such female dog, except for breeding planned by the person in control of said female dog. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VI, §§ 2, 3, 2-18-80) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to prohibit dogs from running at large, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9.  
Sec. 5-205. - License. 
(a)  Any person owning within the village limits any dog four (4) months of age or over shall obtain a license for each dog within ten (10) days of acquiring such dog or becoming a resident of the village. Written application for such license shall be made at the village hall and shall state the name, address and telephone number of the owner and the name, breed, color, age, sex of such dog, the rabies inoculation certificate number, and any other information deemed necessary. A current rabies inoculation certificates for a dog shall be required at the time of the application for license, which shall certify that the inoculation is effective for the full current license year. No tag shall be transferred from one dog to another. The license shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. New licenses, but not a renewal of a license for the previous year, shall be issued after July 1 for a half-year fee. 
(b)  Annual licenses are renewable on January 1 of each year. There shall be no license fee for dogs used to assist the blind or governmental police dogs. 
(c)  The annual license fee to be paid shall be four dollars ($4.00) for each dog. License fees shall be one-half price as of July 1 of each year for licensing of newly acquired dogs only. 
Multi-year licenses shall be available at the price of four dollars ($4.00) per annum for dogs which have received a rabies vaccination which has a multi-year efficiency period. 
The license fee shall be waived for dogs owned by senior citizens with proof of senior status. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. III, §§ 1, 3, 2-18-80; Ord. No. 2903, § 2, 10-20-97) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to tax dogs, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9.  
Sec. 5-206. - Collar. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog required to be licensed to keep such dog within the village limits unless it wears a collar with a dog license tag for the current license year attached at all times the dog is off the premises of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. III, § 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-207. - Rabies vaccination. 
It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping a dog over four (4) months of age to have such dog vaccinated against rabies. The rabies vaccination shall be given in an amount sufficient to provide immunities from rabies for one (1) year and shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall be furnished the village clerk. If the rabies inoculation is effective for a period in excess of one (1) year, the certificate shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VII, § 1, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-208. - Dog bites. 
The police department shall cause to be investigated reports of dog bites. If a dog has bitten a person, the police department shall notify the owner of the dog and the dog shall be delivered promptly to a licensed veterinarian who shall confine or cause to be confined such dog as provided in the Animal Control Act, [Chapter 8, Section 351, et seq., Illinois Revised Statutes, 1979]. If the owner is not known, the police officer or animal control officer shall take such dog promptly to a licensed veterinarian to be confined, as provided in the Animal Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VII, § 2, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-209. - Responsibility for removal of excreta. 
The owner of every dog shall be responsible for removal and sanitary disposition of any excreta deposited by his dog anywhere in the village. When accompanying the animal outside his premises, he shall have on his person means for the removal of such excreta. Failure to have means for removal on his person shall be a violation of any owner or person in control of a dog upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, public area, or unenclosed premises within the village other than the premises of the person in control of said dog. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VI, § 4, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-210. - Unauthorized removal of collars, tags, and muzzles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, animal control officer, licensed veterinarian, or owner to remove the collar, license tag, or muzzle from any dog within the limits of the village without the consent of the owner of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. V, § 3, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-211. - Compliance with state law. 
Every owner of a dog in the village shall comply with the Animal Control Act, the provisions of which are adopted by reference, three (3) copies of said Act being on file in the office of the village clerk, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VII, § 3, 2-18-80)  
Sec. 5-212. - Miscellaneous offenses. 
No owner shall permit or suffer his dog to: 
(1)  Disturb, harass, or intimidate persons or vehicles by chasing, barking at, biting, or attempting to bite. 
(2)  Attack other animals or dogs. 
(3)  Damage property other than that of the owner. 
(4)  Bark, whine, or howl excessively. 
(Ord. No. 1892, Art. VI, § 1, 2-18-80)  
Chapter 6 - BICYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Power of municipality with reference to bicycles, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 11-208(a)8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this ordinance have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
Bicycle: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than sixteen (16) inches in diameter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 1-106. 
Licensee: Any person who procures from the village clerk a license decal for a bicycle, together with a registration card accompanying same. 
Operate: The use, putting into action or causing to function of a bicycle by a person mounted thereon. 
Vehicle: Every device upon or by which loads are transported upon a street, alley or sidewalk, propelled by mechanical, animal or human power. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 1.2, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-102. - Inspections. 
Each member of the police department is hereby authorized to inspect any bicycle at any reasonable time for the purpose of making a checkup of the license decal and license number, serial number and for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the bicycle. No person shall in any manner interfere with or hinder the making of such an inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 4.2, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-103. - Use of bicycle without consent of owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle within the village without the consent of its owner. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 4.4, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-104. - Serial numbers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the manufacturer's serial number on any bicycle. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have custody of a bicycle on which the original serial number has been destroyed, altered, removed, covered or defaced. In the event a bicycle has been purchased which does not contain a manufacturer's serial number, the police department shall stamp an original serial number on the frame of the bicycle and this number shall be considered the original number. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the village or any dealer in bicycles operating in the village to purchase, receive in trade, or otherwise acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered, without first reporting the same to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 1294, §§ 2.10, 4.5, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-105. - Sale by village. 
(a)  The chief of police shall sell in the manner provided in subsection (c) all bicycles and miscellaneous parts to bicycles which have been in the possession of the village for a period in excess of six (6) months after exhausting all efforts to ascertain the ownership of said bicycles and thereafter making a reasonable effort to return said bicycles and parts to the appropriate owner. 
(b)  The chief shall report to the village treasurer an inventory of all such bicycles and parts on hand and the date, place and manner of the proposed sale and shall thereafter deposit all funds from said sales with the village treasurer. 
(c)  All bicycles to be sold shall first be auctioned off in the form prescribed by the village manager, said auction to be with recourse and to be held at those times designated by the police chief. Notice of said auction shall be provided by posting a notice as to the time, place and subject matter of said auction indicating that the individual bicycles shall be sold to the highest bidder which notice shall be published in a newspaper published in the village at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to said auction and shall also be posted at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to said auction in the village hall. Said notice shall indicate that said sale shall occur within five (5) days from the date of said publication. Any bicycles not sold at said auction may be sold and disposed of by the chief of police without bid pursuant to the terms and conditions herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1606, §§ 1—5, 12-8-75) 
State Law reference— Sale of unclaimed property, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 141, § 141 et seq.  
Sec. 6-106. - Rental agencies. 
(a)  Bicycle rental agencies shall comply in all respects, with all the provisions of this chapter and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent. 
(b)  A bicycle rental agency shall not rent or offer to rent any bicycle unless the bicycle is licensed and the license decal is firmly attached as provided herein, and such bicycle is equipped with lamps and other equipment as required in this ordinance and by law. 
(Ord. No. 1294, §§ 4.1, 4.6, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-107. - Dealers. 
Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging bicycles in the village shall maintain for five (5) years a record containing the name, color, type and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged, and the name and address of each person buying, selling or exchanging a bicycle, which record shall be open to inspection by a representative of the police department during reasonable business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 5.0, 3-20-72)  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to regulate bicycles, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 11-208(a)8. 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Required. 
No person who resides in the village shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public way within the village unless such bicycle has been licensed and the license decal is attached thereto as prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.1, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-202. - Application and fee. 
An application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the village and shall be made to the village clerk. No fee shall be required for a bicycle license. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.2, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-203. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall not approve the issuance of a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a proper application and the approval of the chief of police the village clerk shall issue the bicycle license. 
(Ord. No. 1294, §§ 2.3, 2.4, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-204. - Attachment to bicycle. 
The police department upon issuing a license, which shall contain the name Villa Park, Illinois and a number, shall cause the same to be mounted and firmly attached to the left front axle of the bicycle for which the license is issued. Such license shall be in the form of a decal which shall be renewed every four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.6, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-205. - Inspection of bicycle. 
The chief of police shall cause the inspection of each bicycle before approving the licensing of same and shall refuse to approve a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.8, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-206. - Removal from bicycle, injury, etc. 
No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or injure a bicycle license from the bicycle, except upon transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is wrecked, junked or dismantled and is no longer used upon the streets of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1294, §§ 2.7, 4.3, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-207. - Transfer of ownership. 
Upon the sale of a bicycle, the village license shall be removed and the police department notified that the bicycle is no longer in the possession of the former owner. Any bicycle registered by a new owner shall have a new license. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.9, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-208. - Loss of license. 
The licensee shall report immediately to the police the loss or destruction of a bicycle license, and the circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction thereof. With the approval of the police, the village clerk shall issue a duplicate license decal upon payment to the village clerk by the licensee of a fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25). 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.11, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-209. - Records. 
The police department shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle licensed, the name and address of the person to whom the license was issued, and the color and serial number of the bicycle for which the license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 2.5, 3-20-72)  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATING RULES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to license bicycles, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 11-208(a)8; bicycle regulations generally, Ch. 95½, § 11-1501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-301. - Compliance. 
Every person operating a bicycle upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the village shall comply with the provisions of this article and the applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 3.1, 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-302. - Trick riding. 
No person while operating a bicycle shall indulge or engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 3.1(a), 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-303. - Parking. 
Bicycles when parked in the business district shall be parked in zones or places officially designated for that purpose. Bicycles, shall not, at any time, in any place, be indiscriminately parked along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians, or along roadways where they may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person shall move or in any manner interfere with any bicycle properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the police department and fire department may move or, in proper cases, prevent the parking of the bicycle, when, in the judgment of the policeman or fireman, his action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 3.1(i), 3-20-72)  
Sec. 6-304. - Mechanical condition. 
No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated. 
(Ord. No. 1294, § 3.1, 3-20-72)  
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3662, adopted July 25, 2011, amended Ch. 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 7 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the original codification. The amendatory history for the chapter can be found in the Code Comparative Table located at the back of this volume. 
Cross reference— Datum plane, § 2-101; zoning and planning commission, § 2-1601 et seq.; historical preservation commission, § 2-2701 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 9-201 et seq.; planning and development, Ch. 18; burglar alarms, § 19-201 et seq.; excavations, § 21-201 et seq.; encroachments on streets, § 21-501 et seq.; swimming pools, Ch. 22; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; official plan and subdivision regulations, App. B; basic zoning ordinance, App. C; fencing of excavations, App. C, § 22.8; flood control, App. D. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-101. - Community development department. 
There is hereby established a department of the village which shall be known as the "community development department." This department shall consist of the director of community development and such other assistants, deputies and employees as may from time to time be assigned thereto. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-102. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit, the community development department shall: 
(1)  Place on file with the county supervisor of assessments and the York and/or Addison Township assessors an unexecuted certificate of occupancy, said unexecuted copy to be in the same form and manner as the proposed certificate of occupancy save for the approval and execution by the community development department; 
(2)  Obtain from the person applying for said certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit a receipt to be obtained by the owner from the supervisor of assessments or township assessor indicating that said unexecuted certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit has been filed as indicated above. 
(b)  Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit, whether said certificate or permit be of an interim or permanent nature, the director of community development shall file with the county supervisor of assessments and the York and/or Addison Township assessor's office a certified copy of said certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-103. - Conflict. 
In the event of a conflict between this chapter or the codes adopted by this chapter, and any other ordinance or code of the Village of Villa Park, the more specific and more stringent provision or standard shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-104. - Saving clause. 
Nothing in this chapter or in the codes adopted hereby, shall be construed to affect any litigation, lawsuit or impending court proceeding, or any rights acquired, liability incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by the adoption of this chapter, nor shall just or legal right or remedy in law or in equity, be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-105. - Regulations for fences for excavations. 
(a)  Excavations. All excavations, not properly attended, large enough to be considered a hazard or an attractive nuisance to children shall either be filled or covered to grade or completely enclosed within a four-foot fence the same day the excavation is created, unless an extension of time has been obtained from the director of community development. 
(b)  Construction sites. All construction sites large enough to be considered a hazard or an attractive nuisance to children shall be completely enclosed within a six-foot fence that is securely anchored prior to the commencement of any construction activities, unless an extension of time has been obtained from the director of community development. The fence shall be constructed and located so as to prevent unauthorized access to the site and shall be equipped with lockable gates to be secured and locked when workers are not on the site. 
(c)  Additional restrictions. In granting any extension of time under this section the director of community development may impose such additional conditions and restrictions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(d)  Construction sites. In granting any building or other permit, or during any on-site field inspections, the director of community development or his/or her agents may require fencing as a condition of permitting construction to continue. Any fencing requirements imposed under this section shall be such as may be reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 3861 , § 2, 4-13-15)  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to regulate the strength and manner of building construction, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-4. 
 
Sec. 7-201. - Adoption of a building code. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Building Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the building code of the Village of Villa Park, in the State of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Building Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as it fully sets out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, as prescribed in section 7-202 of this article II. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-202. - Amendments to building code—Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes. 
The following sections of the code herein adopted are amended and revised by addition, insertion, deletion and change as follows: 
Chapter 1—Administration 
Section 101.1 Title (page 1, second line): Insert "the Village of Villa Park, DuPage County, State of Illinois." 
Section 105.3.2 Time limitation of application (page 4): Delete entire section and replace with: 
"An application for which no permit is issued within 90 days of filing shall be deemed expired unless such application has been diligently prosecuted. Reapplication shall include resubmittal of plans and fee. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each shall be permitted to be allowed by the building official for the application, provided justifiable cause is demonstrated." 
Add new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.3.2.1 Time Limit for Obtaining Building Permits: An applicant must take possession of a permit within 30 days after notification by the Community Development Department that his/her permit has been approved. If the applicant does not take possession of a permit within 30 days, then the permit application shall be considered null and void. The application for permit shall be destroyed after 60 days if the applicant has not reapplied." 
Insert a new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.3.3 Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to proceed with the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or construction of any building or any structural part thereof and associated electrical, plumbing and HVAC systems, or to construct or resurface a driveway or parking lot within the village unless a permit therefore shall have been first obtained from the Community Development Department. A completed permit application with all required drawings and specifications shall be submitted in its entirety prior to commencement of review. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises for which it is issued, and shall remain so posted at all times until the work is completed and approved." 
Insert a new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.3.4 By whom application is made: Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of the building or structure, or agent of either, the registered design professional or contractor employed in connection with the proposed work." 
Section 105.5 Expiration (page 4): Delete section in its entirety and add: 
"Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within 180 days after the time of commencing the work or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days or more after the work has commenced. After the building permit is issued, it shall be the obligation of the applicant to take reasonable and appropriate action so that the work, which is the subject of the permit, is commenced and completed in a diligent manner. Before such work commences or is resumed, a permit extension or renewal is required." 
Add new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.5.1 Permit extension. A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall be permitted to apply for a one-time 180-day extension, provided the permittee shows good and satisfactory reasons beyond their control that the work cannot be commenced within the 180-day period from the original permit issue date. No additional fee is required for the one time extension." 
Add new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.5.2 Permit renewal. A permit, which has expired for 180 days or less shall be permitted to be renewed provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. The renewal fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit. Permits which have been expired for greater than 180 days require a new application and payment of the full permit fee." 
Add new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.5.3 Time limit of building permit. A permit, once issued, shall be valid for a period of one year, provided work has commenced and the permit has not been suspended per Section 108.2. The Community Development Director or his/her designee may grant two extensions of time for additional periods not to exceed 180 days each, provided a fee of one-half of the original cost of the permit shall be charged at the time each extension is granted. Where, under authority of a permit or extended permit, work has been started and has been abandoned for a period of 180 days, the building permit shall become invalid." 
Add new subsection (page 4): 
"Section 105.5.4 Invalid permits. Nothing in this section shall prevent the building permit from remaining valid by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee where it can be shown that a hardship not caused in whole or in part by the applicant would occur in enforcing the strict letter of this provision. If the permit does become invalid, all rights under such permit shall thereupon terminate by limitations, and a new permit, including fees, shall be secured before such work is started or continues." 
Add new subsection (page 5): 
"Section 105.8 Hours for Construction: Noise emanating from any construction activity shall be allowed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday." 
Add new subsection (page 5): 
"Section 105.9 Maintenance of Construction Areas: All construction areas are to be maintained in a safe manner, free of excessive accumulation of building materials, clear of blowing debris and roadways and sidewalks are to be kept clear and passable." 
Section 107.1 Construction documents (page 5): Replace "two sets of construction documents" with "six sets of construction documents". 
Add new subsection (page 7): 
"Section 109.7 Waiving of Fees: Upon presentation of acceptable documentation, which may include certificates of incorporation, building permit fees for the remodeling, repair, alteration or similar improvement to buildings or structures owned by bona fide governmental agencies, public or private schools, churches and not-for-profit organizations shall be waived. Fees shall not be waived for new construction or additions, nor shall fees be waived for deposits, bonds, water and/or sewer tap fees, and inspections and/or reviews performed by outside consultants or for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Village associated with the construction permit process. The burden of proving that the organization qualifies for the waiver as set forth in this paragraph shall be the organization asserting the entitlement to a waiver." 
Section 109.8 Fee Schedule (page 7): Insert: 
"VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK 
Building Permit Requirements and Fee Schedule 
I.  Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to proceed with the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, or construction of any building or any structural part thereof and any associated electrical, plumbing and HVAC systems, or to construct or resurface a driveway or parking lot within the village unless a permit therefore shall have been first obtained from the Community Development Department. A completed permit application with all required drawings, specifications and fees must be submitted in their entirety prior to commencement of review. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises for which it is issued, and shall remain so posted at all times until the work is completed and approved. 
All plan review, engineering review, plan review consultant and fire system plan review fees shall be deposited with the Village for costs incurred prior to the commencement of review. Any costs in excess of the amount deposited shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
Exceptions: A permit shall not be required for any minor repairs as may be necessary to maintain existing parts of buildings. Roof repair or replacements constituting less than 25% of the total roof area shall not require a village building permit. 
Starting Work Without a Permit: For starting work prior to the issuance of a permit an additional fee of $100.00 or 2% of the total construction cost whichever is greater will be charged. 
II.  Plan Review: The plan review procedure shall begin within a reasonable time after the submission of all required documents. All required drawings and specifications must be submitted in their entirety prior to commencement of review. All plan review, engineering review, plan review consultant and fire system plan review fees shall be deposited with the Village for costs incurred prior to commencement of review. Any costs in excess of the amount deposited shall be paid prior to permit issuance. The time frame for review shall be determined by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee and may be subject to change based upon the number and type of permit applications submitted and awaiting review. 
Plan Review Fees: For the examination of plans, structural, site plans, zoning and administrative: 
Valuations From 	Residential 	Nonresidential and 
Multifamily Residential 
$50 to $5,000 	$30 	$35 
$5,001 to $25,000 	$45 	$55 
$25,001 to $50,000 	$80 	$105 
$50,001 to $75,000 	$100 	$120 
$75,001 to $100,000 	$125 	$160 
$100,001 to $200,000 	$210 	$255 
$200,001 to $300,000 	$380 	$480 
$300,001 to $500,000 	$470 	$575 
$500,001 and up 	$470+ $2.50 per K 	$575 + $4 per K 
Re-Review Fees/ 
Revised Plans: 	After the second review has been completed, revised or corrected plans shall be charged a fee equal to one-half of the initial plan review fee. 
 
Preliminary Plan Review: $45.00 per hour 
The above plan review fees are not refundable. 
The applicant shall pay all fees paid to outside consultants. 
III.  Submission of Building Plans and Documents: 
Architectural Plans: Application for a building permit shall require submission of three (3) sets of stamped and signed architectural plans or drawings complete with all details showing plumbing, electrical, heating, and ventilation schedules and diagrams. Plans or drawings for additions or any type of remodeling with a construction cost over $5,000 shall be required to be signed and sealed by an Illinois licensed architect or structural engineer. 
Landscaping/Lighting Plans: For all new commercial and industrial construction, landscaping and lighting plans, when required, shall be submitted with the building permit application. 
Topographical Survey: Three sets of topographical survey prepared by a registered engineer based on one-foot intervals, including surrounding adjacent buildings and other appurtenances within 20 feet of the subject property with foundation elevation and elevation of other permanent structures, using truss U.S.G.S. elevation standards plus existing grade of curb, sidewalks, and roadways shall be submitted. 
Any new construction or addition over 500 square feet, except for garages, shall submit a topographic survey. All garages and other accessory structures which require foundations must submit elevations. 
Engineering Drawings: Applications for building permits for all development shall include seven (7) sets of engineered drawings. Drawings shall be prepared by all Illinois Registered Engineer and include but not be limited to: all existing and proposed grades, proposed storm water runoff and storm water management facilities, existing and proposed curb cuts for street access, and other details as required by the Director of Community Development to determine compliance with Village regulations. 
Plat of Survey: One original and one copy of a plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be submitted. 
Plot/Site Plan: A plot plan shall also be filed or made part of the prepared plans showing size of the proposed building, distances of yards or setbacks, parking spaces, and maneuvering areas. 
Traffic Impact Study: In addition to other fees established by this chapter, all applications for development that have a traffic impact as determined by Ordinance Number 4096 , AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK, DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS ADOPTING TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY REGULATIONS, shall perform a traffic impact study or traffic assessment in compliance with that ordinance. Until such time that the Village has received the traffic impact study or traffic assessment no permits for the use or development of land shall be issued. 
IV.  Structural Fees: For all new buildings or structures or additions to existing buildings or structures: 
A.  Cubical content shall be computed on the basis of outside dimensions and from the underside of the lowest floor, including basement or bottom of footing, to the highest point of the main roof which will include all projections such as bay windows, dormers, roofed porches and breezeways but excluding the open spaces under projecting eaves: 
	Residential 	Commercial 
5,000 cubic feet or less 	$90 	$110 
5,001 cubic feet to 7,500 cubic feet 	$120 	$155 
7,501 cubic feet to 10,000 cubic feet 	$200 	$270 
10,001 cubic feet to 50,000 cubic feet 	$340 	$430 
50,001 cubic feet to 100,000 cubic feet 	$600 	$770 
100,001 cubic feet to 250,000 cubic feet 	$1,160 	$1,500 
250,001 cubic feet to 500,000 cubic feet 	$2,300 	$3,000 
500,001 cubic feet to 1,000,000 cubic feet 	$3,125 + $4 per 1,000 cubic feet in excess of 500,000 cubic feet 	$3,750 + $5 per 1,000 cubic feet in excess of 500,000 cubic feet 
Over 1,000,000 cubic feet 	$3,500 + $4 per 1,000 cubic feet in excess of 1,000,000 cubic feet 	$4,000 + $5 per 1,000 cubic feet in excess of 1,000,000 cubic feet 
Reinspection fees 	$50 	$50 
 
B. 	Plumbing Permits/Inspection Fees: 	Residential 	Commercial 
	1. 	First Fixture 	$65 	$80 
		Each additional 	$10 	$15 
		Water heater 	$30 	$40 
		Gas meter and piping 	$25 	$30 
		Alteration and remodeling 	$70 	$80 
	2. 	Plumbing Inspection Fees 	$50 	$50 
C. 	Heating and Ventilating System: 
	1. 	Valuation from: 		
		$50 to $1,000 	$65 	$100 
		$1,001 to $2,500 	$75 	$125 
		$2,501 to $7,500 	$130 	$155 
		$7,501 to $15,000 	$150 	$195 
		Over $15,000.00 	$150 + $5 per $1,000 over $15,000 	$195 + $6.50 per $1,000 over $15,000 
	2. 	Heating Inspection (per inspection) 	$50 	$50 
D. 	Electrical: Inspection fees for electrical services and sub-feeder shall be as follows: 
	100 ampere or less 	$75 	$100 
	200 ampere or less 	$90 	$115 
	400 ampere or less 	$100 	$135 
	600 ampere or less 	$125 	$165 
	800 ampere or less 	$135 	$175 
	1,200 ampere or less 	$150 	$200 
	>1,200 ampere 	$150 for the first 1,200 amperes + $10 per each 100 amperes or fraction over 1,200 amperes 	$200 for the first 1,200 amperes + $15 per each 100 amperes or fraction over 1,200 amperes 
	In addition to the above service and sub-feeder fees, the following circuit fees will be added: 
	1 to 5 circuits 	$65 	$90 
	6 to 10 circuits 	$95 	$115 
	11 to 15 circuits 	$120 	$165 
	16 circuits or over 	$120 + $5 per circuit over 15 	$165 + $8 per circuit over 15 
	The above fees are for a 2-wire, 120 volt branch circuit. A 2-wire, 240 volt, single phase circuit or a 3-wire, 120/240 single phase circuit shall be charged a fee of 2 circuits, and a 120/208 volt 3 phase, 4-wire circuit shall be charged a fee of 3 circuits. For inspections of a 30 to 60 ampere circuit the inspection fee shall be double the amount of the same number of 15 or 20 ampere circuits. 
	Misc. Electrical Permit Fees 
	1. 	Conversion of single-family residences such as garages, dormers, etc., fee shall be computed on a circuit count basis. (See circuit count schedule.) 		
	2. 	Electric heat conversion inspection fee shall be a minimum of $50 and shall be based on a circuit count. 		
	3. 	Fees for central air conditioner installation shall be: 		
		Residential (no circuit charge) 	$50 	
		Multifamily commercial (plus circuit charge) 
		5 tons or less (per unit) 	$75 	
		Over 5 tons (per unit) 	$100 	
	4. 	Garage electrical inspection 	$50 	
	5. 	For inspections of each motor or current consuming device other than lighting fixtures, the inspection fee shall be as follows: 		
		One motor or current consuming device 	$25 	$25 
		Additional motor or current devices 	$10 	$10 
	6. 	Inspection fees for the original installation of commercial or private street lighting or parking lot lighting shall be at the rate of $35 for each lamp post, light standard or festoon. 	$35/lamp post, light standard or festoon 	$35/lamp post, light standard 
	7. 	Electrical inspection (per inspection) 	$50 	$50 
E. 	Liquid Storage Tank Installation, Removal and Inspection: 
	1,000 gallons capacity or over (per tank) 	$300 	$300 
	Under 1,000 gallon capacity (per tank) 	$150 	$150 
	Outside portable or temporary LPG storage 	$75 	$75 
	Flammable liquid dispenser installation per unit nozzle 	$75 	$75 
	Vapor recovery system 	$100 	$100 
F. 	Demolition Permit: 		
	Accessory building 	$75 	$75 
	Single-family building 	$750 	
	Single-family interior demolition 	$50 	
	Multifamily building 	$750 	
		Interior demo 0—5,000 cubic feet 	$50 	
		Interior demo 5,001 or more cu. ft. 	$75 	
	Commercial building 		$750 
		Interior demo 0—5,000 cubic feet 		$50 
		Interior demo 5,001 or more cubic feet 		$75 
G. 	Building Moving Permits: 	$100 	$100 
H. 	Elevator, Escalators, Dumbwaiter, Docklift and Wheelchair Lift: 
	Plan review and initial inspection 	$100 	$100 	
	Inspection, semi-annual 	$50 	$50 	
	Semi-annual reinspection 	$30 	$30 	
	Temporary construction towers 	$50 	$50 	
I. 	Signs: 	
	1. 	40 square feet or less 	N/A 	$75 	
		Over 40 square feet 	N/A 	$75 + $2/sf over 40 sf 	
	2. 	Face change 	N/A 	$75 	
	3. 	Temporary sign 	N/A 	$50 	
	4. 	Electrical 	N/A 	$50 	
J. 	Fire Protection: 	
	Sprinkler per riser 	$100 	$100 	
	Sprinkler plan review and inspections/internal reviews (per riser) 	$100 	$100 	
	New sprinkler system—Sprinkler head charge: 			
		1 to 100 heads 	$100 	$100 	
		101 to 200 heads 	$150 	$150 	
		201 to 300 heads 	$200 	$200 	
		301 to 500 heads 	$250 	$250 	
		More than 500 heads 	$300 + $0.25/over 500 	$300 + $0.25/over 500 	
	Existing sprinkler system—Sprinkler head charge 			
		1 to 100 heads 	$100 	$100 	
		101 to 200 heads 	$150 	$150 	
		201 to 300 heads 	$200 	$200 	
		301 to 500 heads 	$250 	$250 	
		More than 500 heads 	$300 + $0.25/over 500 	$300 + $0.25/over 500 	
	Life safety review 	$75 minimum or $0.01/sf gross, whichever is greater 	$75 minimum or $0.01/sf gross, whichever is greater 	
	Stand pipe per riser 	$75 	$75 	
	Fire pump 	$200 	$200 	
	Alarm system 	$100 	$100 	
	Plus accessory devices 	$2.50 	$2.50 	
	Hood and duct system 	$75 	$75 	
	Halon system 	$75 	$75 	
	Minimum permit fee 	$75 	$75 	
K. 	Miscellaneous: 	
	Accessory buildings (not garages) 	$35 		
	Deck and porch 	$60 		
	Driveway, new and reconstruction 			
	Driveway and approach — and includes up to 100 square feet of widening; 2 inspections are included; no additional right-of-way permit fee pursuant to section 13-1104 is required 	$89.00 	Not Applicable 	
					
	Driveway and approach with widening over 100 square feet 	$89.00 plus $50.00 Fill permit is required 	Not applicable 	
					
	Driveway or approach in special management area 	$89.00 plus $100.00 stormwater certification 	Not applicable 	
					
	Commercial driveway, new and reconstruction 	Not applicable 	$125.00 * 	
					
	Commercial driveway resurface 	Not applicable 	$75.00 * 	
	Commercial driveway, approach only 	Not applicable 	$60.00 * 	
	* Additional permit fee for right-of-way permit, fill permit or stormwater certification will apply. 	
	Fence (per foot) ($30.00 min.) 	$30 or $0.30/lineal foot, whichever is greater 		
	Fireplace and/or chimney 	$60 		
	Garage, single-family res. (detached) 	$60 		
	Multifamily (detached) per space ($50.00 min.) 	$15 		
	Garage, electric 	$50 		
	Gutters/facia/soffit 	$40 		
	Lawn sprinkler, plumbing 	$60 		
	Low voltage security systems 	$60 		
	Patios 	$50 		
	Parking lot, where engineering plans not required 	$100 		
	Roof covering and recovering, residential (principal structure) 	$60 		
	Roof covering and recovering, residential (accessory structure) 	$20 		
	Roof covering and recovering, nonresidential (principal structure) 		$75 	
	Roof covering and recovering, nonresidential (accessory structure) 		$30 	
	Sewer repair and new 	$75 		
	Siding (principal structure) 	$40 	$60 	
	Siding (accessory structure) 	$20 	$40 	
	Sidewalk, public 	$60 		
	Sidewalk, private (including service walks) 	$60 		
	Stoops 	$30 		
	Swimming pool, private 			
		Above ground 	$60 		
		In ground 	$125 		
		Electric 	$30 		
		Plumbing 	$30 		
		Gas 	$30 		
		Plan review 	Based on cost of construction listed in plan review fees above 		
	Windows 	$50 		
	Costs in dollars for remodeling, alterations and repairs (for anything requiring a permit, but not covered elsewhere in this fee schedule: 			
		Under $2,500 	$50 	$50 	
		$2,501 to $5,000 	$75 	$75 	
		$5,001 to $10,000 	$100 	$100 	
		Over $10,000 	$100 + $5/additional $1,000 over $10,000 	$100 + $5/additional $1,000 over $10,000 	
L. 	Starting Work Without a Permit: For starting work prior to the issuance of a permit, an additional fee of $100 or 2 percent of the total construction cost (whichever is greater) will be charged. 	
M. 	Reinspection Fee: Where a reinspection is required to determine compliance with the related codes, the following fee will be required to be paid in advance: $50.00 for each reinspection by village employees; if the reinspection is performed by an outside engineering consultant, the actual cost to the village. 	
N. 	Occupancy Certificate: 		
	Residential: 		
		New construction 	$50 	
		Additions 	$25 	
	Nonresidential: 		
		Under 5,000 sq. ft. 	$75 	
		5,001—10,000 sq. ft. 	$100 	
		Over 10,000 sq. ft. 	$100 plus $2.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. over 10,000 sq. ft. 	
O. 	Bonds, Insurance, Restoration Deposits, Registrations and License Requirements: 	
 
VILLA PARK CASH RESTORATION DEPOSIT 
(based on type of construction) 
1.  One- and two-family residence: 
a.  New construction: $500 
b.  Remodeling, addition or both: $250 
c.  Garages: $150 
2.  Commercial, industrial, multiple-family: 
a.  New construction: $1,500 
b.  Remodeling/addition to existing building: $750 
The restoration deposit will be refunded after a final inspection has been made and the building inspector has approved the construction work. 
SURETY BOND 
All contractors shall execute and file a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) surety bond with the community development department in the form approved by the Village of Villa Park for surety bonds. 
INSURANCE 
For construction value less than $25,000: 
All contractors listed on the building permit application shall show proof of public liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) and property damage limited to not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
For construction value over $25,000: 
All contractors listed on the building permit shall show proof of public liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) and property damage insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or 100% of the construction value whichever is greater. 
All certificates of insurance shall name the Village of Villa Park as certificate holder as well as additional non-contributory insured. 
REGISTRATION 
All construction involving electricity and plumbing, exclusive of normal maintenance, requires licensed contractors. 
Plumbers must have a valid state registration. 
Electrical contractors must have a valid license from an Illinois municipality. Roofers must have a valid state registration. 
All general contractors must be registered in the Village of Villa Park. The fee for such registration is seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Homeowners wishing to be the general contractor must be registered as a general contractor and submit all required documents. 
Section 113.0 Means of Appeal (page 8): Delete section in its entirety and replace with: 
"a) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Code or any code, rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto (the "Petitioner"), shall have the right to request, and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Director of Community Development (the "Director") of the Village of Villa Park, provided that such person shall file in the office of Community Development a notice, in writing, requesting such a hearing and containing a statement of the grounds therefore within ten (10) business days after the notice was served. The Director shall issue a written decision with regard to such appeal within twenty (20) business days of the hearing. 
b) The Petitioner shall have the right to request, and shall be granted, a hearing before the Village Manager of the Village of Villa Park with regard to the Director's decision, provided that the Petitioner shall file in the office of the Village Manager a notice, in writing, requesting such a hearing and containing a statement of the grounds therefore within ten (10) business days after the date of the Director's decision. The Village Manager shall issue a written decision with regard to such appeal within twenty (20) business days of the hearing. 
c) The Petitioner shall have the right to request, and shall be granted, a hearing before the Village Board of the Village of Villa Park with regard to the Village Manager's decision, provided that the Petitioner shall file in the office of the Village Clerk a notice, in writing, requesting such a hearing and containing a statement of the grounds therefore within ten (10) business days after the date of the Village Manager's decision. The Village Board shall issue a written decision with regard to such within twenty (20) business days of the hearing." 
Section 115.0 Stop Work Order. 
115.2 (page 9): Delete the entire paragraph and replace with the following: 
" 115.2 Issuance: Upon notice from the code official that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work; and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. 
115.3 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine or not less than "seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)." 
Chapter 3—Use or Occupancy 
Section 310.2 Definitions. (page 35 boarding house): Delete "with or without meals"; insert "without individual kitchen facilities." 
Chapter 4—Special Use and Occupancy 
Section 406.1.4—Separation (page 45, #1, third line): Delete "½ inch"; insert " 5/8 inch." 
Section 406.1.6 (page 45): Insert the following section: " Doorsills : The sills of all door openings between private garages and interior spaces shall be raised not less then 6 inches above the garage floor." 
Chapter 9—Fire Protection Systems 
Section 901.6 Supervision 
Section 901.6.1 Supervisory service—Automatic sprinkler systems. Delete the entire section and replace with: 
"All automatic fire sprinkler and suppression systems required by any section of this code shall be supervised by the remote station located at DuComm, 600 Wall Street, Glendale Heights, Illinois, 60137. 
Exception: 
a. No supervising station is required for automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family dwellings. 
901.6.1.1 All automatic fire suppression systems installed but not required by any section of this code shall be supervised by a central-station system, proprietary system, remote-station system or supervisory service that will cause the actuation of an audible appliance at a constantly attended location, in accordance with NFPA 72 listed in chapter 35. 
Exceptions: 
a. Underground gate valves with roadway boxes. 
b. Halogenated extinguishing systems that are not an integral part of a required automatic fire suppression system. ;ob1; c. Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems that are not an integral part of a required automatic fire suppression system." 
Section 901.6.2 Fire alarm systems. Delete entire section; replace with the following: 
"All required fire alarm systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be supervised by the remote station located at DuComm, 600 Wall Street, Glendale Heights, Illinois, 60137. 
Exceptions: ;ob1; a. Supervisory service is not required for automatic sprinkler systems or automatic fire detection systems in one- and two-family dwellings. 
901.6.2.1 All other automatic fire alarm systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be supervised by a central-station system, proprietary system, remote-station system or supervisory service that will cause the actuation of an audible appliance at a constantly attended location, in accordance with NFPA 72 listed in chapter 35." 
Section 903.0—Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
Section 903.2 Where required: Delete sections 903.2 through 903.2.10 and insert the following: 
All new buildings and structures shall be provided with an approved fire sprinkler system. Exception: Detached structures, which comply with the following, do not require automatic fire sprinklers: 
A.  1.  Less than or equal to eight hundred sixty-four (864) square feet in area, and 
2.  Single story, and 
3.  Not used as a dwelling or sleeping, and 
4.  Not an High Hazard Group, and 
5.  Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage, and 
6.  No basements; or 
B.  A single-family dwelling. 
903.2.1 Additions and alterations: An approved automatic fire suppression system shall be installed and maintained in all buildings and structures added to or altered according to the following: 
1. For existing buildings and structures, any modifications and/or additions that result in the total building area being increased by 1,500 square feet or more in area over a three-year period. 
903.2.2 Change of Use Group: An approved automatic fire suppression system shall be installed and maintained in existing buildings. When the Use Group of the existing building or structure is changed to a Use Group with a higher relative hazard (lower number) rating according to table 903.2.2. 
Table 903.2.2 
Relative Hazard 	Use Group 
1 (Highest Hazard) 	H 
2 	I-2, I-3 
3 	A, E, I-1, M, R-1, R-2 
4 	B, F-1, R-3, R-4, S-1 
5 (Lowest Hazard) 	F-2, S-2, U" 
 
  
Section 906.0—Fire Sprinkler Systems 
Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R systems. (page 187): Delete entire section and add the following: 
"NFPA 13R systems: In residential building four stories or less in height, systems designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13R listed in Chapter 35 shall be permitted in Use Group R fire areas. Sprinklers shall be required in all bathrooms located within individual dwelling units or guestrooms in Use Groups R-1, R-2 and Use Group R residential care facilities. 
Section 903.3.1.3 is deleted. 
Add the following section 903.3.7: 
" 903.3.7-Fire Hose Valves: In all warehouse and/or storage areas, 2½" fire hose valves with a 1½" reducer to a 1½" male connection shall be provided. The valves shall be located at each door entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area. Additional 2½" fire hose valves shall be provided so that no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is situated more than 120 feet travel distance to a 2½" fire hose valve. All obstructions and/or racks shall be shown on the fire suppression system drawings. The fire hose valve(s) system piping shall be: 
a) A separate riser piping system. 
b) Hydraulically calculated for a minimum of 250 gallons per minute flow to the most hydraulically remote fire hose valve. 
c) Where system pressures exceed 100 PSI, a listed and approved pressure-reducing field-adjustable type valve(s) shall be provided." 
Add the following section 903.3.8: 
" 903.3.8 Design: 
A 10% or 5 PSI safety factor, whichever is greater, shall be provided in the fire protection system hydraulic calculations. The system demand shall be at least 5 PSI below the seasonal low water flow test supply." 
Section 903.6 Horn strobe. Add the following: 
"A horn strobe shall be installed above the fire department connection, which shall be activated upon a water flow." 
Section 905.0—Standpipe Systems 
Section 905.3.1 Height. Amend the subsection to read as follows: 
"Standpipe systems shall be installed throughout all buildings that are more than 2 stories above grade or have more than 1 story below grade." 
Section 907.0—Fire Alarm and Detection Systems 
Section 907.2.1 Group A. Delete the entire section and add: 
" 907.2.1 Group A: An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies of Group A ." 
Section 907.2.3 Group E. Delete the entire section and add: 
" 907.2.3 Group E: An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies of Group E." 
Section 907.2.8 Group R-1. Delete the entire section and insert and add: 
" 907.2.9 Group R-1: An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group R-1." 
Section 907.2.9 Group R-2. Delete the entire section and insert and add: 
" 907.2.9 Group R-2: An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group R-2." 
Section 907.6.3 Zones. Amend to read as follows: 
"Each floor shall be zoned separately and a zone shall not exceed 20,000 square feet (1,860 m 2 ). The length of any zone shall not exceed 300 feet (91.5 meters) in any direction. A zoning indicator panel and the associated controls shall be provided in an approved location. The visual zone indication shall lock in until the system is reset and shall not be cancelled by the operation of an audible alarm-silencing switch. All alarm devices, including smoke detectors, heat detectors, flame detectors, manual fire alarm boxes, automatic sprinkler or standpipe water flow devices, other approved types of automatic fire detection devices and suppression and alarm system supervisory devices in any building greater than 1 story in height, including any story or level below grade, or 2,500 square feet gross area shall be of the addressable type. All devices shall indicate their type, location and status on the indicator panel(s). Zoning nomenclature shall be with the approval of the fire department. 
Exceptions: 
1. Automatic Sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 listed in Chapter 35." 
Add the following section: 
" 907.6.3.3 Multi-Tenant Spaces: In any multi-tenant building, each individual tenant space shall be zoned. Each zone shall be displayed on the indicator panel." 
Section 915.0—Yard Hydrants 
Insert new section: 
" 915.01 Fire hydrants: Fire hydrants installed on private property shall be provided around the perimeter of the building in 300 foot increments. Hydrants shall be located at least 40 feet but no greater than 100 feet from each fire department connection and piped from the fire suppression side of the public water supply." 
Section 919—Automatic Fire Detection Systems 
Section 919.4.4 Use Group R-1. Amend to read: "R-1 and R-2" (line 3); insert after "Group R-1"; "and R-2". 
Chapter 10—Means of Egress 
Section 1001.0—General 
Section 1001.1 Scope. (page 217): Delete the second line and insert the following: 
"The provisions of this chapter and NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2000 Edition, with local amendments shall control the design, construction and arrangement of building elements required to provide a reasonably safe means of egress from all structures. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this chapter and NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2000 Edition, with local amendments, the code with the more stringent standard shall prevail." 
Section 1021.2—Stories with One Exit 
Table 1021.2 Single Exits. (page 1243): Delete note c for Group R-2. 
Section 1006.5—Means of Egress Lighting 
Section 1006.5 Power source. (page 221): Insert the following: 
"Means of egress lighting in all buildings or portions of buildings serving rooms or spaces with an occupant load greater than 20 shall be connected to an emergency electrical system that complies with Section 2702.0 to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than 1 hour in case of emergency or primary power loss." 
Chapter 30—Elevators and Conveying Systems 
Section 3001.2. Add the following: 
"Referenced Standards to be as stringent and comply with current Illinois Elevator Safety Act and its Rules. For residential conveyance application, the Act does not apply, however, the IBC code shall for new installation, permits, final acceptance. For applications not covered by the Illinois Elevator Safety Act, those conveyance applications shall be covered under the IBC code by the AHJ for new installation, permits, final acceptance, periodic inspections and testing, unsafe conditions, power to seal equipment, put conveyance out of service, and certificate compliance as well as owner/agent responsibility for contractor, maintenance, accident/injury responsibility." 
Section 3001.4. Change to read as follows: 
"Change in Use-Elevator to comply with ASME A17.1 2007 Sec. 8.7 alterations". 
Section 3002.4. Change to read as follows: 
"In all buildings at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors in buildings. 
Such elevator cars shall be of such size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 80-inch (610 mm to 2,088 mm) ambulance stretcher in the horizontal open position and shall be identified by the International Symbol for emergency medical services (Star of Life). 
The symbol shall not be less than 3x3 inches high and wide (76 mm x 76 mm) and shall be placed inside on both sides of the main lobby hoist way frame. 
This applies to all buildings with an elevator." 
Section 3003.2. Add the following: "and NFPA 72." 
Section 3005.1.1. Add the following: 
"Miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment: All miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment shall be subjected to tests and inspections as required by the AHJ to ensure safe operation. 
As per changes, a full load governor and full load safety test to be done after installation of hoist, a major alteration, and a jump of the hoist tower travel." 
Section 3005.3. Add the following: "see section 3005.4." 
Section 3006.1. Add the following: 
"This means is not to be used as a passage way through the machine room to other areas of the building or roof." 
Section 3006.4. Delete exception #2. 
Add new section: 
" Section 3009.0 Certificate of Compliance 
Section 3009.1 (Acceptable as written) Certificate of Compliance: The operation of all equipment governed by the provisions of this chapter and hereafter installed, relocated or altered shall be unlawful by persons other than the installer until such equipment has been inspected and tested as herein required and a final certificate of compliance has been issued by the code official. 
Section 3009.2 (Acceptable as written) Posting Certificates of Compliance: The owner or lessee shall post the current-issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous place inside the elevator." 
Chapter 35—Referenced Standards 
Amend the following NFPA Standard reference numbers (pages 587—606): 
Listed 
NFPA 
Standard 
Reference 
Number 	Title 	Amend to this NFPA 
Standard 
Reference 
Number 	Title 
11-05 	Low Expansion Foam Systems 	11-10 	Low Expansion Foam Systems 
	Medium and High Expansion Foam Systems 	11A-99 	Installation of Sprinkler Systems 
13D-07 	Installation of Sprinklers in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 	13D-10 	Installation of Sprinklers in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 
13R-07 	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up to and Including Four Stories in Height 	13R-10 	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up to and Including Four Stories in Height 
14-07 	Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems 	14-10 	Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems 
17-02 	Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems 	17-09 	Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems 
17A-02 	Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems 	17A-09 	Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems 
20-07 	Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection 	20-10 	Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection 
70-08 	National Electric Code 	70-05 	National Electric Code 
72-07 	National Fire Alarm Code 	72-10 	National Fire Alarm Code 
80-07 	Fire Doors and Windows 	80-10 	Fire Doors and Windows 
105-07 	Standard for the Installation of Smoke Door Assemblies 	105-10 	Standard for the Installation of Smoke Door Assemblies 
110-05 	Emergency and Standby Power Systems 	110-10 	Emergency and Standby Power Systems 
111-05 	Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems 	111-10 	Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems 
120-04 	Coal Preparation Plants 	120-10 	Coal Preparation Plants 
170-06 	Standard for Fire Safety and Emergency Symbols 	170-09 	Standard for Fire Safety and Emergency Symbols 
211-06 	Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances 	211-10 	Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances 
252-03 	Methods of Fire Tests of Door Assemblies 	252-08 	Methods of Fire Tests of Door Assemblies 
259-03 	Test Method for the Potential Heat of Building Materials 	259-08 	Test Method for the Potential Heat of Building Materials 
484-06 	Combustible Metals 	484-09 	Combustible Metals 
701-04 	Methods of Fire Tests for Flame-Resistant Textiles 	701-10 	Methods of Fire Tests for Flame-Resistant Textiles 
 
  
Add the following: 
"The appendices of all referenced NFPA standards are to be considered part of each standard. As such, all appendices are to be considered mandatory requirements." 
Delete the following references: 
International Plumbing Code 
International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
Appendix: Adopt the following appendices: A, F, H-105, H-106, I, K. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 3763, §§ 5, 6, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 3974 , § 1, 5-22-17; Ord. No. 4096 , § 3, 8-12-19)  
Sec. 7-203. - Sections and chapters not adopted. 
The following chapters and sections of the International Building Code, 2009 Edition, have not been adopted: 
(1)  Section 113.0—Means of Appeal; 
(2)  Section 903.3.5.1.1—Limited Area Sprinkler Systems; 
(3)  Chapter 27—Electric Wiring, Equipment and Systems; 
(4)  Chapter 28—Mechanical Systems; 
(5)  Chapter 29—Plumbing System; 
(6)  Chapter 31—Special Construction; 
(7)  Chapter 32—Construction in the Public Right-of-Way. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-203.1. - Fees in connection with certain alterations, repairs or improvements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply only to the provisions of this section: 
Check valve: A manual or automatic device intended to prevent the flow of sanitary sewerage from a public sanitary sewer main into a structure by way of a building drain. 
Overhead sewer: A plumbing system within a structure carrying sanitary sewerage that contains no gravity-fed building drains below grade. 
Underground sewer: A plumbing system within a structure carrying sanitary sewerage that contains gravity-fed building drains below grade. 
(b)  Eligibility. To be eligible for a waiver of fees for the installation of an overhead sewer in lieu of an underground sewer or for the installation of check valve(s) upon application for a permit, the department of public works will first ascertain if the structure has had at least one (1) verifiable sanitary sewer backup and advise the community development department in writing. Only if the structure has had at least one (1) verifiable sanitary sewer backup will the permit fees be waived. 
(c)  Types of work. The permit fees and inspection fees designated herein will be waived for the following types of work: 
(1)  Installation of check valve(s); 
(2)  Installation of overhead sewer and/or removal of underground sewer; 
(3)  Removal or disconnection of any of the items or articles specified in subsections 25-431(b)(1) through (14) provided that the same was lawfully installed; 
(4)  Any work or improvements required to be done in connection with the foregoing types of work. 
(d)  Specific sections. The permit and inspection fees imposed by the following sections of the Municipal Code are waived for the types of improvements specified in subparagraph (c) provided that the work is eligible in accordance with subparagraph (b): 
(1)  Section 7-202 of Chapter 7: Article II, Article III, Article IV, Article VI and Article XVII. 
(2)  Section 25-421 of Chapter 25. 
(3)  Section 25-428 of Chapter 25. 
(e)  Proper application. The waiver of permit and inspection fees provided herein shall not relieve any person from making proper application to the village or to any other proper governmental agency for all necessary permits for the improvements or work. Any cash bonds required shall be deposited with the village notwithstanding the waiver of permit fees provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-204. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the International Building Code, 2009 Edition, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Villa Park Department of Community Development, its director and his/her designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to regulate the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2; power of municipality to prevent the dangerous construction, installation and condition of electrical wiring, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-2. 
 
Sec. 7-301. - National Electrical Code—Adoption. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as "National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition," as published and copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association, be and the same is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the Village of Villa Park, State of Illinois; for the regulation of the installation, alteration and use of electrical conductors, electric equipment and other equipment installed in buildings, structures, and other premises for the utilization of electricity for light, heat or power and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, as prescribed in section 7-302 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-302. - Same—Deletions and modifications. 
(a)  Articles repealed. The following articles of the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, are hereby repealed: 
(1)  Article 334—Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable; 
(2)  Article 330—Metal-Clad Cable; 
(3)  Article 382—Nonmetallic Extensions; 
(4)  Article 398—Open Wiring on Insulators; 
(5)  Article 394—Concealed Knob-and-Tube Wiring. 
(b)  Articles modified. The following articles of the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, are hereby modified: 
(1)  Article 110-14—Electrical Connections. 
a.  The use of device terminals for splicing is prohibited. 
b.  The use of stab-type screwless pressure terminals of the conductor push-in type is strictly prohibited. 
(2)  Article 110.26(E)—Headroom. Amended by deleting the "Exception." 
(3)  Article 210.6—Branch Circuit Voltage Limitations (C) 277 volts to ground is amended by adding: "Fixtures shall be mounted not less than 8 feet above the finished floor. 
Wall switching shall not exceed 150 volts to ground. All switching mechanisms, including wiring shall be enclosed in conduit. All wall switching shall be installed only in one of the following methods: Low voltage relay switches, panel board switches, SWD rated circuit breakers or approved 277 volt switching mechanisms." 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Article 210.8—Ground-Fault Circuit—Interrupter Protection for Personnel. (A) Dwellings units is amended by adding the following: "No wiring shall be installed that will reduce the effectiveness of the ground-fault interrupter." 
(6)  Article 210.19—Conductors—Minimum Ampacity and Size (A)(1) General, is amended by adding the following: "All branch circuits shall be wired with copper conductors only." 
(7)  Article 210.70—Lighting Outlets Required. Amended by changing the first sentence to read: "Lighting outlets shall be installed where specified in (A) through (C) below", and adding a subsection (D) as follows: "(D) Residential. In all habitable rooms with more than one entrance, at least one lighting outlet shall be switched from at least two of the entrances. In all hallways, at least one lighting outlet shall be switched from the entrances at each end of the hallway when the length is 15 feet or longer." 
(8)  Article 230.1. Amended by adding the following: "Whenever a service is revised or replaced all pertinent articles of the then enforced version of the National Electrical Code and this Ordinance shall apply. 
In residential occupancies, the laundry circuit required by Article 210.11(C)(2) of the 2005 National Electrical Code shall be provided." 
(9)  Article 230.42—Size and Rating (A) General. Amended by adding the following: "Service conductors shall be all copper for 200 ampere services or less and 100 ampere service require No. 3 copper conductors, 200 ampere service requires 3/0 copper conductors." 
(10)  Article 230.43—Wiring Methods for 600 Volts, Nominal or Less. Amended by deleting the following: "(1) Open Wiring on insulators; (7) Service-entrance cables; (13) Type MC cable; (14) Mineral-insulated, metal-sheathed cable; (15) Flexible metal conduit not over 6 feet (1.83) long between raceway and service equipment, with equipment bonding jumper routed with the flexible metal conduit according to provisions of Section 250-79(A), (C), (D) and (F); and (16) Liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit." 
(11)  Article 230.70—General. (A) Location. Amended to read as follows: "The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either outside of a building or structure, inside nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors, in any case within five (5) feet of conduit and conductor entrance to the building." 
(12)  Article 230.71(A) Maximum Number of Disconnects. Amended by adding to this section the following: "It is the intent of this Section to require no more than six (6) operations of switches, buttons, breakers, etc. to disconnect all power entering the service location. 
Each service more than 250 volts to ground and in excess of 800 AMPS shall have a single main to open all ungrounded conductors." 
(13)  Article 250.62—Material. Grounding Electrode Conductor. Amended by deleting the words: "Aluminum, or copper-clad aluminum" from the first sentence. 
(14)  Article 250.64. Delete paragraph (A) Grounding Electrode Conductor. Deleted in its entirety and rewritten as follows: "The grounding electrode conductor for the service shall terminate at the street side of the domestic water service and shall be protected by rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, or approved ground conductor cable. The grounding electrode conductor shall be copper and the water meter shall be provided with an adequate jumper." 
(15)  Article 310.5—Minimum Size Conductors. Amended by adding: "Except in residential uses, conductors used in systems exceeding 50 volts shall be #12 or larger." 
(16)  Article 310.14—Aluminum Conductor Material. Amended by deleting the text of the article in its entirety and inserting the words: "All conductors #2000 AWG and smaller shall be copper." 
(17)  Article 320—Armored Cable. Armored cable, as provided in Article 320, shall not be permitted to be used as an initial installation, but only upon reworking and remodeling and then only if installed in existing enclosed walls or inaccessible ceilings. 
(18)  Article 338—Service-Entrance Cable. Service-entrance cable as provided in Article 338, shall be permitted only by special permission of the Director of Community Development of the Village of Villa Park and then only for good cause shown. 
(19)  Article 340.10—Uses Permitted. Amended by deleting subsection 340.10 in its entirety. 
(20)  Article 358.10(B) Use. Amended by deleting the following paragraph: "Ferrous or nonferrous electrical metallic tubing, elbows, couplings, and fittings shall be permitted to be installed in concrete, in direct contact with the earth, or in areas subject to severe corrosive influences, when protected by corrosion protection and judged suitable for the condition." 
(FPS): See Section 300.6 for protection against corrosion. 
(21)  Article 358.42—Couplings and Connectors. Amended by adding the words: "Only set-screw type fittings and compression type fittings shall be installed." 
(22)  Article 410.8—Fixtures in Clothes Closets. (A) Definition. Storage Space. Amended by adding the following: "In residential occupancies, all clothes closets over six (6) square feet shall have an approved light fixture installed." 
(c)  Additions for grounding of service. The following provisions shall control the grounding of services and shall supersede any conflicting provisions in the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition: 
(1)  When water is supplied by the village, the service grounding conductor shall be connected to the water pipe on the supply side of the meter unless otherwise approved by the director of community development of the Village of Villa Park. 
(2)  The grounding conductor shall be installed in EMT or rigid conduit. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-303. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Village of Villa Park department of community development, its director, and his or her designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-304. - Fees. 
The fees for all permits for electrical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections, shall be as prescribed by the Village of Villa Park in section 7-201 et seq., as originally adopted and subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-305. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity which disobeys, violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this article or the provisions thereof shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, punishable by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day or portion thereof a violation or noncompliance continues or exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided herein, the director of community development may seek to enforce the provisions of this article in any court of competent jurisdiction by injunctive or other relief. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-401. - Adoption of a mechanical code. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Mechanical Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and the same is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the Village of Villa Park, State of Illinois; for the control of mechanical systems of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said International Mechanical Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-402 of this article IV. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to adopt technical codes by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2.  
Sec. 7-402. - Amendments of mechanical code; additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
Article 1—Administration 
Section 101.1. Title. (page 1, line 2): Insert: "The Village of Villa Park." 
Section 106.5.2. Fee Schedule. (page 4): Delete in its entirety and insert: "The fees for all permits for mechanical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be as prescribed in Section 7-202 of Chapter 7 of the Villa Park Municipal Code." 
Section 108.5. Stop Work Orders. (page 6, line 3): Following the words "unsafe condition" delete remainder, insert "shall be guilty of a violation of this code and shall be liable to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)." 
Insert new section (page 7): 
" Section 108.8: Enforcement. The provisions of this article and The International Mechanical Code, 2009 Edition, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Village Department of Community Development, its Director and his or her designee(s)." 
Section 109. Means of Appeal. (page 7): Delete in its entirety. See Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
Delete the following references in Chapter 15: International Plumbing Code. 
Appendix: Adopt the following appendices: A. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 7-403. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the International Mechanical Code, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the village department of community development, its director, and his or her designee(s). 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-404. - Fees. 
The fees for all permits for mechanical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be prescribed in section 7-202 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-405. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 7-405, entitled "Violation; penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 3662, § 2, adopted July 25, 2011.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-501. - Adoption of a plumbing code. 
The Illinois Plumbing Code, as amended and published by the Illinois Department of Public Health (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890), is adopted and incorporated by reference as the rules and regulations governing the design and installation of new plumbing or plumbing systems and the alteration of plumbing systems including new construction and any remodeling or renovation that alters, renovates or replaces existing plumbing or plumbing systems except as hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3952 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 7-502. - Amendments to plumbing code; additions, insertions and changes. 
A.  WaterSense Requirements. Pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 892) all new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after June 27, 2016 shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program) when such labeled fixtures are available. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3952 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 7-503. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the Village's Plumbing Inspector. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3952 , § 1, 12-5-16)  
Sec. 7-504. - Fees. 
The fees for all permits for plumbing work, inspections and, or, periodic inspections, shall be as prescribed in article II of chapter 7 of the Villa Park Municipal Code as originally adopted and subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-505. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 7-505, entitled "Violations; penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 3662, § 2, adopted July 25, 2011.  
Sec. 7-506. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-507. - Responsibility of plumbing contractors. 
(a)  Plumbing contractors shall be solely responsible for requesting plumbing inspections; twenty-four (24) hours' notice of such inspections shall be given to the manager. 
(b)  A copy of the plumbing contractor's current state or City of Chicago plumbing license shall be left on file with the community development director prior to issuing a plumbing permit. 
(c)  Plumbing contractors shall be responsible for any changes in design or addition of fixtures. The community development director shall be notified of any changes on which original permit was issued. Mechanical drawings shall be required on all plans of commercial, industrial and multiple-family structures. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-508. - Water conservation. 
All plumbing work to be in strict accordance with the village's water conservation program. Plumbing contractors shall be responsible for the installation of suitable flow control devices where manufacturers' items do not conform to regulations. The addition of aerators with flow control features will not be permitted on new or replacement installations. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 7-601. - Adoption of a property maintenance code. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 Edition" as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the Village of Villa Park, in the State of Illinois; for the regulation and control of existing structures and buildings as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, standards, provisions, guidelines, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Code Council's International Property Maintenance Code, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein, with the additions, deletions, insertions and changes, if any, as prescribed and stated in section 7-602 of this article VI. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-602. - Amendments to the property maintenance code. 
The following sections of the code herein adopted are amended and revised by addition, insertion, deletion and change as follows: 
Chapter 1—Administration 
Section 101.1 Title (page 1, second line): Insert: "the Village of Villa Park, DuPage County, State of Illinois." 
Section 101.3 Intent (page 1, last sentence): Delete: "Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code." and replace with "Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the building, plumbing, mechanical, fire and zoning codes adopted by the Village of Villa Park." 
Section 102.3 Application of other codes (page 1): Delete entire paragraph and insert: 
" Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing, mechanical and fire codes adopted by the Village of Villa Park. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provisions of the jurisdiction's zoning code. In the event of conflict, the most restrictive provision shall apply." 
Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards (page 1): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards: The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that have been adopted by the Village of Villa Park and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference." 
Section 103 Department of Property Maintenance Inspection (page 2): Delete entire section. 
Section 103.5 Fees: Delete entire section. 
Section 104.1 General (page 2): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 104.1 Enforcement: The provisions of this ordinance and the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Villa Park Department of Community Development, its Director and his or her designated representatives." 
Insert a new subsection (page 2): 
" Section 104.7 Relief from personal liability: Any code official, officer or employee who acts in good faith in the discharge of duties of enforcement of this code is relieved of all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. Further, the code official shall not be held liable for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted by the code official in the enforcement of this code. In any of these actions, the official or employee shall be defended or represented by the jurisdiction's attorney-at-law until the final termination of the proceedings." 
Section 107.2.5 Form (page 3): Delete line. 
Section 109.6 Hearing (page 5): Delete entire section. 
Section 111 Means of Appeal (page 6): Delete entire section and replace with: 
" Section 111.1 Appeal. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this code or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall have the right to request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Village of Villa Park, as is more specifically provided in Appendix C - Basic Zoning Ordinance of the Villa Park Municipal Code, provided that such a person shall file in the Office of Community Development a petition requesting such a hearing and containing a statement of the grounds therefor within ten (10) days after the notice was served." 
Chapter 2—Definitions 
Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes (page 9): Delete entire paragraph and replace with: "Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the building, plumbing, mechanical and fire codes adopted by the Village of Villa Park, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes." 
Section 202—General Definitions 
Bathroom (page 9): Delete and replace with: "A room containing a lavatory, water closet, bathtub and/or shower." 
Insert new definition (page 9): "Debris: An accumulation of one or more of the following items; tin cans, glass jars, bottles, scrap glass, paper cartons, scraps of paper, boxes, ashes, iron, old hot water tanks, oil storage tanks, tin or other metal materials, refuse, rubbish, junk, waste, manure, straw, piles of grass clippings, lumber, old bricks, concrete blocks, chunks of broken concrete, plaster board, discarded furniture, mattresses, bed springs, portable swimming pools in disrepair, operable or inoperable household appliances, lawn and garden equipment, inoperable bicycles, plumbing materials, electrical supplies or cords, or other like matter or things." 
Insert new definition (page 9): "Public nuisance: Includes the following: 
1.  The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law; or 
2.  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures; or 
3.  Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage of plumbing facilities; or 
4.  Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use; or 
5.  Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or property; or 
6.  Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by this code have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided; or 
7.  Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish, debris or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or 
8.  Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse or failure; or dangerous to anyone on or near the premises." 
Chapter 3—General Requirements 
Section 301.2 Responsibility (page 11 second line): Delete first sentence and replace with: "The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures, fixtures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code." 
Section 302.1 Sanitation (page 11, second line): Insert after sanitary condition: "and free from any accumulation of rubbish, debris or garbage." 
Section 302.4 Weeds (page 11, second line): Insert: "six (6) inches." 
Insert a new subsection (page 11): 
" Section 302.10 Open Fires: Open fires shall be prohibited except as specifically approved by the fire official." 
Insert a new subsection (page 11): " Section 302.11 Dead Vegetation. Any vegetation that is dead and in the opinion of the code official is capable of causing property or utility damage shall be removed. Any vegetation that is dead and within any yard shall be removed. Any vegetation removed that is a part of a required landscaping area shall be replaced with live plants as approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee." 
Section 304.3 Premises identification (page 12): Delete: "... minimum of 4 inches ..." and insert "minimum of 3 inches ..." 
Insert new subsection (page 12): 
" Section 304.3.1 Multi-premises identification: 
a. Where there are more than four (4) spaces/units located in a single commercial or industrial structure, each rear street level exterior door shall be marked with the corresponding street address and the identification of the occupancy. The numbering and lettering shall be no less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and in contrast coloring to that of the coloring of the door(s). The placement of the numbering and lettering shall be a height of six (6) feet from the door threshold and shall be uniform throughout the commercial or industrial structure. All fire protection rooms, with direct outside ground access, shall be identified with the words, "Fire Protection Equipment Room" which shall appear on the door to said room in the same manner as the street address. Where fire protection rooms have interior access only, these rooms shall be identified as such with lettering or acceptable symbols, in the same manner as the street address, except that said lettering or acceptable symbols shall be no less than one (1) inch in height. 
b) Where there are more than four (4) multi-family residential units, addresses shall be displayed on both the front and rear of the buildings." 
Section 304.14 Insect screens (page 14): Insert: "April 1 to December 1." 
Section 305.1 General (page 14): Insert: ...and in a sanitary condition "so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or visitors and to protect the occupants from the environment." 
Section 307.1 Handrails and Guardrails General (page 15): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 307.1 Handrails and Guardrails General: Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having three or more risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall [have] guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches high or more than 38 inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 36 inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck or ramp or other walking surface. Open sides of stairs with a total rise of more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails not less than 34 inches in height measured vertically from the nosing of the treads. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code." 
Section 308.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage (page 15, line 3): Delete: "rubbish or garbage" and insert "rubbish, debris or garbage." 
Insert a new subsection (page 15): 
" Section 308.4 Disposal of Debris: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of debris in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such debris in an approved debris disposal facility or approved debris containers, and such disposal shall take place in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 10 of the Villa Park Municipal Code." 
Chapter 4—Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations 
Section 404.4 Bedroom Requirements (page 18): Delete: "404.4.5" and replace with "404.4.6." 
Section 404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy (page 18): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy/prohibited sleeping areas. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen, hallway, closet, basement (unless it meets the bedroom requirements listed herein), storage room, public area, dining room, living room or nonhabitable space." 
Insert a new subsection (page 18): 
" Section 404.4.6 Definitions. 
Bedroom. A bedroom is defined as a segregated and separate room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and delineated by four (4) fixed walls and a door containing a minimum of at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area for a single occupant and every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof, for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Villa Park, excepting studios. It shall be prohibited to occupy any residence that fails to satisfy the minimal floor area set forth herein for any residential occupancy. 
Bedroom Requirements. For all sleeping areas, whether above or below grade, the following requirements shall be met, except where noted: 
1.  All walls and ceilings in bedrooms on any floor shall have, as a minimum, a layer of one-half inch (½") gypsum board or equivalent, taped and finished so as to provide a continuous surface with no breaks or gaps. 
2.  For all bedrooms, ceiling height shall not be less than seven (7) feet high. 
3.  Doors, with minimum dimensions of one and five-eighths (1 5/8 ) inch thick and six (6) feet eight (8) inches height, shall be required for all bedrooms. The door shall be side-hinged, readily operable, and provided with latching hardware. 
4.  A smoke detector shall be installed in each bedroom. 
5.  Basement bedrooms, as well as other habitable space, shall be free of excess moisture, dampness and ground water seepage. All excess moisture shall be removed by mechanical or gravitational means. 
6.  All habitable rooms shall be provided adequate light and ventilation in accordance with the most current adopted Village of Villa Park Building Code. 
7.  Every sleeping room shall have at least one openable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units must be operable from the inside to a full clear opening without the use of a key, tool or special knowledge. Windows that are provided as a means of escape or rescue, including basement bedrooms, shall have a sill height of not more than forty-four (44) inches above the floor. 
8.  Escape or rescue windows with a finished sill height below the adjacent ground elevation shall be provided with a window well. The escape window well shall have an accessible and clear opening of not less than nine (9) square feet and with a length and width of not less than thirty-six (36) inches. 
9.  Furthermore, the escape window well shall have horizontal dimensions that allow the window to be fully opened. 
Prohibited sleeping areas. Prohibited sleeping areas are defined as kitchens, as well as living rooms, dining rooms and other rooms which are not designated or qualified as bedrooms, as defined and qualified herein, which shall not be used for sleeping purposes." 
Section 404.5 Overcrowding : Insert at end of sentence: "Overcrowding shall also be determined in a residential dwelling unit as any qualified bedroom occupied by one (1) person which does not consist of at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area and any qualified bedroom occupied by more than one (1) person which does not consist of at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof." 
Section 404.5 Overcrowding (page 18): Delete entire section and insert the following: 
" 404.5 Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5 
  Table 404.5 
  Mimimum Area Requirements 
Space 	Minimum Area in Square Feet 
	1—2 
Occupants 	3—5 
Occupants 	6 or More 
Occupants 
Living room a, b 	No requirements 	120 	150 
Dining room a, b 	No requirements 	80 	100 
Bedrooms 	Shall comply with section 404.4 
 
a  See section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
;sup\sup; See section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
404.5.1 Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 404.4. 
404.5.2 Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room." 
Chapter 5—Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements 
Section 502.2 Rooming Houses (page 19): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 502.2 Rooming Houses: At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each habitable story, including basement." 
Section 507.1 General (page 20): Delete: "drainage of roofs and paved areas" and insert "drainage of roofs, sump pits, and paved areas". 
Chapter 6—Mechanical and Electrical Requirements 
Section 602.2 Residential occupancies (page 21): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms all year. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section." 
Section 602.3 Heat supply (page 21): Delete entire section and insert: 
" Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, shall maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees F at any time during the year in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms." 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces (page 21): Delete: "65 degrees F (18 degrees C)" and replace with "68 degrees F at any time during the year." 
Insert a new subsection (page 22): 
" Section 604.4 Receptacles: All 125 volt, single-phase, 15- or 20-ampere receptacles installed in bathrooms and within six (6) feet of a kitchen sink to serve counter top surfaces shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel." 
Chapter 8 Referenced Standards (page 27): Delete entire chapter and insert: 
" Chapter 8 Referenced Standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that have been adopted by the Village of Villa Park and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference." 
Delete the following references in Chapter 8: 
International Plumbing Code 
International Zoning Code 
Appendix: Adopt the following appendices: A. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 7-603. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Villa Park Department of Community Development, its director and his or her designated representatives. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-701. - International Residential Code; adoption. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Residential Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and the same is hereby adopted as the one and two-family dwelling code of the village governing the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, maintenance and use of one- and two-family dwellings, as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the said International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-702 of this article VII. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-702. - Amendments to International Residential Code, 2009 Edition—Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
(a)  Chapters and parts repealed. The following chapters, parts, sections, tables, appendixes and figures contained in the International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby repealed: 
(1)  Chapter 12—Mechanical Administration. 
(2)  Chapter 13—General Mechanical System Requirements. 
(3)  Chapter 14—Heating and Cooling Equipment. 
(4)  Chapter 15—Exhaust Systems. 
(5)  Chapter 16—Duct Systems. 
(6)  Chapter 17—Combustion Air. 
(7)  Chapter 18—Chimneys and Vents. 
(8)  Chapter 19—Special Fuel Burning Equipment. 
(9)  Chapter 20—Boilers and Water Heaters. 
(10)  Chapter 21—Hydronic Heating. 
(11)  Chapter 22—Special Piping and Storage Systems. 
(12)  Chapter 23—Solar Systems. 
(13)  Chapter 24—Fuel Gas. 
(14)  Chapter 25—Plumbing Administration. 
(15)  Chapter 26—General Plumbing Requirements. 
(16)  Chapter 27—Plumbing Fixtures. 
(17)  Chapter 28—Water Heaters. 
(18)  Chapter 29—Water Supply and Distribution. 
(19)  Chapter 30—Sanitary Drainage. 
(20)  Chapter 31—Vents. 
(21)  Chapter 32—Traps. 
(22)  Chapter 33—Storm Drainage. 
(23)  Chapter 34—General Electrical Requirements. 
(24)  Chapter 35—Electrical Definitions. 
(25)  Chapter 36—Services. 
(26)  Chapter 37—Branch Circuit and Feeder Requirements. 
(27)  Chapter 38—Wiring Methods. 
(28)  Chapter 39—Power and Lighting Distribution. 
(29)  Chapter 40—Devices and Lighting Fixtures. 
(30)  Chapter 41—Appliance Installation. 
(31)  Chapter 42—Swimming Pools. 
(32)  Chapter 43—Class 2 Remote-Control, Signaling, and Power-Limited Circuits. 
(33)  Appendix E—Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings. 
(34)  Appendix F—Radon Control Methods. 
(35)  Appendix G—Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. 
(36)  Appendix C—Energy Conservation. 
(b)  Articles, chapters or provisions modified. The following sections, subsections, or tables, contained in the International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby amended or modified as follows: 
(1)  Section R101.1. Insert: "Village of Villa Park". 
(2)  Section R104—Authority. Section R104 is amended to read as follows: "The Villa Park Community Development Department, its Director, and his or her designated representatives, are hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code." 
(3)  Section R108.2—Permit. Section R108.2111.5, Permit fees, is amended to read as follows: "Fees for permits, inspection and/or periodic inspections shall be as prescribed by the Village in Chapter 7 of the Villa Park Municipal Code, as originally adopted and subsequently amended." 
(4)  Section R112—Board of Appeal. Delete section in its entirety. See IBC Section 113. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Table 301.2(1)—Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria shall be amended to read as follows: 
GROUND SNOW LOAD (pounds per square foot) 	25 
WIND DESIGN (SPEED) 	90 
WIND DESIGN (TOPOGRAPHICAL EFFECTS) 	N/A 
SEISMIC CONDITION CATEGORY 	B 
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM WEATHERING 	Severe 
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM FROST LINE DEPTH 	42 
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM TERMITE 	Yes 
WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE 	-4 
ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIREMENT 	YES 
FLOOD HAZARD 	
AIR FREEZING INDEX 	2,000 
MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE 	
 
(7)  Section R310—Emergency Escape or Rescue Openings. Section 310.1, Emergency escape required, is amended by adding the following paragraph: "All areas below grade level shall have two (2) separate means of escape conforming to the requirements listed in this section. Window wells for egress windows shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36") inches wide and twenty-four (24") inches deep and shall be rectangular in shape, as opposed to the common semi-circular type well." 
(8)  Sections R302.2.2, R302.2.2.1, R302.3, R302.4—Townhouses and Two-Family Dwellings. The provisions of these sections are deleted in their entirety and replaced with the following: "Dwelling Unit Separation: Dwelling units in two-family dwellings or townhomes constructed side-by-side shall be separated by a two-hour rated masonry wall assembly which shall not be penetrated by plumbing, mechanical or electrical equipment, or when applicable, a two-hour rated floor/ceiling assembly. Such wall assembly shall extend to and be tight against the non-combustible roof sheathing or extend two (2) feet eight (8) inches above combustible roof sheathing. Floor/ceiling assembly shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls." 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems is repealed. 
(11)  Section R403—Footings. Section R403.1, General, is amended by adding the following paragraph: 
"A footing is not required for the following applications: 
a.)  For 1-story framed additions, a trench foundation may be permitted. The width of the trench shall be a minimum of ten (10") inches belled to sixteen (16") inches at bottom. Depth minimum of forty-two (42") inches or below frost line. 
b.)  For open porches, concrete or pressure treated piers may be permitted. Open porches are considered those structures not capable of, or constructed in anticipation of, being enclosed for year-round use and shall not contain permanent windows, insulation, enclosed walls, heating or cooling, plumbing, or similar characteristics." 
(12)  Table No. 404.1.1.(1)—Plain Concrete and Plain Masonry Foundation Walls. Minimum thickness and allowable depth of unbalanced fill for unreinforced masonry and concrete foundation walls where unstable soil or ground water conditions do not exist in Seismic Categories No. 0, 1, or 2. The provisions of Table No. 404.1.1.(1) providing specifications and provisions for "Masonry of Hollow Units" and "Rubble Stone" are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(13)  Table No. 404.1.1.(2)—Reinforced Concrete and Masonry Foundation Walls. Requirements for masonry or concrete foundation walls subjected to no more pressure than would be exerted by backfill having an equivalent fluid weight of thirty pounds per cubic foot located in Seismic Categories No. 3 or 4 or subjected to unstable soil conditions. The provisions of Table No. 404.1.1.(2) providing specifications and provisions for "Hollow Masonry" are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(14)  Section R910—Re-Roofing. Section R910.3, is amended by adding the following paragraph: "The number of roof covering shall not exceed two (2). When verified by a licensed structural engineer that the roof load is acceptable in conjunction with this code and sheathing and framing members are and will be reasonably free from deterioration, then a maximum of three (3) coverings shall be permitted." 
Delete the following references in Chapter 44: 
International Plumbing Code 
International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
Appendix: Adopt the following appendices: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, M. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 3763, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-13)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE HANDICAPPED 
 
Sec. 7-801. - Adoption of code and standards. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "Illinois Accessibility Code, effective April 24, 1997" as printed by the State of Illinois and is hereby adopted as the accessibility code for the Village of Villa Park, in the State of Illinois; for the control and regulation [regulation] of providing access to the built environment by environmentally limited persons as therein provide; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Illinois Accessibility Code and standards referenced therein are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-802. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  The provisions of this article and the Illinois Accessibility Code, effective April 24, 1997, shall be enforced by the Village of Villa Park Community Development Department, its director, and his or her designated representative or may be referred to the appropriate agency or official as set forth in section 400.140 of the Illinois Accessibility Code for civil enforcement. 
(b)  Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity which disobeys, violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this article or the provisions thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, punishable by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day or portion thereof a violation or noncompliance continues or exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided herein, the director of community development may seek to enforce the provisions of this article in any court of competent jurisdiction by injunctive or other relief. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-803. - Conflicting provisions. 
The provisions of the Illinois Accessibility Code and referenced standards contained therein shall constitute the minimum standards for accessibility and to the extent that any other ordinance of the village conflicts with the provisions of this article or the publications adopted by the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article or the publications adopted hereby shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-804. - Effect. 
Except to the extent required by the Environmental Barriers Act or the Illinois Accessibility Code, nothing in this article or the Illinois Accessibility Code and reference standards adopted hereby shall be construed to affect any litigation, lawsuit or impending court proceeding, or any rights acquired, liability incurred, or any cause or cause of action acquired or existing; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired, or affected by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
ARTICLE IX. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 7-901. - Adoption of fuel gas code. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and the same is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the Village of Villa Park, State of Illinois; for the control of fuel gas systems of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-902 of this article X. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to adopt technical codes by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2.  
Sec. 7-902. - Amendments of fuel gas code; additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
Article 1—Administration 
Section 101.1. Title. (page 1, line 2): Insert: "The Village of Villa Park." 
Section 106.6.2. Fee Schedule. (page 4): Delete in its entirety and insert: "The fees for all permits for mechanical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be as prescribed in Section 7-202 of Chapter 7 of the Villa Park Municipal Code." 
Section 108.5. Stop Work Orders. (page 6, line 3): Following the words "unsafe condition" delete remainder and insert "shall be guilty of a violation of this code and shall be liable to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)." 
Insert new section (page 7): 
" Section 108.8: Enforcement. The provisions of this article and the International Mechanical Code, 2009 Edition, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Village Department of Community Development, its Director and his or her designee(s)." 
Section 109. Means of Appeal. (page 7): Delete in its entirety. See Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
Delete the following references in Chapter 8: International Plumbing Code. 
Appendix: Adopt the following appendices: A, B, C, D. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 7-903. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the International Fuel Gas Code, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the village department of community development, its director, and his or her designee(s). 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-904. - Fees. 
The fees for all permits for mechanical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be prescribed in section 7-202 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-905. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 7-905, entitled "Violation; penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 3662, § 2, adopted July 25, 2011.  
ARTICLE X. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-1001. - Adoption of the existing building code. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and the same is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the Village of Villa Park, State of Illinois; for the control of mechanical systems of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said International Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-1002 of this article X. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to adopt technical codes by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2.  
Sec. 7-1002. - Amendments of mechanical code; additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
Article 1—Administration 
Section 101.1. Title. (page 1, line 2): Insert: "The Village of Villa Park." 
Section 108.2. Fee Schedule. (page 7): Delete in its entirety and insert: "The fees for all permits for mechanical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be as prescribed in Section 7-202 of Chapter 7 of the Villa Park Municipal Code." 
Section 112. Board of Appeal. (page 9): Delete in its entirety. See Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
Section 114.1. Stop Work Orders. (page 10, line 3): Following the words "unsafe condition" delete remainder and insert "shall be guilty of a violation of this code and shall be liable to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)." 
Insert new section (page 10): 
" Section 114.2: Issuance. The provisions of this article and the International Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the Village Department of Community Development, its Director and his or her designee(s)." 
Section 1301.10. Add the following: "The assigned point value for the building shall not change or affect the local amendments in any of the adopted codes. A point value which indicates code compliance without the required fire protection systems is not applicable and does not demonstrate code compliance." 
Delete the following references in Chapter 15: International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 7-1003. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the International Existing Code, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the village department of community development, its director, and his or her designee(s). 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1004. - Fees. 
The fees for all permits for application of the existing building code, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be prescribed in section 7-202 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1005. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 7-1005, entitled "Violation; penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 3662, § 2, adopted July 25, 2011.  
ARTICLE XI. - SAFETY CODE FOR ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS 
 
Sec. 7-1101. - Adoption of the Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. 
See chapter 30 of the IBC for the requirements for elevators, dumbwaiters, moving walks and material lifts and for compliance with Public Act 096-0054. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1102. - Enforcement; violations; penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. The provisions of this article, shall be enforced by the Village of Villa Park Community Development Department, its director, and his or her designated representative in compliance with the public act and the OSFM rules. 
(b)  Additional remedies. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the director of community development may seek to enforce the provisions of this article in any court of competent jurisdiction by injunctive or other relief. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 7-1103. - Conflict. 
The provisions of this article and Public Act 096-0054 contained therein shall constitute the minimum standards for elevators et al, and to the extent that any other ordinance of the Village of Villa Park conflicts with the provisions of this article or the publications adopted by the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article or the publications adopted hereby shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1104. - Saving clause. 
Nothing in the article or in the standards adopted hereby, shall be construed to effect any lawsuit, litigation, impending court proceeding, or any rights acquired, liability incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired, or affected by this section. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
ARTICLE XII. - FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 7-1201. - Adoption of a fire code. 
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the Village of Villa Park, being marked and designated as the "International Fire Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and "NFPA 96: Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations, 2008 Edition," as published by the National Fire Protection Association be and the same are hereby adopted as the fire code of the Village of Villa Park, State of Illinois; for the control of fire hazards as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, and NFPA 96: Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations, 2008 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-1202 of this article XII. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3683, § 2, 1-9-12) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to adopt technical codes by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2.  
Sec. 7-1202. - Amendments of fire code; additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
Article 1—Administration 
Section 101.1. Title. (page 1, line 2): Insert: "The Village of Villa Park." 
Section 102.3. Delete the entire section and insert: "See the Building Code for change of use." 
Section 102.6. Historic buildings. Delete the section in its entirety. 
Section 103.2. Insert the following: "The fire code official shall be the Deputy Fire Chief of the Villa Park Fire Department." 
Sections 103.1103.2 and 103.3. Delete the sections in their entirety. 
Setion 105.31. Open flame and torches. Delete the section in its entirety. 
Section 104.2.1. Insert the following: "Before any fire alarm, detection, or fire suppression system is installed, enlarged or extended, a permit shall be obtained. Construction documents shall be reviewed by the fire code official or independent reviewer designated by the fire code official prior to the issuance of the permit." 
Section 108. Board of Appeal. (page 11): Delete in its entirety. See Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
Section 113.2. Fee Schedule. (page 13). Delete in its entirety and insert: "The fees for all permits for inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be as prescribed in Section 7-202 of Chapter 7 of the Villa Park Municipal Code." 
Section 111. Stop Work Order. 
Section 111.2. (page 13): Delete the entire paragraph and replace with the following: 
" 111.2 Issuance: Upon notice from the code official that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work; and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. 
111.3 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than "seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)." 
Section 112.3 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
"(a) Any person, firm or corporation or other entity which disobeys, violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, punishable of [by] a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation or noncompliance continues or exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b) In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Director of Community Development may seek to enforce the provisions of this article in any court of competent jurisdiction by injunctive or other relief." 
Chapter 3—General Requirements 
Section 307.1.2 Open burning is prohibited except within express written permission of the fire code official or his designate. The burning of seasoned firewood in an "outdoor fireplace is allowed. The wood used shall be cut into logs and freshly cut or "green." The appliance used shall have secure, suitable cover and suitable screening in place on its sides. The fire code official or his designate may prohibit the use of an outdoor fireplace if the products of combustion create or add to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
Section 308.4 Open flames in and R-2 delete the section in its entirety. 
Chapter 4—Emergency Planning and Preparedness 
Delete the chapter in its entirety. 
Section 506 Key boxes. Delete the section in its entirety and the Village Ordinance on Key Boxes. 
Section 510 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage. Delete the section in its entirety. 
Chapter 6—Building Services and Systems 
Section 605.3 Working clearance: Change 30 inches to 36 inches. 
Chapter 9—Fire Protection Systems 
Section 901.6 Supervision 
Note: See Chapter 9 of the International Building Code and the local amendments in article II for the requirements for system supervision and monitoring of the alarms. 
Section 903.0—Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
Section 903.2 Where required: Delete sections 903.2 through 903.2.10 and insert the following: 
All new buildings and structures shall be provided with an approved fire sprinkler system. Exception: Detached structures, which comply with the following, do not require automatic fire sprinklers: 
A.  1.  Less than or equal to eight hundred sixty-four (864) square feet in area, and 
2.  Single story, and 
3.  Not used as a dwelling or sleeping, and 
4.  Not an High Hazard Group, and 
5.  Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage, and 
6.  No basements; or 
B.  A single-family dwelling. 
Section 903.2.1 Additions and alterations: An approved automatic fire suppression system shall be installed and maintained in all buildings and structures added to or altered according to the following: 
1.  For existing buildings and structures, any modifications and/or additions that result in the total building area being increased by 1,500 square feet or more in area over a three-year period. 
Exception: 
a.  Single-family dwellings 
903.2.2 Change of use group: An approved automatic fire suppression system shall be installed and maintained in existing buildings, when the Use Group of the existing building or structure is changed to a Use Group with a higher relative hazard (lower number) rating according to table 903.2.2. 
Relative Hazard 	Use Group 
1 (Highest Hazard) 	H 
2 	I-2, I-3 
3 	A, E, I-1, M, R-1, R-2 
4 	B, F-1, R-3, R-4, S-1 
5 (Lowest Hazard) 	F-2, S-2, U" 
 
  
Section 906.0—Fire Sprinkler Systems 
Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R systems. Delete entire section. Add the following: 
" NFPA 13R systems: In residential building four stories or less in height, systems designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13R listed in Chapter 35 shall be permitted in Use Group R fire areas. Sprinklers shall be required in all bathrooms located within individual dwelling units or guestrooms in Use Groups R-1, R-2 and Use Group R residential care facilities." 
Section 903.3.1.3 is deleted. 
Insert the following section 903.3.8: 
" 903.3.8 Fire Hose Valves: In all warehouse and/or storage areas, 2½" fire hose valves with a 1½" reducer to a 1½" male connection shall be provided. The valves shall be located at each door entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area. Additional 2½" fire hose valves shall be provided so that no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is situated more than 120 feet travel distance to a 2½" fire hose valve. All obstructions and/or racks shall be shown on the fire suppression system drawings. The fire hose valve(s) system piping shall be: 
a)  A separate riser piping system. 
b)  Hydraulically calculated for a minimum of 250 gallons per minute flow to the most hydraulically remote fire hose valve. 
c)  Where system pressures exceed 100 PSI, a listed and approved pressure-reducing field-adjustable type valve(s) shall be provided." 
Insert the following: 
" 903.3.9 Design: 
A 10% or 5 PSI safety factor, whichever is greater, shall be provided in the fire protection system hydraulic calculations. The system demand shall be at least 5 PSI below the seasonal low water flow test supply." 
Section 903.4.1 Monitoring. Add the following: 
"All automatic fire sprinkler and suppression systems required by any section of this code shall be supervised by the remote station located at DuComm, 600 Wall Street, Glendale Heights, Illinois, 60137. 
Exception: 
1.  Occupancies in townhomes complying with Section 906.2.3 or the IRC. All automatic fire suppression systems installed but not required by any section of this code shall be supervised by a central-station system, proprietary system, remote-station system or supervisory service that will cause the actuation of an audible appliance at a constantly attended location, in accordance with NFPA 72 listed in chapter 35. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Underground gate valves with roadway boxes. 
2.  Halogenated extinguishing systems that are not an integral part of a required automatic fire suppression system. 
3.  Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems that are not an integral part of a required automatic fire suppression system." 
Section 903.7 Horn strobe. Add the following: "A horn strobe shall be installed above the fire department connection, which shall be activated upon a water flow." 
Section 905.0—Standpipe Systems 
Section 905.3.1 Height. Delete the subsection and insert the following: "Standpipe systems shall be installed throughout all buildings that are more than 2 stories above grade or have more than 1 story below grade." 
Section 906.3 Size and distribution. Add the following: "Portable fire extinguishers shall be a minimum of 2A-10BC." 
Section 907.0—Fire Alarm and Detection Systems 
Section 907.2.1 Group A. Delete the entire section and add: 
" 907.2.1 Group A. An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies of Group A." 
Section 907.2.3 Group E. Delete the entire section and add: 
" 907.2.3 Group E. An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies of Group E." 
Section 907.2.8 Group R-1. Delete the entire section and insert and add: 
" 907.2.9 Group R-1. An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group R-1." 
Section 907.2.9 Group R-2. Delete the entire section and insert and add: 
" 907.2.9 Group R-2. An approved fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in all occupancies in Use Group R-2." 
Section 907.7.3 Zones: Delete the entire section and add: 
"Each floor shall be zoned separately and a zone shall not exceed 20,000 square feet (1860 m 2 ). The length of any zone shall not exceed 300 feet (91.5 meters) in any direction. A zoning indicator panel and the associated controls shall be provided in an approved location. The visual zone indication shall lock in until the system is reset and shall not be cancelled by the operation of an audible alarm-silencing switch. All alarm devices, including smoke detectors, heat detectors, flame detectors, manual fire alarm boxes, automatic sprinkler or standpipe water flow devices, other approved types of automatic fire detection devices and suppression and alarm system supervisory devices in any building greater than 1 story in height, including any story or level below grade, or 2,500 square feet gross area shall be of the addressable type. All devices shall indicate their type, location and status on the indicator panel(s). Zoning nomenclature shall be with the approval of the fire department. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic Sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 listed in Chapter 35. 
Add the following section: 
" Multi-Tenant Spaces: In any multi-tenant building, each individual tenant space shall be zoned. Each zone shall be displayed on the indicator panel." 
Section 907.7.5.1 Add a new section: 
"All required fire alarm systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be supervised by the remote station located at DuComm, 600 Wall Street, Glendale Heights, Illinois, 60137. 
Exception: 
1.  All other automatic fire alarm systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be supervised by a central-station system, proprietary system, remote-station system or supervisory service that will cause the actuation of an audible appliance at a constantly attended location, in accordance with NFPA 72 listed in chapter 35. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Single and multiple-station detectors required by section 907.2.11. 
2.  Single-family dwellings." 
Section 915.0—Yard Hydrants 
Insert new section: 
" 915.01 Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants installed on private property shall be provided around the perimeter of the building in 300 foot increments. Hydrants shall be located at least 40 feet but no greater than 100 feet from each fire department connection and piped from the fire suppression side of the public water supply." 
Chapter 10—Means of Egress 
Section 1001.0—General 
Section 1001.1 Scope. (page 217): Delete the second line and insert the following: "The provisions of this chapter and NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2000 Edition, with local amendments shall control the design, construction and arrangement of building elements required to provide a reasonably safe means of egress from all structures. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this chapter and NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2000 Edition, with local amendments, the code with the more stringent standard shall prevail." 
Insert the following amendments to Life Safety Code, 2002 Edition: 
Section 24.1.2.3. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
" 24.1.2.3 
No multiple-dwelling unit of a residential occupancy shall be located above any nonresidential occupancy unless the dwelling unit of the residential occupancy and exits therefrom are separated from the nonresidential occupancy by construction: 
1.  Having a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour; or 
2.  As approved by the fire code official; and 
a.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7; or 
b.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected by an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 9.6." 
Section 26.1.2.3. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
" 26.1.2.3 
No multiple-dwelling unit of a residential occupancy shall be located above any nonresidential occupancy unless the dwelling unit of the residential occupancy and exits therefrom are separated from the nonresidential occupancy by construction: 
1.  Having a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour; or 
2.  As approved by the fire code official; and 
a.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7; or 
b.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected by an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 9.6." 
Section 29.1.2.3. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
" 29.1.2.3 
No multiple-dwelling unit of a residential occupancy shall be located above any nonresidential occupancy unless the dwelling unit of the residential occupancy and exits therefrom are separated from the nonresidential occupancy by construction: 
1.  Having a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour; or 
2.  As approved by the fire code official; and 
a.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7; or 
b.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected by an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 9.6." 
Section 30.1.2.3. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
" 30.1.2.3 
No multiple-dwelling unit of a residential occupancy shall be located above any nonresidential occupancy unless the dwelling unit of the residential occupancy and exits therefrom are separated from the nonresidential occupancy by construction: 
1.  Having a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour; or 
2.  As approved by the fire code official; and 
a.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7; or 
b.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected by an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 9.6." 
Section 31.1.2.3. Delete in its entirety and replace with the following: 
" 31.1.2.3 
No multiple-dwelling unit of a residential occupancy shall be located above any nonresidential occupancy unless the dwelling unit of the residential occupancy and exits therefrom are separated from the nonresidential occupancy by construction: 
1.  Having a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour; or 
2.  As approved by the fire code official; and 
a.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 9.7; or 
b.  Where the nonresidential occupancy is protected by an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 9.6." 
Section 1021.2—Stories with One Exit 
Table 1021.2 Single Exit. (page 1243): Delete note c for Group R-2. 
Section 1006.5—Means of Egress Lighting 
Section 1006.5 Power source. (page 221): Insert the following: "Means of egress lighting in all buildings or portions of buildings serving rooms or spaces with an occupant load greater than 20 shall be connected to an emergency electrical system that complies with Section 2702.0 to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than 1 hour in case of emergency or primary power loss." 
Section 1504.5.2 Protection of sprinklers. Delete all references to plastic bags. 
Chapter 24—Tents and Other Membrane Structures 
Section 2401.1.1. Insert the following: "Fire extinguishers: At least two (2) portable fire extinguishers with a minimum rating of 2A-10BC shall be provided in all tents and air supported structures." 
Section 2404.8. Fireworks. Delete the section in its entirety. 
Section 2404.16.3. Delete the section in its entirety. 
Chapter 33—Explosives and Fireworks 
Delete the chapter in its entirety. Fireworks and explosives are not allowed. 
Chapters 34, 35, 36 and 38 
Delete all references to the aboveground storage of these liquids. 
Chapter 3404.1.1. The storage of flammable liquids and combustible liquids in aboveground storage tanks is not allowed. 
Chapter 3—Liquefied Petroleum Gases 
Section 3801.1. Add the following: 
"The storage of liquefied petroleum gas above grade is not allowed. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Tanks with a total of 200 gallons of water capacity are allowed for use as a fuel for tar kettles used for roofing. The maximum container quantity is limited to 200 gallons water capacity. Approval of the Deputy Fire Chief or his designate is required for such use. 
2.  Outside tank storage is allowed for use as a motor fuel. The total shall not exceed 300 gallons water capacity and shall follow applicable guidelines. A permit is required. 
3.  Tanks for temporary heating of buildings under construction is allowed and shall follow applicable guidelines. A permit is required. 
4.  Where in storage awaiting use or resale in accordance with NFPA 58." 
Chapter 46—Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings 
Section 4603.5. Insert the following after "of fire department vehicle access": "or more than 3 stories above grade". 
Section 4604.1.1. Add the following section: "Door hardware, All Groups A and E shall have panic hardware when the occupant load of 50 or more shall be equipped with panic hardware on all means of egress doors." 
Section 4604.1.2. Add the following: "Mistaken egress: All doors, passageways and stairways that are neither a means of egress nor provide access to a means of egress and are located or arranged so as to be mistaken for a means of egress, shall be marked with a sign reading "No Exit." Such signs shall have the word "no" in letters 2 inches high with a stroke width of 3/8 inch and the word "Exit" in letters 1 inch high, with the word "Exit" below the word "No." Any supplementary identification indicating the character of the area, such as "to basement," "Storeroom," " Laundry" or the like shall be provided." 
Delete the following references in Chapter 47: 
International Plumbing Code 
International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
Appendix: Adopt the following appendices: D, E, F, G. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3683, § 3, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 3763, §§ 3, 4, 9-23-13)  
Sec. 7-1203. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article and the International Fire Code, which it adopts and incorporates, shall be enforced by the village department of community development, its director, and his or her designee(s). 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1204. - Fees. 
The fees for all permits for mechanical work, inspections and/or periodic inspections shall be prescribed in section 7-202 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1205. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 7-1205, entitled "Violation; penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 3662, § 2, adopted July 25, 2011.  
ARTICLE XIII. - VACANT BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-1301. - Declaration of policy. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by enactment of this article which: 
(a)  Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings. 
(c)  Provides for administration, enforcement of property regulations, including prevention and abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of penalties. 
This article shall be construed liberally to effect its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1302. - Other ordinances. 
This article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe standards other than those provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1303. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Boarded building means a building which has had, in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its components. 
Building means any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy. 
Dangerous building or structure means a building or structure defined as a "nuisance" in section 15-102 of this Code, as now existing or hereafter amended. 
Director means the director of community development or the director's designee. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an individual. 
Premises means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structure thereon. 
Public nuisance includes the following: 
(a)  The physical condition, or uses of any building, structure or premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under this Code; or 
(b)  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises, structure, building or appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; or 
(c)  Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or 
(d)  Any building designated by the director as unsafe for human habitation or use; or 
(e)  Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or manifestly unsafe or insecure so as to endanger life, limb or property; or 
(f)  Any building or premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or 
(g)  Any building or structure that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; unsecure; vacant and the doors, windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; or 
(h)  Any building or structure defined as a "dangerous building" hereinabove. 
Unoccupied building means a building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, including buildings ordered vacated by the director pursuant to authority granted to him/her by this Code. In determining whether a building is "unoccupied", the director may consider these factors, among others: 
(a)  A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased. 
(b)  The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall be considered. 
(c)  The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this determination. 
(d)  The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or natural gas. 
(e)  The building is the subject of a foreclosure action. 
(f)  The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale", "for rent" or similar signage. 
(g)  The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations. 
Vacant building means a building or portion of a building which is: 
(a)  Unoccupied and unsecured; or 
(b)  Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or 
(c)  Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or 
(d)  Unoccupied and condemned by the director pursuant to applicable provisions of this Code; or 
(e)  Unoccupied and has multiple code violations; or 
(f)  Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months; or 
(g)  Condemned by the director and unlawfully occupied; or 
(h)  Unoccupied for over one hundred eighty (180) days and during which time the director has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and same have not been corrected in a code-compliant manner; or 
(i)  Unoccupied for over two (2) years; 
but not including, unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1304. - Vacant building determination. 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this article, the director shall evaluate all buildings in the village he or she believes to be unoccupied on the effective date of this article and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a vacant building within the meaning of this article. The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. For buildings the director determines to be vacant buildings, she/he shall, within seven (7) days of making that determination, send notice of the written determination with the factual findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent DuPage County tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this article. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The director shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of determination sent. 
(b)  The director shall cause an inspection of the interior of all vacant buildings to determine compliance with village health and fire codes. 
(c)  The notice of determination shall set a tentative date and time for the code-compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building to determine the extent of compliance with village health and fire codes. After receipt of the notice of determination, if the owner does not appeal the determination, the owner shall either confirm the tentative date for the inspection or shall schedule a new date and time for same. If the owner fails to confirm the tentative date and time for the inspection or refuses to schedule or permit the inspection it shall be the responsibility of the village to obtain an administrative search warrant to accomplish the inspection. 
(d)  The village shall charge the owner a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to offset the cost to the village of said inspection. The owner shall pay the inspection fee to the village within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill for same. 
(e)  The notice of determination shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to section 7-1006 and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the determination. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1305. - Appeal of director's determination of vacant buildings. 
(a)  An owner of a building determined by the director to be a vacant building as provided for in this article may appeal that determination to the village manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the village manager within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his or her building as required by section 7-1006. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The village manager shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the director's written determination. 
(b)  The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the village manager that it is more likely than not that the subject building is not a vacant building within the meaning of this article. 
(c)  The village manager shall send written notice of his or her decision to the owner within ten (10) days of his or her receipt of the appeal. The village manager may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The village manager may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more than ten (10) additional days to decide the appeal if he or she determines that such additional time is required for consideration of the appeal. 
(d)  An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this article to his/her building without the director's determination having been made shall set forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in writing to the director. In the event the director determines that the subject building is a vacant building, the owner shall have the right to appeal the director's determination to the village manager as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1306. - Owner's obligation to register vacant buildings and unoccupied buildings acquired through mortgage foreclosure. 
(a)  The owner of a vacant building and a mortgage lender who acquires title to an unoccupied building shall be required to register same with the director as prescribed below; and the owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a vacant building within the meaning of this article after the effective date of this article or the owner of a building which the director determines at any time to be a vacant building, or the owner of a building whose appeal from the director's determination has been denied by the village manager, shall take the actions provided for in this section 7-1006 within fifteen (15) days after either the date of director's notice of determination or occurrence of the facts which would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a vacant building, or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable. 
Registration requirements: 
(1)  Register the building with the director, on a form provided by the director and pay the two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner; the case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in DuPage County, Illinois to accept service on behalf of the owner with respect to any notices the director sends pursuant to this article or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of this article, and file with the director on the registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A street address is required. A post office box is not an acceptable address. 
(2)  The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "acceptance of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent, pursuant to this article, by posting on the building if the owner fails to renew the registration if required, or maintain as current with the director the information required regarding the person designated to accept notice and service of process. 
(b)  The owner shall renew the vacant building registration each year on the anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant and pay the required two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual fee; and file an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever. 
(c)  Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this article, nor does it preclude any of the actions the village is authorized to take pursuant to this article or elsewhere in the Village Code. 
(d)  Inspection: The village shall conduct a comprehensive code-compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building and the owner shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee to the village to defray the village's cost of same within thirty (30) days of the inspection. Such inspection will determine the extent of compliance with village property maintenance, building, health, water, sewer and fire codes. The village shall send the inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days. Periodic reinspections shall take place, as necessary, until code compliance is achieved. Timely code compliance is required. 
(e)  Vacant building plan: At the time a building is registered as required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The director may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as provided for by this article, the director may determine the plan. The plan shall contain the following as a minimum: 
(1)  A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured or covered by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type with board removed. Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the director and available from the director. The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the director may waive the requirement of an enclosure. 
(2)  For buildings and/or premises which are determined by the director as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section 7-1003, then the vacant building/premises plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s). 
(3)  A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance identified by the director. 
(4)  When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition. 
(5)  A plan of action to maintain the building and/or premises thereof in conformance with this article. 
(6)  A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which fails to provide for compliance with this article or, which will not, as determined by the director, achieve such compliance, within three (3) months, in the case of a vacant boarded building, and two (2) years, in the case of a vacant, unbounded, and code-compliant building will be approved, except that the director may approve an extension of the time during which the building will be unoccupied beyond two (2) years to a date certain but then only based upon clear and documented evidence of good cause shown by the owner as determined by the director. 
(f)  All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings, are located and the exteriors shall at all time be maintained in compliance with the Village Code. 
(g)  Exterior lighting shall be maintained according to standards established by the director and available from the director. 
(h)  All ground floor windows facing street frontage, including, but not limited to, all display windows in unoccupied or vacant commercial buildings shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and shall be covered on the interior side in a professionally finished manner with an opaque window covering material manufactured for that purpose and approved by the director, or in the case of display windows, such windows shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and the display area shall be enclosed with a professionally finished backdrop, floor, side walls and ceiling all of which shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and shall be well lighted from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. each day. Photographs, paintings and other works of art or other tasteful forms of decoration may be professionally displayed in these properly enclosed clear glass display windows. If opaque window covering material is used, a one-inch by one-inch clear glass opening through which the interior space is clearly visible shall be maintained at standing eye level along one (1) edge of one (1) such window. 
(i)  Security: On written notice of the director, the owner shall provide bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Such service shall remain in place until the director gives written notice that the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required when the director makes a written determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such conditions that securing the building is insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1307. - Mortgage lender's obligation to register unoccupied buildings acquired through mortgage foreclosure. 
The obligation to register buildings shall extend to mortgage lenders that have obtained title to unoccupied buildings through a mortgage foreclosure action. 
(a)  Mortgage lenders shall register unoccupied buildings with the director within fifteen (15) days of obtaining title to same. 
(b)  The registration obligation of mortgage lenders under section 7-1006 shall be limited to providing the director with the same information required under subsection 7-1006(a) on the registration form prescribed by the director. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection 7-1007(e) below, mortgage lenders shall not be responsible for paying the two hundred dollar ($200.00) registration fee and shall not be required to comply with subsections 7-1006(b) through (i). 
(d)  An amended registration form shall be filed in accordance with subsection 7-1006(b) within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information provided in any registration form provided hereunder. 
(e)  If such unoccupied, registered building is later determined to have become a "vacant building" as defined in section 7-1003, then such building and building owner shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of section 7-1006. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1308. - Approval of plan. 
(a)  The director shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The director shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his or her determination. 
(b)  In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the director shall include the following in his or her consideration and shall make written findings as to each: 
(1)  The purposes of this article and intent of the village board to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant. 
(2)  The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property. 
(3)  The length of time the building has been vacant. 
(4)  The presence of any public nuisances on the property. 
(5)  The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1309. - Authority to modify plan; right to appeal. 
The director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this article he or she deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1310. - Failure to comply with plan. 
Failure to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this article subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in this article and to any remedies the village may avail itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in the Village Code, including, but not limited to, an action to compel correction of health or fire code violations. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1311. - Other enforcement. 
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the village to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other provisions of this article, the Village Code, or other applicable legislation. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1312. - Certification. 
A certificate of compliance with this for vacant buildings article issued by the director and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this article are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1313. - Time restrictions, vacant buildings. 
It is the policy of the village that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than three (3) months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the director. 
A vacant building which is otherwise code-compliant and secure as determined by the director on the basis of police reports, citizen complaints, and other information considered reliable by reasonable persons, may not remain vacant for more than two (2) years and must have an approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition of the building in place within the timeframes established in this article, except as otherwise provided for in section 7-1006 hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 7-1314. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 7-1314, entitled "Enforcement and penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 3662, § 2, adopted July 25, 2011.  
Sec. 7-1315. - Severability. 
In the event any section of this article or any part of any section of this article is declared to be unconstitutional, such decision shall in no way affect the operation of any other section or part thereof [and] the remainder of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 3662, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Chapter 7.5 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 7; cable TV commission, 2-3001 et seq.; licenses, permits and business regulations, ch. 13; table of franchises, App. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
(RESERVED)  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE T.V. ETHICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2059, adopted Feb. 7, 1983, added a new Ch. 26, §§ 26-101—26-110 to the Code. In order to maintain the alphabetical sequence of chapters in this Code, the editor has redesignated said provisions as Ch. 7.5, Art. II, §§ 7.5-201—7.5-210. 
 
Sec. 7.5-201. - Definitions. 
Cable T.V. franchise means granting by the Village of Villa Park the right and privilege to establish, construct, operate and maintain a system and facilities in, over, upon and under the public right-of-way and within easements or other rights to use property which are effective for the purpose of that grant; said system defined in Illinois Revised Statutes Chapter 24, Section 11-42-11. 
Communication means a discussion, presentation, either oral or written, or other transmission of information relating in any way to cable communications in the Village of Villa Park. 
Expenditure means the payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, political or campaign contribution or load, a gift of money or anything of value, or employment, or the conferring of an economic benefit or the incurring of an economic cost, and includes a contract, promise or agreement; whether or not legally enforceable; whether or not made or incurred in the Village of Villa Park; relating in any way to cable communications in the Village of Villa Park. An expenditure includes expenditures by a person's parent corporation, subsidiary, predecessor, or other affiliated entity, or by any business or professional entity with which a person is affiliated or associated. 
Family member includes spouse, parent and children if they are members of the same household. 
Franchisee means any person who applies for cable T.V. communications franchise in the Village of Villa Park and with whom the corporate authorities have agreed to negotiate regarding a cable communications franchise. 
Grantee means any person granted a cable communications franchise, and the person's lawful and approved successors, transferees or assignees. 
Interest means any economic interest or relationship, whether by ownership, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, investment, employment, gift, fee, or otherwise; whether present, promised, or reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect; whether or not legally enforceable; whether in person itself or in a parent or a subsidiary corporation, or another subsidiary of the same parent. Interest shall not include any interest provided without discrimination to all cable subscribers or to all persons who agree to become cable subscribers, or any publicly disclosed minority interest determined by the village board to be so minor that it does not reasonably constitute a natural or apparent conflict of interest. 
Manager means the village manager of the Village of Villa Park. 
Municipal Code means the Municipal Code of the Village of Villa Park. 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation, cooperative, association, trust, partnership, joint venture, combination or other legally recognized entity. 
Person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association means a person associated with a village representative in a partnership, professional service corporation, or other form of business association or professional association, whether as a partner, officer, employee, associate, principal, agent or otherwise. 
Representatives includes any persons who, at any time, since January 1, 1982, are or were authorized to speak on behalf of a franchisee, or otherwise represent the franchisee, or to service the franchisee or an agency capacity or by contract, with respect to any matters relating to cable communications within the Village of Villa Park. Representatives include, but are not limited to, all attorneys, consultants, franchise representatives, advertising agencies, marketing research firms, persons conducting needs' assessments on behalf of the franchisee, and the like, and any persons who are or were authorized to or who, on behalf of the franchisee, make any communication or engage in any activity relating to the content or approval of any requests for proposal, franchise applications, franchise, or ordinance concerning the cable communications within the Village of Villa Park. In the case of an individual representative, a representative also includes any firm or other business or professional association by which the individual is employed, or with which he or she is otherwise affiliated. In the case of a firm or other entity, a representative also includes any individuals who perform or will perform any of the activities as representative. Representative includes any person employed or retained by the franchisee or a parent corporation, subsidiary, or other affiliated entity whose responsibilities include any of the foregoing communications or activities. 
Requests for proposal means the village's requests for proposal to construct and operate a cable communication system within the corporate limits of Villa Park. 
Village means the Village of Villa Park. 
Village advisor means any outside consultant, counsel or other person retained by the village with respect to cable communications within the Village of Villa Park. 
Village employee means any employee who is working in a department. 
Village representative means members of the village board, all village officers whose positions are created by state statute and all supporting staff of the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-202. - Ineligible franchisees. 
The following shall not be eligible to be or to remain franchisees where any interest might exceed one per cent franchise value or constitute a continuing financial interest in the Villa Park Cable T.V. Franchise: 
(1)  Any person in whom a village employee, or family member of a village employee has an interest; 
(2)  Any person in whom a village representative, or a family member of a village representative has an interest; 
(3)  Any person in whom a village advisor, or family member of the village advisor has an interest; 
(4)  Any person in whom an interest is held by a person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic relationship; 
(5)  Any person whom, directly or indirectly, knowingly offers, promises, suggests, or otherwise communicates the possible provision of an interest to a village employee, family member of a village employee, to a village advisor, to a family member of a village advisor, to a village representative, to a family member of a village representative, or to a person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association to a village representative; 
(6)  Any person who, directly or indirectly, knowingly communicates with a village employee in violation of the restrictions in ex parte communications provided in section 7.5-208 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-203. - Disclosure by franchisee and grantees. 
Each franchisee, or an authorized officer of the franchisee, shall file with the village manager a written statement, subscribed under oath before a notary public, publicly disclosing the following information: 
(1)  The name and addresses of all representatives for the franchisee; the capacity in which each acts as representatives, the amounts of all compensation paid to or reasonably expected by each representative for services rendered with respect to any matter relating to Villa Park cable communications at any time since January 1, 1982 or to be rendered as a representative for the franchisee. 
(2)  All expenditures by or on behalf of the applicant at any time since January 1, 1982, itemized by categories and amounts regarding expenditures performed in regards to the village. 
(3)  All information concerning ownership of franchisee. Such ownership information shall include disclosure of owners, including any beneficiary or beneficiaries of any trust or similar entity, and disclose their principals whenever any ownership is held by an agent or nominee. 
(4)  The identity of all village employees, and family members of village employees, all village advisors and family members of village advisors, village representatives, family members of village representatives, and persons with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association who have or at any time since January 1, 1982, have had an interest in the franchisee, and the nature and amount of such interest. 
(5)  All communications by or on behalf of the franchisee with any village representatives, family member, or person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association, at any time since January 1, 1982, outside of the scope of public meetings in accord with the Open Meetings Act. The written statement disclosing such communication shall include the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number to whom the communication was made. 
b.  The date, time, and duration of the communication, and the circumstances under which it was made. 
c.  A brief statement describing any oral communication. 
d.  A copy of any written materials which were subject to the communications. 
e.  Such disclosure statements shall be filed within thirty (30) days after passage of the ordinance from which this article derived. These statements shall cover the period from January 1, 1982, to the date of said ordinance. Additional statements supporting the information initially filed shall be filed on the last day of each quarter calendar thereafter until three (3) months have passed after the award of any franchise for which the franchisee applied. 
f.  Each grantee shall make disclosures, consistent with the provision and intent of this article, regarding changes of ownership, interest, representatives, expenditures, and other matters relating to cable T.V. communications during the term of the franchise. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the village manager or the village board from requiring disclosure of information in addition to that needed to comply with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-204. - Representatives—Prohibitions. 
Representatives shall not directly or indirectly, knowingly: 
(1)  Provide, offer, promise, suggest or otherwise communicate the possible provision of an interest to a village employee, to any family member of the village employee, to a village advisor, family member of a village advisor, to a village representative, family member of a village representative, or to a person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association. 
(2)  Communicate with a village employee in violation of the restriction on ex parte communication provided by section 7.5-208 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-205. - Same—Registration and disclosure. 
(a)  All representatives shall register with the village manager within thirty (30) days of passage of the ordinance from which this article derived, or before engaging in any activities as a representative, whichever is later. 
(b)  Any franchisee may register on behalf of all representatives who are full-time employees of itself and of any parent, subsidiary, or affiliated corporation. Each franchisee shall be responsible for informing all its representatives of the provisions of this article in a timely manner, and for ensuring that all its representatives comply with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Registration shall consist of filing with the village manager a written statement by the representative, or by the franchisee in case of representatives who are its full-time employees, subscribed under oath before a notary public, publicly disclosing the following information: 
(1)  The name and business address of the representative. 
(2)  The name and address of any firm or any business or professional association with which an individual representative is employed or otherwise affiliated, or in the case of the representative which is a firm or other entity, the name and addresses of any individuals who perform any activities as a representative. 
(3)  The name and address of the franchisee on whose behalf the representative acts or will act. 
(4)  The name and address of any person employing, retaining, or paying the representative to act on behalf of the franchisee. 
(5)  All expenditures by the representative on behalf of the franchisee, at any time since January 1, 1982, itemized by category and amount, and identifying the person to whom each amount of money or other expenditures were directly or indirectly paid relating to any cable T.V. franchise in the village. 
(6)  All communications by the representatives, on behalf of the franchisee with a village employee, family member of a village employee, village advisor, family member of a village advisor, village representative, family member or a village representative or person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association at any time since January 1, 1982. 
(d)  Additional registration statements supplementing the information initially filed shall be filed within thirty (30) days of passage of the ordinance from which this article derived and on the first day of each quarter calendar thereafter until three (3) months have passed after the award of any franchise for which the franchisee applied. If the representative made no expenditures or communications on behalf of the franchisee subsequent to those previously disclosed, the representative shall file and so state in the additional registration statement. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-206. - Village employees, advisors and representatives—Prohibitions. 
(a)  No village employee, village advisor, village representative, or member of his or her family shall have an interest exceeding one per cent in a franchisee except as permitted under section 7.5-202 hereof. 
(b)  No village employee or member of his family shall, directly or indirectly: 
(1)  Solicit or accept an interest in, expenditure from, or any other thing of value or transaction conferring an economic benefit, from a franchisee representative. 
(2)  Solicit, request from or recommend to any franchisee, or representative, the appointment of any person to a place or position, or the provision of an interest, expenditure, or any other thing of value or transaction conferring an economic benefit, to any person. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-207. - Same—Disclosure. 
(a)  Each village representative and advisor shall file with the village manager a written statement, described under oath before a notary public, publicly disclosing the following information: 
(1)  All interests or other economic relationships which the village representative or a member of his family has or had at any time since January 1, 1982, in any franchisee. 
(2)  All interests which the village representative knows have been held, at any time since January 1, 1982, in any franchisee by a family member or by a person with whom the village representative maintains a close economic association. 
(3)  All interests or other economic relationships which the village advisor or a member of his family has or had at any time since January 1, 1982, in any franchisee. 
(4)  All communications, direct or indirect, which the village representative, or member of his family, or advisor, at any time since January 1, 1982, has had with the franchisee, any such communication relating in any way to cable communications in the village with a person who has a direct economic interest in the award of a franchisee, outside of meetings held under the Open Meetings Act, and other public meetings regarding cable T.V. franchise. 
(b)  With respect to each of the interests or other economic relationships described in subparagraph (1), (2) and (3) of this section, the written statement shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who has had, and that person's relationship to the village representative or advisor. 
(2)  The dates any interest was acquired and held. 
(3)  The amount and nature of the interest, and a description of the transaction in which it was acquired. 
(4)  The name and address of the person in whom the interest is or was had. 
(c)  Village representatives and advisors shall file their disclosure statements within thirty (30) days after passage of the ordinance from which this article derived. Additional statements supplementing the information initially filed shall be filed on the first day of each quarter calendar hereafter until three (3) months have passed after the award of all cable franchisees in the village. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-208. - Ex parte communications. 
(a)  No franchisee, or person who supplies materials or services to a franchisee, shall directly or indirectly communicate with a village employee concerning any matter relating in any way to cable communications in the village, other than in the franchise negotiating process, except in writing addressed to the village manager, 20 S. Ardmore Avenue, Villa Park, II, 60181. All responses on behalf of the village or any village employee to such communications shall be in writing and filed with the village manager. The village manager shall maintain and coordinate all such communications and responses in his office, available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  The foregoing shall not apply to communications consisting exclusively of: 
(1)  Requests for schedule of meetings. 
(2)  Requests for information regarding procedural matters not in dispute. 
(3)  Any meetings held under the Open Meeting Act. 
(4)  Negotiations or other discussions with franchisees publicly authorized by the village board. 
(5)  Communications through the public media, such as statements in news interviews and in paid advertisements. In addition, nothing in this section shall preclude the village board from publicly designating the village manager to respond to inquiries from franchisees concerning ascertainment of the needs of each department for possible use of the cable communications system. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-209. - Village manager's responsibilities. 
(a)  Not less than thirty (30) days before the due date for filing the initial statement required by these sections, the village manager shall send a written notice to each village representative of his or her responsibility to file such a statement. 
(b)  All statements and reports are filed in his office pursuant to this article. 
(c)  All statements, reports, listings, and other documents filed pursuant to this article shall be available for examination and copying by the public during regular business hours. A reasonable fee may be charged for copies. Each person requesting to examine a statement, report, or other document filed pursuant to this article must fill out a form identifying the examiner and the person on whose behalf the examination is being conducted by name, address, occupation, and telephone number, and listing the documents to be examined and the date of examination. 
(d)  The village manager shall notify the village board of any alleged or apparent violations of this article, and any reports or investigations relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
Sec. 7.5-210. - Additional penalties. 
In addition to any other remedies provided by this article or other applicable law, violations of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following additional penalties: 
(1)  Violations of sections 7.5-203 through 7.5-206 may render a franchisee ineligible for a franchise, and may render any franchise ordinance or other village action relating to the franchisee voidable. 
(2)  When a village employee, village advisor, village representative, family member of the above, a person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic association acquires or otherwise has an interest in the franchisee, the village board may revoke any franchise held by the franchisee. 
(3)  When an interest in a franchise is acquired or otherwise held by a person who, within twenty (20) months prior to obtaining such interest, was a village representative, a family member of a village representative, or a person with whom a village representative maintains a close economic relationship, any franchise held by the grantee may be voidable. 
(4)  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-108 for each offense. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 2-7-83)  
ARTICLE III. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2103, adopted March 19, 1984 provided for the addition of a new Art. II, §§ 26-203—26-229 to the Code. In order to keep related material together, the editor has redesignated said provisions as a new Art. III, §§ 7.5-301—7.5-327. 
Cross reference— Table of franchises, App. A. 
 
Sec. 7.5-301. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the granting of nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate and maintain broadband communications networks (community antenna television systems) in the public ways of the Village of Villa Park; to provide for the specifications, procedures and standards for the same; to provide for the regulation of such networks; and to provide for the payment to the village for the privilege of exercising the rights granted by such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-302. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases and words and their derivatives shall have the meaning specified herein in connection with this article: 
(a)  Affiliates of another person shall mean: 
(1)  Any person directly or indirectly owning, controlling, or holding with power to vote, five (5) per centum or more of the outstanding voting securities of such other person; 
(2)  Any person five (5) per centum or more of whose outstanding voting securities are directly or indirectly owned, controlled, or held with power to vote, by such other person; 
(3)  Any person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, such other person; and 
(4)  Any officer, director, partner, co-partner, agent, joint-adventurer, or executive employee of such other person. 
(b)  Annual gross revenues shall mean all revenues received by the grantee, its affiliates, and/or subsidiaries from and in connection with the operation of the "broadband telecommunications network" (BTN) in the Village of Villa Park, and all revenues generated by such BTN or from the use of such BTN, including, but not limited to, retail sales of personal property, data transmission, alarm or signal transmission, advertising revenue, charges to, subscribers for basic service, pay service, two-way service, installation charges, and any and all revenue received from any source whatsoever for use of the BTN for the transmission of electronic or microwave impulses, provided that such revenue may lawfully be included in the base on which the village may calculate the franchise fee herein. Sales taxes or other taxes for fees which are separately billed to subscribers by the grantee or which are collected from subscribers by the grantee or which are collected from subscribers for remittance to a governmental agency or other third party are excluded from the term "annual gross revenues." 
(c)  Basic service shall mean the service package offered by the grantee to subscribers which includes (but which is not necessarily limited to) the signals referred to in section 7.5-309(a) and at least one municipal access channel, at least one educational access channel, and at least one public interest channel. If more than one service package meets the foregoing conditions, then the service package which is offered at the lowest rate shall constitute the basic service. 
(d)  Board or village board shall mean the board of trustees of the Village of Villa Park. 
(e)  Broadband telecommunications network (BTN) shall mean all of the component physical operational and programming elements of any network of cables, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including cable television, designed, constructed, wired or used for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and transmitting by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio and/or audio-visual electrical impulses of television, radio and other intelligences, either analog or digital, for sale or use by the inhabitants of the village, including, without limitation, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment and facilities, and shall include within its meaning what is known as a "community antenna television system." 
(f)  Commence operation shall mean that time and date when operation of the BTN is considered to have commenced, which shall be when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least twenty (20) per cent of the potential subscribers in the franchise territory. 
(g)  Community antenna television system shall mean "community antenna television system" as defined in Section 11-42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(h)  FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, elected, or established successor with respect to federal regulation and licensing in connection with the subject matter of this article. 
(i)  Franchise shall mean the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this article to construct and operate a broadband telecommunications network along the public ways within all or a specified area in the village. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the village as required by other codes, ordinances and laws of this village. 
(j)  Full network service shall mean basic service and all pay services. The term does not include two-way service. 
(k)  Grantee shall mean any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this article and under the granting franchise ordinance, its present subsidiaries and affiliates, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
(l)  May is permissive. 
(m)  Pay service shall mean any service package for which a monthly or other service charge is made. 
(n)  Person shall mean an individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, organization, corporation or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the same. 
(o)  Schools means all public, parochial and private, elementary and secondary school, junior colleges, colleges and universities located or operating within the Village of Villa Park and which have been granted a certificate of recognition by the State of Illinois. 
(p)  Reasonable notice shall be written notice addressed to the grantee at its office, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than four (4) days prior to the day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said four (4) days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized by the village shall be excluded. 
(q)  Sale shall include any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
(r)  Service package shall mean one or more communications channels which are offered as a unit by the grantee to subscribers and for which a separately identifiable charge is made. 
(s)  Shall and Must: Each is mandatory and not merely directory. 
(t)  Start construction and/or Commencement of construction shall mean the act of initiating the laying, installing or stringing of cable, wires, or lines upon, under or above streets. 
(u)  Street shall include each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or is hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the village limits: Streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such other public property and areas that the village shall permit to be included within the definition of "street" from time to time. 
(v)  Subscriber shall mean any person receiving a service package. 
(w)  Substantially completed shall occur when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least ninety (90) per cent of the potential subscribers in the franchise territory. 
(x)  System shall mean "community antenna television system" as defined in Section 11-42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code, and as amended from time to time. 
(y)  Two-way service shall mean any service which involves the transmission of a signal from a subscriber to a facility maintained by the grantee as part of the BTN. This term includes (but is not limited to) fire, security and medical alert systems. 
(z)  Village shall mean the Village of Villa Park, a municipal corporation of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-303. - Franchise requirement; authority granted by a franchise. 
(a)  Franchise required. No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate on or within any street, any equipment, facilities or system for the distribution of television signals or radio signals or other intelligences, either analog or digital, over a BTN to any subscriber unless a franchise authorizing the use of the streets has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article; and thereafter, only while said person is legally operating under the terms and provisions of said franchise. 
(b)  Authority granted. Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the grantee, subject to the provisions of this article, the right and privilege at its own expense, to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, such towers, antennas, cables, electronic equipment, and other network appurtenances as are necessary for the operation of a BTN (community antenna television system) in the village. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-304. - Terms and conditions for each franchise. 
(a)  Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be exclusive. The village reserves the right to grant other franchises to other persons at any time or times. 
(b)  Term of franchise. Each franchise granted under this article shall take effect and be in force as provided herein for a term of fifteen (15) years from the effective date as provided in section 7.5-305(e) subject, however, to the right of the village to terminate said franchise as provided herein. 
(c)  Noninterference with use of streets. The right and privilege granted by a franchise shall be exercised so as not to interfere with the use of the streets by the village and such others as may be designated by the village to use such streets, and the village may demand the removal of any cables or equipment as have been constructed by the grantee when the village has reasonable grounds to believe that such is interfering with the use of the streets. 
(d)  Transfer of franchise. 
(1)  No franchise granted hereunder may be sold, transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of, whether by way of sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, without in each case the prior written consent of the village, and then only under such conditions as the village may establish. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7.5-304(d)(1), a franchise may be mortgaged, pledged or assigned as security for the financing of the related BTN. Such mortgage, pledge or assignment may be made without the consent of the village, but any such mortgage, pledge or assignment shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the franchise and the related franchise agreement and to the rights of the village under this chapter, provided however, any franchise agreement may include for the benefit of the village right of first refusal and purchase provisions. 
(3)  Reference is made to section 7.5-304(i)(1) for the effect of changes in ownership or control of the grantee and to section 7.5-304(i)(2) for rules covering control of a BTN by a financial institution. 
(4)  Reference is made to section 7.5-317 for transfers in connection with insolvency proceedings. 
(e)  Franchise territory. Each franchise granted hereunder shall relate to the territorial limits of the village, or such lesser area as may be designated by the village board, and to any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise. Subject to section 7.5-310 hereof, the grantee shall be required to extend the BTN to and to offer the services of the BTN to potential subscribers within the franchise territory where there are at least a total of forty (40) residential dwelling units and/or occupied commercial or industrial structures per line mile. 
Where the density of residential dwelling and occupied commercial or industrial structures, adverse terrain, or other factors render extension of the system and offer of services impractical or technically unfeasible or creates a substantial economic hardship, the village may upon petition of the grantee either waive the extension and offer of services on such special terms, conditions and provisions as are reasonable and fair to the village, the grantee and potential subscribers in such areas. 
(f)  Privileges must be specified. No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted except those specifically prescribed herein. 
(g)  Obligations of grantee to obtain other permits. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the village, utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in streets. 
(h)  Franchise binding. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be binding upon the grantee, and all successors, lessees, or assignees as may be approved by the village. 
(i)  Transaction affecting ownership or control. 
(1)  Express approval of the village board, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten (10) per cent of the right of control of or interest in the franchise or in the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control ten (10) per cent or more of such right of control or interest, singularly or collectively. Transfer from a subsidiary to a parent corporation or vice versa shall not be considered change of control. 
At the time a franchise is granted hereunder, and annually thereafter, the grantee shall file with the village a current list of its owners, partners (both general and limited), officers and directors, together with a list of shareholders owning or controlling five (5) per cent or more of its stock if the grantee is a corporation. 
(2)  Any financial institution having a pledge of, or other form of security interest in a franchise, or in the assets of a grantee, for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the BTN, shall notify the village whenever it or its designee satisfactory to the village takes control or operates the BTN. However, such financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial institution exercises control over the BTN. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the BTN for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the village board in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the village to transfer said franchise to another grantee. If the village finds that any transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant, is satisfactory, the village may transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the village to such transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided however, nothing contained herein shall limit any right of the village of first refusal, purchase, or other similar provision which may be included in any franchise agreement. 
(3)  For purposes of this section 7.5-304(i), the term "grantee" shall not include any affiliate of such grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-305. - Selection of grantees. 
(a)  Application for a franchise. Applications for an original franchise granted hereunder shall be filed with the village manager and shall be accompanied by the payment of a nonrefundable filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such applications shall contain written information which is responsible to requirements established from time to time by the board of trustees. 
(b)  Acceptance of certain applications. Applications, requests or proposals for a franchise which were submitted to and accepted by the village prior to December 31, 1983, shall be deemed to be in compliance with section 7.5-305(a). Section 7.5-305(a) as it relates to a filing fee shall not be applicable to such applications. 
(c)  Criteria for evaluation of applications. Applications for BTN franchise will be evaluated under the following criteria: 
(1)  Experience. Preference may be given to applicants that can give evidence of providing dependable and complete service to other communities and who have established a record of excellent construction practices, ability to meet deadlines, and good planning and marketing practices. 
(2)  Financial stability. Preference may be given to applicants that present evidence of financial resources which will assure that the applicant will have the ability to complete the entire BTN in the franchise area within the time period set forth in section 7.5-305(a). 
(3)  System design. Preference may be given to a system which contains the flexibility to adjust to new technological development and which indicates that high quality equipment will be used and high quality maintenance practices will be followed. 
(4)  Services. Preference may be given to the applicant that proposes to provide superior programming. In determining what constitutes superior programming, particular consideration will be given to local origination and the resources which an applicant proposes to devote to local origination in order to make it interesting, innovative, and financially feasible. 
(5)  Local facilities. Preference may be given to applicants that propose to maintain studio facilities, and/or district, regional or corporate headquarters, or offices within the village. 
(6)  Rate schedules. Preference may be given to applicants with the most reasonable installation and subscriber rate schedules. However, such schedules must be justified in financial pro forma statements by the use of realistic levels of penetration. 
(7)  Local ownership and control. The degree of local ownership and control of an applicant may be taken into account. 
The foregoing criteria are not listed in any order of priority and shall not limit the village from taking into consideration other factors which may directly or indirectly benefit the village, or potential or existing subscribers. 
(d)  Procedures for granting a franchise. All phases of the franchise process shall be had in accordance with Chapter 7.5, Article I of the Municipal Code of the Village of Villa Park. If the village board determines that a franchise should be granted hereunder, the board will then proceed as follows: 
(1)  The board shall, by motion, make a tentative selection of the applicant. Such action shall not constitute the award of a franchise and shall not confer any rights upon the applicant except to proceed in accordance with this section 7.5-305(d). 
(2)  The proper officers and representatives of the village and the applicant shall discuss the terms of the franchise agreement described in section 7.5-306 of this article. 
(3)  If the village and the applicant reach agreement to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement, the agreement shall be presented to the village board for approval and authorization for execution by the village president. 
(4)  The board shall then, by ordinance, grant a franchise to the applicant. 
(5)  The decision of the board concerning grantee selection and awarding of any franchise shall be final. 
(e)  Effective date of a franchise. The effective date of a franchise shall be the date on which the ordinance referred to in subsection (4) of section 7.5-305(d) is adopted by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-306. - Franchise agreement. 
(a)  Agreement required. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the village have executed a franchise agreement which shall set forth the terms and provisions of the franchise. 
(b)  Contents of agreement. Each franchise agreement shall contain the following express representation by the grantee: 
(1)  The grantee has carefully read the terms and conditions of this article of Chapter 7.5 of the Village Code and the franchise agreement and accepts all of such terms and conditions and agrees to abide by the same. 
(2)  The grantee acknowledges that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this article and expressly waives any claims that any provisions thereof are unreasonable or arbitrary or void, except as to those provisions which are pre-empted now or hereafter by superseding provisions of federal or state law, in accordance with section 7.5-323(d) of this article. 
(3)  The grantee acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the franchise by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the village or by any third person, regarding any term or condition of this article or the franchise agreement not expressed therein. 
(4)  The grantee represents that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any village employee, agent, representative, attorney, consultant or official regarding receipt of the franchise. 
(c)  Additional conditions. In addition to those matters required to be included in the franchise agreement by virtue of this article, the franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be included in the grantee's proposal and/or negotiated between the village and the grantee, except that no such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In case of such conflict, or in case of any ambiguity between any terms or provisions of the franchise agreement and this article, the words of this article shall control, provided, however, this provision shall not impair in any way the right of the village to revoke any franchise, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard as a consequence of any default in the performance of any of its material obligations under any franchise agreement.  
Sec. 7.5-307. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Annual franchise payment. Each grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the village an annual fee in the maximum amount approved by the FCC, not to exceed five (5) per cent of the annual gross revenues. Such payment shall be in addition to any other payment, charge, reimbursement, permit fee or bond owed to the village by the grantee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of real property taxes levied by state, county or local authorities. 
The amount of the franchise fee set forth in this section shall increase to the highest rate that the grantee is paying any other municipality located within fifty (50) miles from the village, provided the FCC has not prohibited the payment of such rate to such other municipality. For the purposes of this section, franchise fees payable by any affiliate, subsidiary, partnership, or wholly owned corporation related to the grantee shall be deemed payable by the grantee so as to trigger an increase in the amount paid to the village. Any successor, lessee or assignee shall be bound by all rate increases and by the provisions of this section. 
The change in the amount of the franchise fee shall go into effect on the date of passage of an ordinance in the other municipality where the grantee, as hereinabove defined, operates. 
To facilitate the implementation of this section, the grantee shall within fifteen (15) days after their passage, send to the village a certified copy of all ordinances granting to grantee, as hereinabove defined, a franchise within fifty (50) miles from the village. 
(b)  Method of computation. The fee payable under section 7.5-307(a) shall be computed on the basis of the grantee's fiscal year. 
(c)  Partial payments. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days after the end of the first six (6) months of each fiscal year of the grantee, the grantee shall make a partial payment of the annual fee due for that year. Such partial payment shall be equal to the maximum fee amount approved by the FCC, but not in excess of five (5) per cent of the grantee's gross revenues for such six-month period. "Gross revenues" for this purpose shall be determined in the same manner as annual gross revenues. 
(2)  The village and the grantee may agree to a greater number of partial payments in each fiscal year by a provision therefor in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Time of annual payment. The payment of the amount required under section 7.5-307(a) shall be due not later than ninety (90) days after the end of the fiscal year for which such payment is computed. Such payment shall equal the amount determined under section 7.5-307(a) minus all partial payments theretofore made under section 7.5-307(c). 
(e)  Place of payment. All payments made under this section 7.5-307 shall be made at the office of the treasurer of the village during normal business hours. 
(f)  Certificates. Each payment made pursuant to this section 7.5-307 shall be accompanied by a certificate of an executive officer of the grantee to the effect that the amount of the payment has been correctly determined in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Audit rights. The village may at any time or times cause an audit or inspection to be made of the grantee's books and records for the purpose of verifying the correct amount of any payment required under this section 7.5-307. If such an audit discloses a deficiency in the amount paid of three (3) per cent or more of the amount which should have been paid, the grantee shall pay forthwith to the village upon demand the amount of such deficiency plus the cost of such audit, subject, however, to the provisions of section 7.5-325 of this article concerning disputes. 
(h)  Acceptance by village. No acceptance of any payment by the village shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the village may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(i)  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate of ten (10) per cent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-308. - Nature of the system: Technical standards. 
(a)  General requirements. Except to the extent to which the FCC has pre-empted the field of technical standards, each BTN for which a franchise is granted hereunder shall be designed, installed and operated so as to meet the following general requirements: 
(1)  The system shall be operationally capable of relaying to subscriber terminals those television and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of which the grantee is now or hereafter authorized by the FCC. 
(2)  The system shall consist of a cable network having a minimum initial forward bandwidth in compliance with the technical standards and rules of the FCC; provided that if a reverse or feedback circuit is routed through a subscriber's premises, it shall be connected so as to permit subscriber notification and deactivation. 
(3)  The system shall be capable of continuous twenty-four-hour daily operation. 
(4)  The system shall be operated in such a manner as to avoid causing interference with reception of off-the-air signals by nonsubscribers to the network. 
(5)  The system shall be designed, installed and operated so as to comply with all applicable technical standards and regulations promulgated by the FCC. 
(6)  The system shall be designed, installed and operated so as to assure the delivery to all subscribers of standard color and monochrome signals on the FCC-designated Class I television channels without noticeable picture degradation or visible evidence of color distortion or other forms of interference directly attributable to the performance of the BTN. 
(7)  The system shall be established and constructed in accordance with the highest standards of the art of cable communications and in accordance with the highest standards of the code of conduct with respect to businesses of the size and type of the grantee. 
(b)  Performance monitoring. Except to the extent to which the FCC has pre-empted the field of performance monitoring, the following rules shall apply to the grantee: 
(1)  The performance of each BTN for which a franchise is granted hereunder with respect to the standards set forth in section 7.5-308(a) shall be monitored in accordance with this section 7.5-308(b). 
(2)  Test procedures used in verification of the performance criteria set forth herein, if not as set forth in Paragraph 76.609, Subpart K, of the FCC Rules and Regulations, as may be from time to time amended or revised, shall be in accordance with good engineering practice and shall be fully described in an attachment to the annual certificate filed with the village. 
(3)  To the extent that the report of measurements as required above may be combined with any reports of measurements required by the FCC or other regulatory agencies, the village shall accept such combined reports, provided that all standards and measurements herein or hereafter established by the village are satisfied. 
(4)  Not later than thirteen (13) months after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, or within such lesser period of time as may be required by the FCC from time to time, technical performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate full compliance with the current technical standards of the FCC. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, a qualified registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the village describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the tests. 
(5)  The village may require additional tests on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests will be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The village will endeavor to so arrange its requirements for such additional tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or to the subscriber. 
(c)  Interconnections. 
(1)  Whenever it is financially and technically feasible, the grantee shall so construct and operate the network so that the network can be interconnected into all other networks within the village. 
(2)  Wherever it is financially and technically feasible, the grantee shall so construct and operate the network so that the network can be interconnected into all networks adjacent to the village. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-309. - Nature of the system: Services. 
(a)  Carriage of Chicago Area television stations. Unless prohibited by rules and regulations of the FCC, each BTN for which a franchise is granted hereunder shall carry the signals of all television broadcast stations whose specified zone includes the Village of Villa Park. 
(b)  Other channel requirements. Whether or not required by the rules and regulations of the FCC, each BTN for which a franchise is granted hereunder shall: 
(1)  Have a minimum capacity of fifty-two (52) channels; 
(2)  Have the capacity for two-way active communications; 
(3)  Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on which use by educational agencies within the village shall have priority over all other uses; 
(4)  Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on which the village shall have priority over all other uses; 
(5)  Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on which public interest programming, including, but not limited to, not-for-profit hospitals, shall have priority over all other uses; 
(6)  Provide at least one channel, the use of which is available to the public on a leased basis. 
(c)  Service package. Subject to the provisions of section 7.5-309(d), a grantee may offer service packages to subscribers or potential subscribers in such number, description and content as the grantee shall determine, provided that all service packages shall be offered on a nondiscriminatory basis as provided in section 7.5-320(a). 
(d)  Basic service. Each grantee shall offer the basic service as defined in this article. The basic service need not be offered by that name, insofar as subscribers are concerned, but for purposes of this article, the service shall be known as the basic service. The grantee shall not be required to provide the basic service to a subscriber as a condition to the provision of other service packages. The provisions of this section 7.5-309(d) shall not be construed as any effort by the village to regulate the program content of the basic service; the only purpose of this section 7.5-309(d) is to insure that the basic service will be offered to subscribers as one of the grantee's service packages. 
(e)  Public installations and service thereto. 
(1)  The grantee shall connect the BTN to each school, public library, fire station, and such municipal buildings and other public buildings and locations as the village may designate, without charge for installation and maintenance of one basic cable outlet per connection. Such installations shall be made within sixty (60) days of completion of the cable trunk line that would serve those buildings. 
(2)  Any service granted pursuant to subsection (a) above, may be extended by the persons receiving such service to as many areas within the building where the service is granted or its adjacent buildings which are a part of the total complex receiving such service. The person receiving such service shall pay all expenses for any such extension and shall complete such extension so as not to interfere with the operation of the BTN. 
(3)  The grantee shall provide, without charge, the basic service to each installation made pursuant to this section 7.5-309(e)(1). 
(4)  The village shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge, upon the property of any grantee located in the village, its own equipment and/or that of any unit of local government providing services or protection of life or property within the village, including, but not limited to, a police and fire system and emergency services disaster agency, provided that such equipment does not unreasonably interfere with the grantee's establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the BTN. 
(f)  Emergency alert override. Each grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for a remotely activated emergency override alert system whereby a designee of the village, in times of emergency, may introduce an audio and/or visual message on all BTN channels simultaneously. The village shall hold grantee harmless and indemnify grantee for liability solely and exclusively resulting from the emergency use of the BTN by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-310. - Construction of the system. 
(a)  Construction schedule. 
(1)  Permits. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall file with the appropriate governmental authorities and with the necessary utility companies, all initial papers, applications, contracts and other documents necessary to permit the commencement of construction and operation of the BTN, and shall thereafter make diligent efforts to obtain the proper execution and delivery of such documents. The grantee shall report to the village every thirty (30) days on its progress in obtaining necessary permits, contracts and other necessary documents as contemplated above, and on its construction progress as specified hereinafter. 
(2)  Substantial completion of construction. Within twenty-four (24) months after the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall have substantially completed the BTN. 
(3)  Midway completion of construction. Within twenty (20) months after the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall have installed sufficient distribution facilities so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least fifty (50) per cent of the potential subscribers in the franchise territory. 
(4)  Commencement of operation. Within sixteen (16) months after the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall commence operation. 
(5)  Initiation of services. Within ten (10) months after the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall have installed sufficient distribution facilities so as to permit the offering of full network service to at least one potential subscriber in the franchise territory. 
(6)  Commencement of construction. Within six (6) months after the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall commence construction of the BTN. 
(b)  Construction standards. 
(1)  Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any amendments thereto, as well as all state and local codes where applicable. 
(2)  Compliance with electrical code. All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Village Code, as may be from time to time amended. 
(3)  Antennas and towers. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designed for the proper loading zone as specified in Electronics Industry Association's R.S.-22A Specifications, as may be from time to time amended. 
(4)  Construction standards and requirements. All of the grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head-end and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances, if and to the extent located within the village, shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, and such work shall be performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the village may deem proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on village properties. 
(5)  Safety, nuisance requirements. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. 
(6)  Experienced personnel. The grantee shall employ only such personnel as have necessary and sufficient skill and experience or training as properly to perform their respective jobs and positions. 
(c)  Street occupancy. 
(1)  Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities on public property until the written approval of the village is first obtained, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Grantee shall endeavor to use existing conduits and/or implement augering whenever economically and technically feasible to avoid unnecessary cutting of streets. Grantee shall not acquire any vested interest in any location for any pole or wire holding structure, and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the village determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(2)  The facilities of the grantee shall be installed underground in those areas of the village where existing telephone and electric services are both underground at the time of network construction. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of network construction, the grantee may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial facilities are required to be placed underground by the village, the grantee shall likewise place its facilities underground at its own expense. 
(3)  The grantee shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The village shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets and that the proposed construction shall be done in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Villa Park Village Code. 
(4)  All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order and repair. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(5)  Grantee shall restore to village standards and specifications, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the village, any damage or disturbance caused to any street, public way or to public property as a result of its operations or construction on its behalf. Grantee shall guarantee and maintain such restoration for a period of one year against defective materials or workmanship. Grantee shall substantially restore any damage or disturbance to private property which may result from operations or construction by it or on its behalf. 
(6)  Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the village president, village manager, director of public works, civil defense director, police chief, or the fire chief of the Villa Park Fire Department or his lawful successor, to remove or damage any of the grantee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the village for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the village. 
(7)  Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to prior notice and supervision and direction of the village. 
(8)  The grantee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove, any property of the grantee when in the opinion of the village manager, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other type of structure or improvement by governmental agencies, whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including (but not limited to) movement of buildings, renewal of areas within the village, and any general program under which the village shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The grantee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligation, to abandon any property of grantee in place. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of grantee, and grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder. 
(9)  Upon failure of grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article to be done in any street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the village manager, the village manager may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the village the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the village manager to grantee, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(10)  The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely necessary, and then only after written permission has been given by the village manager. 
(11)  The grantee shall install in conduit, all cables passing under any roadway. 
(d)  Letter of credit or bond. The grantee shall furnish to the village an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the village in a form approved by the village's attorney certifying that one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) is and will remain available (until reduced in accordance with this section 7.5-310(d)) at a sound and reputable banking or financial institution, located within fifty (50) miles of the village, (selected by the grantee and approved by the village) authorized to issue such irrevocable letter of credit. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the grantee of its obligations under this article and the franchise agreement, including timely compliance with the construction schedule set forth in section 7.5-310(a) of this article or the franchise agreement, whichever provisions are shorter, and shall be reduced in accordance with the following table upon such timely compliance by the grantee: 
If the following construction phase is timely 
completed by the grantee, 
  
_____ 	The dollar amount of the letter of credit 
required by this section 7.5-310(d) shall be 
reduced to the sum of: 
_____ 
Commencement of construction 
(Six (6) months after effective date of franchise) or such lesser time as may be specified or referred to in any franchise agreement 	$100,000.00 
Initiation of services 
(Ten (10) months after effective date of franchise) or such lesser time as may be specified or referred to in any franchise agreement 	80,000.00 
Commencement of operation 
(Sixteen (16) months after effective date of franchise) or such lesser time as may be specified or referred to in any franchise agreement 	70,000.00 
Midway completion of construction 
(Twenty (20) months after effective date of franchise) or such lesser time as may be specified or referred to in any franchise agreement 	60,000.00 
Substantial completion of construction 
(Twenty-four (24) months after effective date of franchise) or such lesser time as may be specified or referred to in any franchise agreement 	50,000.00 
 
When the BTN has been substantially completed, the amount of the letter of credit shall remain fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and shall be renewed on a yearly basis through the remainder of the term of the franchise, or any renewal or extension thereof, and upon the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any law, code, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise in a material fashion, there shall be recoverable from the irrevocable letter of credit any damages or loss suffered by the village as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees and costs, up to the full amount of the letter of credit. 
The village shall determine whether the grantee has satisfied the conditions of the letter of credit in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in section 7.5-316 of this article. If no claim shall be made under such letter of credit for five (5) consecutive years, the grantee shall be entitled to a return and cancellation of the letter of credit. Such period may be reduced in any franchise agreement, in the discretion of the board, but such reduced period shall not be less than the period required for the completion of construction. 
In the sole discretion of the board a performance bond, from a reputable bonding company doing business in Illinois, in a form acceptable to the village's attorney may be accepted in lieu of a letter of credit in the amount aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-311. - Operation and maintenance of the system. 
(a)  Repair. Any damage caused by the grantee's negligence shall be repaired fully by the grantee. 
(b)  Office and phone for service. The grantee shall maintain an office in the village which shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a locally listed telephone and shall be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. Alternatively, the franchise may designate an agent, who has an office in the village, who is authorized to receive complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. In addition, the grantee shall maintain a convenient service in the village during normal business hours for the receipt of sums due by its subscribers and shall provide for regular billing of accounts. 
(c)  Notification of service procedures. The grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is installed written instructions that clearly set forth procedures for placing a service call, or requesting an adjustment, or making a complaint or request. 
(d)  Service response time. The grantee shall use its best efforts to provide prompt service response for all complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. In no event shall response time exceed twenty-four (24) hours except in circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the grantee. 
(e)  Service interruptions and notification. The grantee shall interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good cause and for the shortest time possible, and except in emergency situations, only after publishing notice of service interruption in a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the service interruption. Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance, and repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday or Sunday, or any night preceding any legal holiday. 
(f)  Request for removal or change. 
(1)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued under the provisions of the Village Code, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of said building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires, shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days advance notice of any move contemplated to arrange for temporary wire changes. 
(2)  The village shall notify the grantee at least ten (10) days prior to the intention of the village to commence any construction in the streets that requires the relocation of grantee's lines, wires or other network appurtenances so as not to interfere with such construction. 
(3)  In the event that permanent use of a street is denied to the grantee by the village for any reason, the grantee shall provide service to affected subscribers over alternate routes within a reasonable period of time. 
(g)  Subscriber's right to cancel service. 
(1)  Any subscriber shall have the right to cancel any or all service packages upon thirty (30) days written notice to the grantee. 
(2)  Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the subscriber's premises upon his request. 
(h)  Abandonment of service. 
(1)  After grantee has established service pursuant to this article in the franchise area, such service shall not be suspended or abandoned in the whole or any part of the franchise area unless the suspension or abandonment is authorized in writing by the village board. 
(2)  Whenever grantee shall file with the village board a written application alleging that the public interest no longer requires that grantee furnish service pursuant to this article in the whole or in any part of the franchise area, the village board may take evidence upon that question and make a finding with respect to it. If the village board shall find that the public interest no longer requires that the grantee furnish service, the village board may authorize suspension or abandonment of service upon such reasonable terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-312. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Rates and service schedules. The grantee shall at all times maintain on file with the village a complete and current schedule showing all services being provided under the grantee's franchise, the fees and charges for each of such services, the charges for connections or disconnections, and any other charges which may be made by the grantee in connection with the BTN. Such schedule shall also show the components of the basic service and the pay service, each on a channel-by-channel basis, the monthly charge for each service package, and reasonably complete description of each service package. 
(b)  Initial rates. The rates and charges initially charged by a grantee for each of its service packages, as shown in the first schedule filed under section 7.5-312(a), shall be the same as shown or referred to in any franchise agreement, or in the absence of any provision in any franchise agreement, then as proposed in any grantee's application, proposal, or request. Such rates and charges shall not be increased until the later of the following dates: 
(1)  The date which is thirty (30) months subsequent to the effective date of the grantee's franchise, and 
(2)  The date which is two (2) years after the grantee has at least fifty (50) per cent of the system activated and serving subscribers. 
(c)  Modification of rates. 
(1)  After the later of the dates specified in section 7.5-312(b), the grantee may modify its rates from time to time by filing a revised schedule in accordance with section 7.5-312(a). 
(2)  Each rate adjustment and the establishment of a charge for a new or different service shall become effective on the date designated by the grantee in the schedule, provided, that such date may not be less than sixty (60) days from the date on which the schedule was filed, and provided, further, that this section 7.5-312(c) is subject to the provision of section 7.5-312(d). 
(d)  Regulation of rates. It is presently the policy of the village not to regulate rates charged by a grantee for any of its services. However, the village expressly reserves the right to regulate, to the extent permitted by law, any increase in the grantee's rates beyond those rates regarding which a schedule has been filed pursuant to section 7.5-312(c) herein. At the time of each hearing conducted pursuant to section 7.5-315(a), the village shall consider whether to regulate rates. If the village determines at any of such times to regulate rates, this article shall be amended to provide for appropriate standards and hearings in order that such rates may be fairly and equitably determined. Each franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the village's right to amend this article for the purpose stated in this section 7.5-312(d). Such right shall be exercised at the sole discretion of the village. Nothing contained in this article shall relieve any grantee from complying with any rate schedule which may be included or referred to in any franchise agreement. 
(e)  Disconnections. No charge may be made for disconnection from the BTN. However, if a subscriber has failed to pay properly due monthly fees, or if a subscriber disconnects for seasonal period, the grantee may require, in addition to full payment of any delinquent amounts, a reasonable fee for reconnection to the system. 
(f)  No consideration beyond schedule. A grantee shall not receive any consideration whatsoever for or in connection with its provision of service to its subscribers other than as set forth in this section or in the schedule then on file with the village. 
(g)  Abatement of charges. Upon subscriber's request, charges shall abate pro rata in the event that service to a subscriber is interrupted for more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours for any reason whatsoever except interruption caused by the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-313. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Records required. Each grantee shall at all times maintain: 
(1)  A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding three (3) years. 
(2)  A full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps showing the exact location of all BTN equipment installed or in use in the village (exclusive of subscriber service drops). 
(3)  Financial records of the grantee in connection with its activities within the village maintained in a manner distinguishing revenues earned within the village from revenues earned by the grantee in other municipalities. 
(b)  Reports required. Each grantee shall file with the village the following reports: 
(1)  Reports to be filed within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year of the grantee: 
a.  An "annual report of cable television systems" (FCC Form 325, Schedules 1 and 2). 
b.  An ownership report indicating all persons who at any time during the preceding year controlled or benefited from an interest in the franchise of ten (10) per cent or more. This report shall also include all creditors secured by pledges or other form of security interest in the BTN and all unsecured creditors whose claims in respect to the operation of the franchise in the village exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
c.  A summary list of all complaints and requests, and BTN "down time" received or experienced during the year, provided, however, the grantee shall maintain for a period of at least three (3) years complete records identifying the person making the complaint or request, the subject matter thereof, and the resolution of the matter in question or the action taken by the grantee. 
d.  A report showing or containing: 
(i)  The total number of hours of utilization of each of the channels described in items (4), (5) and (6) of Section 7.5-309(b); 
(ii)  The number of persons subscribing to two-way service; and 
(iii)  A brief statement indicating whether grantee is planning any new services for the ensuing years as a result of technological development in the cable television industry. 
e.  An annual report of the annual gross revenue of the grantee, prepared, certified and audited by an independent certified public accountant to be selected by the grantee and approved by the village. 
(2)  Reports and certificates to be filed promptly after the indicated event occurs: 
a.  A copy of all petitions and applications filed or submitted by the grantee with any governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matter affecting the BTN or the grantee's undertaking; with respect to this article. 
b.  Written evidence of the payment of each premium for each policy of insurance required hereunder. 
(c)  Documents required. Each grantee shall file with the village within thirty (30) days after the end of each of such grantee's fiscal years a true copy of the most current form of each of the following documents: 
(1)  The letter of credit or bond required hereunder. 
(2)  All policies of insurance or certificates thereof required hereunder. 
(3)  All rules, regulations, and policy statements adopted by the grantee in operating the BTN. 
(d)  Filing. When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters required to be filed with the village shall be filed with the village manager. 
(e)  Inspection of property and records. At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the village, of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated within or without the village. The grantee shall also permit any duly authorized representative of the village to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property of grantee. If any of such maps or records are not kept in the village, or upon reasonable request made available in the village, and if the village manager shall determine that an examination of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of his duties, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-314. - Indemnification and insurance. 
(a)  Indemnification agreement. The following shall be contained in or incorporated by reference within any franchise agreement: 
"The grantee hereby agrees to indemnify, defend and save whole and harmless the village and its officers, boards, commissions, agents, attorneys and employees from all liabilities and related expenses (including reasonable attorney's fees and the costs or liabilities of the village with respect to its employees) of any kind which may arise out of or from or in connection with the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the BTN or the execution and implementation of Article III of Chapter 7.5 of the Village Code of the Village of Villa Park or the ordinance amending the Village Code creating said article, or the granting of a franchise to the grantee by the village, or the exercise of or the enjoyment of its franchise by the grantee. The village shall notify the grantee in the event any person shall in any way notify the village of any claim or demand from which the grantee may be subject to liability under this section or otherwise. The undertaking of grantee in connection with section 7.5-314(a) of the Village Code of the Village of Villa Park includes, but is not limited to, all liabilities or claims of liability with respect to property damage, personal injury or death, invasions of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, antitrust violations, any unfair business practice or any fraud, the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent (including damages arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's BTN), or of any other right of any person, and failure of the grantee to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local statute, code, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the grantee in connection with said article or in connection with its franchise or operations. Without limitation of the foregoing, the undertaking of the grantee in connection with said section 7.5-314(a) shall include, but not be limited to, costs and expenses for accountant fees, expert witness and consultant fees, court reporter fees, court costs, per diem expenses, traveling and transportation expenses." 
(b)  Insurance. The grantee shall keep the BTN continuously insured against such risks as are customarily insured against by businesses of like size and type, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Insurance upon the repair or replacement basis if available, and otherwise to the full insurable value of the BTN (with reasonable deductible provisions) against loss or damage by fire and lightning, with uniform standard extended coverage endorsement, limited only as may be provided in the standard form of extended coverage endorsement at the time in use in the state. 
(2)  Boiler explosion insurance on steam boilers, pressure vessels and pressure piping in an amount not less than repair or replacements costs (with reasonable deductible provisions), provided that such insurance need not be taken out until the steam boilers, pressure vessels and pressure piping have been installed in the BTN. 
(3)  Insurance to the extent of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for bodily injury including death and to the extent of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence against liability for damages to property including loss of use, occurring on, arising out of or in any way related to the BTN. Such policy shall name as additional insureds the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees. 
(4)  During any period of construction, adequate coverage to meet liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act. 
(5)  Workmen's compensation insurance within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(6)  Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for bodily injury including death and to the extent of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss of use occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to the BTN. 
This section 7.5-314(b) shall not be a limit on the grantee's undertaking provided in section 7.5-314(a). Such insurance shall be issued by a company or companies mutually acceptable to the grantee and the village in a form satisfactory to the village and shall list the Village of Villa Park, its officers, boards, commissions, committees, agents and employees as additional insureds. 
(c)  Notice of cancellation or reduction of coverage. The insurance policies referred to above shall contain a broad form contractual liability endorsement and shall also contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village of Villa Park by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage." 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-315. - Reviews, modifications and renewal of the franchise. 
(a)  Three-year reviews. On or about the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise grant, the village board shall schedule and hold a special public meeting or meetings with the grantee to review the performance by the grantee under the franchise, including future plans of the grantee regarding operation and performance. In particular, the village may inquire whether the grantee is supplying a level and variety of services equivalent to those being generally offered at that time in the industry in comparable market situations. At such meeting, the village board may consider whether the rates of the grantee should be regulated. The grantee shall make available to the village, if required by the village, such records, documents and information which are relevant to such meeting and inquiry. 
(b)  Modifications necessitated by FCC regulations. Any changes in the franchise agreement necessitated by modifications in the FCC's regulations shall be incorporated into the franchise agreement within the time limit provided for in the rules and regulations of the FCC then in force and effect. 
(c)  Franchise renewal. At least six (6) months prior to the expiration of a franchise, the village shall schedule and hold a public meeting or meetings with the grantee to review and discuss the performance of the grantee under the franchise. The grantee shall make available, if requested by the village, such records, information and documents which are relevant to such meeting and inquiry. The village shall thereupon re-issue a franchise to the grantee unless the village board determines that there is a compelling reason not to re-issue such franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-316. - Termination of the franchise by reason of default. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. The village reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under this article and the franchise agreement. 
(1)  A default by the grantee in the performance of any of its material obligations under this article or under the franchise agreement or under any documents, contracts, and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the village and the grantee pursuant to or in connection with this article. 
(2)  A failure by the grantee to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverages or the letter of credit as required herein. 
(3)  Frequent violations by the grantee of any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this franchise. 
(4)  The grantee's complete cessation of services for any reason within the control of the grantee over the BTN. However, the grantee shall not be declared at fault or subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee's control. Fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control. Fault shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by an affiliate of grantee or by a corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held directly or indirectly. The provisions of this section 7.5-316(a)(4) shall not be construed as any effort by the village to regulate the program content or program offerings of the grantee; the only purpose of this section 7.5-316(a)(4) is to insure that the grantee does not voluntarily cease to provide services under its franchise. 
(5)  Attempts by the grantee to evade any of the provisions of this ordinance or of the franchise agreement, the practice of any fraud or deceit upon the village or the subscribers or any violation by the grantee of Chapter 7.5, Article II (Ordinance No. 2059) of the Village Code of the Village of Villa Park. 
(6)  The grantee fails to establish or construct the BTN in compliance with the schedule in section 7.5-310(a) of this article, or fails for a substantial time to provide effective transmission and receiving services and capabilities to subscribers; provided, however, that if such failure is due to strikes, war, civil commotions, Acts of God, or other causes beyond the control of the grantee and without the grantee's fault, the time for the grantee to establish and construct the BTN or to meet any other time limit imposed by this article shall be extended by the amount of time of any delay resulting from such causes. The period of delay shall be determined by the grantee in writing with the consent of the village, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Procedures prior to revocation. If it appears or is made to appear to the village manager that one or more grounds exist for revoking a grantee's franchise, the following procedures shall then be followed: 
(1)  The village manager shall make a written demand that the grantee comply with the requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation, which the village manager believes to be applicable. The village manager shall provide the village board with a copy of each such written demand. 
(2)  If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, the village manager may place a request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular board meeting agenda. 
(3)  With or without compliance with the foregoing, the village manager may cause to be served upon the grantee, reasonable notice in writing of his intent to request a revocation of grantee's franchise. Such notice shall state the time and place of the board meeting and notice of such request shall be published by the village clerk at least once during the four-day period preceding the board meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the village. 
(4)  The board shall consider the request of the village manager and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(5)  If the failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the board shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner, and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(6)  If the board shall determine that such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the board may, by motion, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be revoked and terminated and the letter of credit forfeited, unless there is compliance by the grantee within such period as the board may fix. 
(7)  Nothing in this article, nor this section, nor in any franchise agreement shall be deemed to limit or prevent the village from revoking any grantee's franchise as a result of there being duly established good and just cause for revocation originating from a written complaint filed by any interested subscriber, person or entity, provided grantee is first given notice of such complaint and a reasonable opportunity to be heard and show cause why its franchise should not be revoked as a consequence of any default in the performance of any of its material obligations under any franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-317. - Insolvency proceedings. 
(a)  Right to terminate franchise in case of insolvency proceedings. The franchise herein granted shall, at the option of the village board, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees, however denominated, designated to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, re-organization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty-day period, or unless both of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within sixty (60) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this article and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and 
(2)  Such receivers or trustees shall, within said sixty (60) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted herein. 
(b)  Right to terminate franchise in case of foreclosure or judicial sale. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, including or excluding the franchise granted to grantee, the village board may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale. In such event, the franchise shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The village board shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner in this article provided; and 
(2)  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the village to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-318. - Procedures following revocation or expiration of franchise. 
(a)  Disposition of facilities. If a franchise expires, is revoked, or is otherwise terminated, the village may order the removal of the network facilities from the village within a reasonable period of time as determined by the village. 
(b)  Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that has been made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as prevailed prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances, without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The village shall inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and public places, and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance as provided herein, and the letter of credit provided herein, shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with all the terms and conditions of this section 7.5-318(b) and this article. 
(c)  Restoration by the village; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required by section 7.5-318(a) and/or section 7.5-318(b), or any other work required by the village code or ordinances within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the village, the village may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall then reimburse the village for the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs; or the village may recover such costs through the letter of credit provided by the grantee. The village shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section 7.5-318(c). 
(d)  Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or the revocation of a franchise, the village may: (i) permit the grantee to continue to operate the network for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such expiration or revocation; (ii) operate the network itself for such period; or (iii) engage a third party to operate the network for such period. Said person (hereinafter called the "interim operator") shall, as trustee for grantee's successor in interest, use its best efforts to continue to operate the cable television system under the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise and to provide services that may be provided at that time. During such interim period, the interim operator shall not sell any of the system assets nor shall the interim operator make any physical, material, administrative or operational changes that would tend to degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, or tend to decrease income, or tend materially to increase expenses, without, in each case, express permission in writing of the village. The village shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section 7.5-318(d). 
(e)  Village's rights not affected. The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the village under the franchise or any provision of law, and the grantee shall continue to maintain records and make reports as required by this article until such time as all payments due the village under this article have been paid and accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-319. - Hiring and employment practices. 
(a)  Discrimination prohibited. In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of the BTN, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment on account of race, creed, color, sex or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-320. - Prohibition of preferential practices: Other business activities. 
(a)  Services to be equally available. The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscription to the network or other legitimate uses thereof; nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classifications shall be entitled, provided, such schedules have been filed with the village as provided in section 7.5-312; nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the furnishing of service without charge or at a reduced charge to the locations specified in section 7.5-309(e). 
(b)  Fairness of accessibility. The entire network of the grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies or other entities having a legitimate use for the network; and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of the use of said facilities shall be made according to the rules of decisions of the grantee and any regulatory agencies affecting the same. 
(c)  Subscribers' antennas. Grantee is expressly prohibited from requiring the removal or from offering to remove or to provide any inducements for removal of any potential or existing subscribers' antennas as a condition for provision of service by the grantee. 
(d)  Sale or service of TV receivers. During the period of the franchise, neither the recipient of such franchise nor any of its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent organizations, officers or directors of stockholders holding ten (10) per cent or more of the outstanding stock of such recipient shall, within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park or within ten (10) miles in any direction, directly or indirectly, engage in the retail sale, rental or repair of radio or television receivers, nor require, encourage or recommend to any subscriber to purchase, rent, or lease radios or television sets at any specific business which rents, leases or sells radios or television sets, or to utilize the services of any special television or radio service business, for the repair or maintenance of the subscribers receivers, either radio or television, wherever located. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-321. - Subscriber privacy. 
(a)  Use of data from subscriber. Neither the grantee nor any other person shall initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring information or data from subscribers' terminals by use of the BTN without obtaining the prior authorization from and the written informed consent of each subscriber so affected. 
(b)  Subscriber lists. The grantee shall not, without obtaining the prior written informed consent of each subscriber so affected, provide any list designating subscribers' names or addresses nor any information concerning any subscriber to the village or to any other person. 
(c)  Polling. Grantee shall not permit the transmission of any signal, aural, visual or digital, including "polling" the channel selection, from any subscriber's premises without first obtaining informed written consent of the subscriber which shall not have been obtained from the subscriber as a condition of any service for which transmission is not an essential element. The request for such consent shall be contained in a separate document, which specifically enumerates and describes the transmissions being authorized and includes a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provision and the same shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. This provision is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance or used for billing subscribers. 
(d)  Two-way service. Grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without obtaining the prior written informed consent of each subscriber so affected as provided in section 7.5-321(c). 
(e)  Viewing habits. Grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not, without the prior written informed consent of the subscriber involved, as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, sell or otherwise make available to any part any information which identifies the viewing habits or responses of individual subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-322. - Sanctions. 
(a)  Lesser sanctions. Nothing shall prohibit the village in enforcing its rules and regulations to impose lesser sanctions or censures for violations of provisions of this article or any other provision of the Municipal Code of the Village of Villa Park rather than revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-323. - Rights reserved to the village. 
(a)  Eminent domain. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the village to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value; and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the village's right of eminent domain. 
(b)  All legal rights and powers. There is hereby reserved to the village every right or power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by law, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirement of the village in its exercise of such rights or powers, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. Without limitation of the foregoing, the right is hereby reserved to the village to adopt and enforce in addition to the terms, conditions and provisions contained in this article and in otherwise existing applicable codes, such additional ordinances, rules, regulations and amendments as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police powers; provided, that such codes, ordinances, rules, regulations and amendments shall be reasonable and not in material or substantial conflict with the rights herein granted. 
(c)  No waiver. Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental rights or powers of the village, subject to the rights of a grantee under its franchise and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  FCC jurisdiction. If the FCC or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise granted under this article, then to the extent such jurisdiction pre-empts or precludes the exercise of like jurisdiction by the village, the jurisdiction of the village shall terminate; provided, however, the village shall thereupon have the right to modify or amend any of the provisions of this article and of any franchise agreement to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article. 
(e)  Village's contract rights. The pre-emption or preclusion by the State of Illinois of the exercise by the village of any of its police powers shall not diminish, impair, alter, or affect any contractual benefit to the village or grantee nor any contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder. Any and all rights, powers, privileges and authorizations arising under this article or any franchise agreement are each and all hereby declared by the village and any grantee accepting any franchise hereunder to be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the village. 
(f)  Right to make rules and regulations. There is hereby reserved to the village the right to impose rules and regulations, reasonably required, in order to better carry out the purpose and intent of this article. Before any such rules and regulations are adopted, the village shall give notice to the grantee and afford the grantee an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-324. - Continuing regulation and administration by the village. 
(a)  Continuing supervision by village board. The village board shall have continuing supervision over the operation of any franchise granted hereunder. Routine responsibilities in the administration of this article and any franchise agreement hereunder shall be performed by the village manager. 
(b)  Responsibilities of the village manager. The village manager shall have the following responsibilities and duties, together with such other responsibilities and duties that the village board may assign to him: 
(1)  Review and audit all reports and filings submitted to the village as required hereunder and such other correspondence as may be submitted to the village concerning the operation of the BTN and review the rules and regulations established by each grantee. 
(2)  Assure that all rate schedules and rules pertinent to the operation of the BTN are made available for inspection by the public at reasonable hours. 
(3)  Confer and coordinate with each grantee on the interconnection of the BTN with other similar networks. 
(4)  Advise the board on matters which might constitute grounds for revocation of the franchise. 
(5)  Conduct evaluations of the BTN at least every three (3) years. 
(6)  Make recommendations to the village board for amendments to this article and/or any franchise agreement. 
(7)  Assist the cable television advisory committee established under section 7.5-324(c) of this article in connection with all its functions and activities. 
(c)  Cable television advisory committee. The board of trustees may establish a cable television advisory committee consisting of three (3) of its members who shall exercise such powers and perform such functions in connection with the BTN and this article as the village board shall from time to time provide, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The committee shall advise the village board with respect to all aspects of the grantee's actions in connection with the BTN in the village. 
(2)  The committee shall assure that all rate schedules and rules pertinent to the operation of the BTN are made available for inspection by the public at reasonable hours. 
(3)  Confer and coordinate with each grantee on the interconnection of the BTN with other similar networks. 
(4)  Conduct evaluations of the BTN at least every three (3) years. 
(5)  Advise the board on matters which might constitute grounds for revocation of any franchise. 
(6)  Make recommendations for amendments to this article or any franchise agreement. 
(7)  Make suggestions and recommendations to the board and any grantee pertaining to the improvements of service by any grantee. 
(8)  The committee shall review all aspects of the grantee's actions in connection with the BTN and advise the board in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-325. - Disputes. 
Arbitration. At the option of either the village or the grantee, any matter in controversy or dispute between the village and the grantee may be submitted to arbitration in all cases where the judgment of a court of law could be sought. This option shall be exercised by serving written notice. Such arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Sec. 7.5-326. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  Unlawful interception of communications. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a grantee's BTN for the purpose of enabling such person or any other party to receive any signal, information or intelligence transmitted over the BTN, without payment to the grantee of full amount properly due for such signal, information or intelligence. 
(b)  Unlawful tampering with equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cable, wires or other equipment used for the distribution of signals, information or intelligence over a grantee's BTN. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 7.5-327. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Each grantee, at its expense, shall comply with all laws, codes, ordinances, orders and regulations of federal, state, county, municipal or local governmental authorities and with any directive of any public officer pursuant to law who shall legally impose any regulation, order or duty upon the grantee with respect to the franchise. 
(b)  Diligence by grantee. Each grantee shall diligently apply for all necessary permits and authorizations required by the conduct of its business, and shall diligently pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment agreements, and necessary authorizations from the Federal Aviation Agency to construct such receiving antenna towers as may be required, and any necessary authorizations or waivers from the FCC, and shall assist the village in filing its application to the FCC for waiver of franchise fee limitations. 
(c)  Notification to village of certain FCC communications. Each grantee shall not apply for any waivers, exceptions or declaratory rulings from the FCC or from any other federal or state regulatory agency without prior written notification to the village manager. 
(d)  Transfer of village's rights, powers or duties. Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, committee or board of the village shall be subject to transfer by the village to any other officer, employee, department, committee or board of the village. 
(e)  Village's rights of intervention. A grantee shall, at the sole risk and expense of the grantee, upon demand of the village made by the village's attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasijudicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, attorneys, or employees, and which arise out of or pertain to the exercise or the enjoyment of the grantee's franchise or the granting thereof by the village; provided, that neither grantee, nor the village shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit, or other proceeding, without first obtaining the written consent of the other. 
(f)  No waivers by village. A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this article or any franchise agreement by any failure of the village, upon any one (1) or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee's performance or to seek grantee's compliance with any one or more of such terms or conditions. 
(g)  No recourse against village. Except as expressly provided otherwise in this article, the grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the village for any loss, cost, or expense or damages arising out of the terms, conditions and provisions or requirements of this article or because of the village's enforcement of this article. 
The grantee shall expressly acknowledge that upon accepting the right, privilege and franchise granted pursuant to this article, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the village in connection with the BTN and this article. By the acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall agree it will not at any time set up against the village in any claim or proceeding any provision, condition or term of this article or any franchise agreement as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the village had no power or authority to make such provision, term or condition a part of or pursuant to this article, except as to those matters pre-empted by federal or state law. 
(h)  New developments. The village board may amend this article or the franchise agreement whenever necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of communication signals which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its customers; provided, however, that this subsection 7.5-327(h) shall not be construed to require the village to make any such amendment. 
(i)  Construction of article. This article shall be construed and interpreted according to the following principles: 
(1)  All ordinances or parts thereof or codes or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of any conflict. 
(2)  Words in the present tense include the future. 
(3)  Words importing the singular number may extend to and include the plural, words importing the plural number may extend to and include the singular, and words in masculine gender shall include female gender. 
(4)  The specification in this section of principles to apply in the construction and interpretation of this article shall not be a limitation as to other applicable principles. 
(5)  Whenever this article shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the grantee to perform within time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the village to terminate, cancel and revoke the grant or use other remedies. 
(j)  Reimbursement of village expenses. In connection with the grant of all franchises, each successful grantee shall reimburse to the village all actual expenses incurred by the village in granting a cable TV franchise, including all expenses incurred for legal services and consultants. Upon receipt of all such expenses, the village manager shall transmit to the grantee an itemized listing of all such expenses and the grantee shall then reimburse the village within thirty (30) days after receipt of such listing. 
(Ord. No. 2103, § 1, 3-19-84)  
Chapter 8 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-101. - Purchases and expenditures. 
(a)  The president, with the consent of the board of trustees, may, on recommendation of the coordinator of the village emergency services and disaster agency, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, to protect the public health and safety, and to protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster. 
(b)  In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the village coordinator is hereby authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, provided that if the board of trustees meet at such time he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 9, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1111(j).  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY 
 
Sec. 8-201. - Established. 
There is hereby established the village emergency services and disaster agency to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 1, 3-14-77)  
Sec. 8-202. - Composition. 
The village emergency services and disaster agency shall consist of the coordinator and additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 1, 3-14-77)  
Sec. 8-203. - Appointment of coordinator; powers, duties. 
(a)  The coordinator of the village emergency services and disaster agency shall be appointed by the president with the consent of the board of trustees and shall serve until removed by same. 
(b)  The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the emergency services and disaster agency, subject to the direction and control of the president, with the consent of the board of trustees. 
(c)  In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the president or any person designated by him, with the consent of the board of trustees, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 2, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1111(i).  
Sec. 8-204. - Duties. 
The village emergency services and disaster agency shall perform such functions within the village as shall be prescribed by the state emergency services and disaster agency plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 3, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1111(i).  
Sec. 8-205. - Oath of members. 
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village emergency services and disaster agency shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator: 
I, _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Villa Park Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, I will not affiliate myself in any way with any public, private, political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 10, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1124.  
Sec. 8-206. - Mobile support teams. 
(a)  Any members of the village emergency services and disaster agency may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the state emergency services and disaster agency as provided by law. 
(b)  The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator of the village emergency services and disaster agency. 
(c)  Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the director of the state emergency services and disaster agency, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to such employment or office. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 4, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1119.  
Sec. 8-207. - Mutual aid agreements. 
The director of the village emergency services and disaster agency may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the corporate authorities and by the director of the state emergency services and disaster agency. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 5, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1115.  
Sec. 8-208. - Cooperation with state. 
If the governor declares that a disaster exists, in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the village emergency services and disaster agency to cooperate fully with the state emergency services and disaster and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 6, 3-14-77) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 127, § 1108.  
Sec. 8-209. - Compensation. 
Members of the village emergency services and disaster agency who are paid employees or officers of the village, if called for training by the director of the state emergency services and disaster agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 7, 3-14-77)  
Sec. 8-210. - Office space. 
The president with the consent of the board of trustees is authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the village president for the village emergency services and disaster agency as its office. 
(Ord. No. 1698, § 11, 3-14-17)  
ARTICLE III. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of corporate authority to confer emergency powers upon the village president, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-1-6. 
 
Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Civil emergency shall mean: 
(1)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law; or 
(2)  Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Curfew shall mean a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-302. - Declaration. 
Whenever an emergency exists the president shall so declare by means of a written proclamation setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-303. - President's powers—Curfew. 
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the president, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to the village as a whole, as he deems advisable, applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 3, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-304. - Same—Additional orders. 
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the president may also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
(1)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted. 
(2)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer. 
(3)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or delivery of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of sale, distribution or delivery of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(5)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 4, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-305. - Term of declaration; redeclaration. 
The proclamation authorized in this article shall be effective for a period of forty-eight (48) hours, or until the adjournment of the first regular or special meeting of the board of trustees after the sate of emergency is declared, whichever is sooner, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the president indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The president shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each forty-eight (48) hour period during the time the civil emergency exists. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 5, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-306. - Dissemination of proclamation. 
Upon the proclamation authorized in this article the chief of police shall notify the news media situated within the village and shall three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the village: The village hall, the police station and the post office. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 6, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-307. - Article not to derogate powers of police and fire departments. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to impair the powers contained in this Code or in any statute giving powers to the police and fire departments, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 9, 5-20-68)  
Sec. 8-308. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the orders of the president which are promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 7, 5-20-68)  
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Tax on foreign fire insurance companies, Ch. 23, Art. VI. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
(RESERVED)  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; existing structures code, Ch. 7, Art. VI; basic zoning ordinance, App. C. 
State Law reference— Power of village to promulgate fire safety regulations, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-201. - Fire code. 
The fire codes and amendments thereto (the "Fire Prevention Code" adopted under sections 7-1201 and 7-1202 of the Village Code shall be the fire codes applicable within the Village of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 1, 12-17-62; Ord. No. 1206, § 1, 12-7-70; Ord. No. 1700, § 1, 3-28-77; Ord. No. 2155, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 2663, § 1, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 3126, § 1, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 3683, § 4, 1-9-12) 
State Law reference— Power of village to adopt codes by reference, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 1-3-2, Ch. 85, § 1002.  
Sec. 9-201.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3683, § 5, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 9-201.1, entitled "Amendments to fire prevention code; additions, insertions, deletions and changes", which derived from: Ord. No. 2663, § 2, Oct. 18, 1993; Ord. No. 3126, § 2, adopted Mar. 18, 2002; Ord. No. 3528, adopted Dec. 22, 2008; and Ord. No. 3599, § 2, adopted Mar. 8, 2010.  
Sec. 9-202. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the village. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the village. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 3, 12-17-62)  
Sec. 9-203. - Bureau of fire prevention—Established; composition. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The bureau of fire prevention shall consist of the chief of the fire department, and such other members as may be authorized by the corporate authorities. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the corporate authorities the employment of technical inspectors on either a permanent or temporary basis whenever necessary. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to board of trustees; it shall contain all proceedings under this article, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein; the chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 2, 12-17-62)  
Sec. 9-204. - Same—Duties. 
In addition to any other duties and responsibilities provided by ordinance or pursuant to the rules and regulations of the fire department, the fire prevention bureau shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Inspection program for all industrial, commercial, multifamily and assembly occupancies on a scheduled basis, and to follow through with the measures needed to correct any fire hazard violations. 
(2)  Fire hydrant locations, inspections and condition, as well as a record of flow and static testing. 
(3)  Inspections of all blueprints submitted to the community development department before building permits are issued for industrial, commercial, multifamily and assembly occupancies, and shall be marked with its stamp of approval. 
(4)  Promotion of fire prevention programs throughout the village. 
(Ord. No. 1231, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-71; Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 7-23-90)  
Sec. 9-205. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the corporate limits of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3683, § 6, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 9-206. - Fireworks; definitions. 
(a)  Fireworks: Shall mean and include any explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel balloons, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance or containing combustible substances producing visual effects. The term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers," "booby traps," "snappers," "trick matches," "cigarette loads," "auto burglar alarms," wire sparklers, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used; provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come into contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than 0.20 grains of explosive mixture. 
(b)  Smoke device: A tube or sphere containing a pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect. 
(c)  Snake/glowworm: Pressed pellets of pyrotechnic composition that produce large, snake-like ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the pellet burns. These devices may not contain mercuric thiocyanate. 
(d)  Trick noisemaker: An item that produces a small report intended to surprise the user. 
(e)  Wire sparkler: Wire coated with a pyrotechnic composition that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. These items may not contain magnesium and must not exceed one hundred grams (100 g) of composition per item. Devices containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams (5 g) of composition per item. 
(f)  Auto burglar alarm: A tube which contains a pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle and/or smoke when ignited. A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding fifty milligrams (50 mg), may be used to produce a small report. A squib is used to ignite the device. 
(g)  Booby trap: A small tube with a string protruding from both ends, similar to a party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small report. 
(h)  Cigarette load: A small wooden peg that has been coated with a small quantity of explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced. 
(i)  Party popper: A small plastic or paper item containing not more than sixteen milligrams (16 mg) of explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it, expelling paper streams and producing a small report. 
(j)  Snapper: A small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped the devices explode, producing a small report. 
(k)  Trick match: A kitchen or book match that has been coated with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the match, a small report or a shower of sparks is produced. 
(Ord. No. 2285, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 3919 , § 2, 7-11-16)  
Sec. 9-206.1. - Acts prohibited. 
The following acts in regard to possession, sale and/or use of fireworks are prohibited: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, shoot, explode or otherwise use or exhibit fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, Roman candles, skyrockets, cherry bombs, M-80s, or other pyrotechnic displays within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park, except as provided in 425 ILCS 35/2. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to sell or use wire sparklers on any public property within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 3919 , § 3, 7-11-16)  
Sec. 9-206.2. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(Ord. No. 3919 , § 4, 7-11-16)  
Sec. 9-207. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is to be prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
Above ground outside storage tanks for flammable liquids are prohibited in all districts except for the following: Fuel oil tanks for supplying oil burning heating equipment are permitted above ground, provided such tanks do not exceed six hundred sixty (660) gallons for each building served and such location is approved by the fire prevention bureau. 
(Ord. No. 3683, § 7, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 9-208. - Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases. 
Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall be restricted, and permitted only as established by the building code and zoning regulations of the village. All such installations must comply with NFPA-58.  
Sec. 9-209. - Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
Motor vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents shall be prohibited in all residential, heavily populated, and congested areas at all times and permitted on only outer perimeter main highways of the village, Routes 83, 38, and 64.  
Sec. 9-210. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2533, adopted Nov. 18, 1991, repealed § 9-210 in its entirety. Formerly, § 9-210 pertained to the establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles, and derived from the 1981 codification.  
Sec. 9-211. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be approved by the chief of the fire department or his designee and the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department or his designee and the chief of police may designate fire lanes on any municipally owned or controlled public right-of-way or real property. 
(c)  Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 6A, 12-17-62; Ord. No. 1206, § 2, 12-7-70; Ord. No. 2433, § 2, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 2464, § 1, 2-11-91)  
Sec. 9-212. - New materials, processes or occupancies. 
The bureau of fire prevention shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code. The chief of the fire department or his designee shall post such list in a conspicuous place in the Village Hall and in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 6, 12-17-62; Ord. No. 2433, § 3, 7-23-90)  
Sec. 9-213. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department or his designee shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department or his designee to the board of trustees within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 5, 12-17-62; Ord. No. 2433, § 4, 7-23-90)  
Sec. 9-214. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code herein adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the corporate authorities or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the forced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 847, § 7, 12-17-62)  
Sec. 9-215. - Fire prevention fees. 
The schedule of fees for fire inspection services and inspections shall be in the amounts hereinafter set forth in the following schedule: 
(1)  Occupancies that receive a satisfactory evaluation upon an initial inspection shall not be assessed a fire inspection fee. 
(2)  Occupancies whose violations are corrected immediately or within the time limits set forth in the violation notice provided by the inspector shall not be assessed a fire inspection fee. 
(3)  Fire inspection fees will be imposed on building owners whose occupancies, whether owner-occupied, leased or otherwise used by a tenant or tenants, do not comply with the Village of Villa Park Life Safety and/or Fire Prevention Codes, according to the following: 
a.  Occupancies that require additional inspections beyond the time limits prescribed in the violation notice provided by the inspector will be assessed a fire inspection fee. The fee schedule is as follows: 
Second reinspection: $50.00. 
Third reinspection: $100.00. 
Each additional reinspection: $100.00. 
This fee schedule shall not limit the village's ability to seek code conformance through any other legal methods. 
(Ord. No. 3599, § 3, 3-8-10)  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-301 et seq.; fire and police commission, § 2-1801 et seq.; firemen's pension board, § 2-2401. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-301. - Created. 
There is hereby created a fire department. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 1, 8-1-27)  
Sec. 9-302. - Size and composition. 
The fire department shall have the following composition: 
(1)  Fire chief, who shall supervise, direct, control and manage the entire fire department. All members and officers hereinafter mentioned shall be under the supervision and control and subject to the direction of the fire chief. 
(2)  Commissioned deputy fire chief. The deputy fire chief shall oversee the fire departments fire prevention bureau and other duties, work assignment, projects and responsibilities to be determined by the fire chief. 
(3)  Paramedic lieutenants to supervise each shift and are under the direct supervision of the deputy fire chief. 
(4)  Paramedic firefighters, under the direct supervision of the full-time lieutenants and such other persons within the fire department as the fire chief or the deputy fire chief may designate. 
(5)  Fire inspector, who shall be under the supervision and control and subject to the direction of the deputy fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1874, §§ 1—5, 11-12-79; Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 2011, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2025, § 1, 2-19-82; Ord. No. 2039, § 1, 8-23-82; Ord. No. 2076, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-83; Ord. No. 2125, § 1, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 2433, § 5, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 2585, § 1, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 2620, § 1, 2-8-93; Ord. No. 2731, § 1, 10-24-94; Ord. No. 2738, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 2806, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 2974, § 2, 1-25-99; Ord. No. 3194, § 2, 7-28-03; Ord. No. 3282, § 2, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 3566, § 2, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 3734, § 4, 3-18-13)  
Sec. 9-302.1. - Special provisions regarding contractual professional services. 
The village manager may obtain by contract with an independent contractor the professional services of not less than two (2) qualified individuals to provide additional services to the village on a twenty-four-hour rotating shift basis. Such individuals shall be neither employees of the village nor members of the Villa Park Fire Department, nor shall they be subject to the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners or the board of trustees of the Villa Park Firefighter's Pension Fund. Such individuals shall possess at least the following qualifications: 
(1)  State of Illinois paramedic licensure; 
(2)  Certification by Good Samaritan Hospital in accordance with the Good Samaritan Mobile Intensive Care System; 
(3)  Twelve (12) months post-licensure experience; and 
(4)  Firefighter II certification. 
Such individuals shall perform such paramedic services and firefighter services as may be consistent with a written contract to provide such services and as determined by the fire chief or his designee. Any written contract to provide such professional services shall be approved by resolution of the president and board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2585, § 2, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 2620, § 2, 2-8-93; Ord. No. 2738, § 2, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 2806, § 3, 23-28-95)  
Sec. 9-303. - Residency requirement of sworn firefighters. 
(a)  Any person, regardless of their place of residence at the time of making application, may apply for the position of firefighter with the fire department. 
(b)  All sworn firefighters hired by the fire department shall reside a maximum of thirty (30) miles from the territorial limits of the village within one (1) year after the one-year probationary period of employment is completed and shall thereafter continue to reside in said territory during employment by the fire department. 
(c)  In the event that any sworn firefighter so hired by the village fails to reside within the aforedescribed territorial limits of the village within one (1) year after the one-year probationary period of employment, same shall be cause for discharge or dismissal. 
(d)  All sworn firefighters hired by the fire department prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 2353 who have successfully completed the probationary period under section 9-304 of this Code and who do not reside in the territory provided in subsection (b) of section 9-303, shall at the time of their first change of residency after being hired by the fire department, reside within the territory provided in subsection (b) of section 9-303 and shall thereafter continue to reside in said territory during employment by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1752, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 1963, § 1, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 2035, § 1, 7-26-82; Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 6-19-89; Ord. No. 2856, § 2, 11-11-96; Ord. No. 2989, § 2, 5-10-99)  
Sec. 9-304. - Probationary service. 
All applicants for the position of fulltime firefighters with the village shall, if accepted, serve a one-year probationary period. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 5, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 2989, § 3, 5-10-99)  
Sec. 9-305. - Probationary promotional period. 
(a)  A one-year probationary period for all fire department promotions is hereby required. 
(b)  The review and determination of a successful completion of the probationary period shall be determined by the board of fire and police commissioners pursuant to its rules and regulations. 
(c)  If the board of fire and police commissioners determines that the member promoted has not successfully performed his probationary period, or at the written request of the member during the probationary period, the member shall return to his prior rank, if such a position is available. 
(d)  This section shall not limit any right or power granted to the village or the board of fire and police commissioners to hire or fire employees of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1695, §§ 2—5, 3-7-77)  
Sec. 9-306. - Preferential credits for certain individuals. 
(a)  The board of fire and police commissioners shall give preference for original appointment to persons whose names appear on any register of eligibles resulting from an examination for original entrance conducted by the board of fire and police commissioners by adding the following points to the final grade average of those persons who satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Certified firefighter, three (3) points; 
(2)  Emergency Medical Technician (National Registry), one (1) point; 
(3)  Paramedic (National Registry), one (1) point. 
(b)  The board of fire and police commissioners shall give preference for original appointment to persons whose names appear on any register of eligibles resulting from an examination for original entrance conducted by the board of fire and police commissioners by adding the following points to the final grade average of those persons who satisfy the following requirement: 
A paid-on-call member of the fire department shall receive one (1) point for each year of service as a paid-on-call member up to a maximum of five (5) points. This shall only be applicable to periods of most recent continuous service to the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 2-16-76)  
Sec. 9-307. - Appointment of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be appointed by the village manager and not by the board of fire and police commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1637, § 1, 4-5-76) 
State Law reference— Power of board of trustees to provide for appointment of fire chief by manager, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.  
Sec. 9-308. - Special provisions for paramedic/firefighters. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the full-time paramedic/firefighter dual responsibility is of primary importance. All employees designated in subsection (b) hereof must maintain both paramedic and firefighter qualifications at all times during their employment. Failure to maintain continuous certification as a firefighter or failure to obtain recertification as a paramedic as specified hereinafter shall be just cause for separation from the department and termination of employment. In the event of the loss of status as a paramedic/firefighter, such individual shall be required to obtain a recertification as a paramedic/firefighter within six (6) months thereafter. 
(b)  The employees designated as included hereunder shall consist of all current full-time lieutenants, all current full-time paramedic/firefighters, and all full-time paramedic/firefighters who have applied for employment with the village on or after August 15, 1995. 
(c)  During such time as any person who has been employed as a paramedic/firefighter has lost certification as a paramedic, that person's pay shall be reduced to that of a firefighter only, not qualified as a paramedic. 
(d)  No person who has applied for employment with the village as a paramedic/firefighter from and after August 15, 1995, may be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners unless such person has a current, valid Illinois Paramedic Certification at the time of appointment. Failure to furnish the board's secretary with evidence of such paramedic certification prior to appointment shall result in disqualification, and the candidate's name shall be stricken from the final eligibility register. 
(Ord. No. 1874, § 2, 11-12-79; Ord. No. 2078, § 1, 5-9-83; Ord. No. 2781, § 2, 7-24-95)  
Sec. 9-309. - Illinois Fire Protection Training Act—Election to participate in programs. 
The village hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire Protection Training Act. 
(Ord. No. 2045, § 1, 9-20-82)  
Sec. 9-310. - Same—Certification requirement. 
Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire Marshal as a firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course as provided in said Act. 
(Ord. No. 2045, § 1, 9-20-82)  
Sec. 9-311. - Same—Time limit for completion of training. 
The firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within his probationary period of twenty-four (24) months, except for volunteers, part-time and paid-on-call personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2045, § 1, 9-20-82)  
Sec. 9-312. - Same—Amendments to certain rules. 
The board of fire and police commissioners are hereby instructed and directed to make the necessary amendments to the personnel rules, the manual of rules of the Villa Park Fire Department, and rules of said board of fire and police commissioners in order to require that any person appointed to the fire department of the village shall not become a regular member of the Villa Park Fire Department unless and until he shall complete, pursuant to said Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, the approved training course within twenty-four (24) months of the date of his initial employment. 
(Ord. No. 2045, § 1, 9-20-82)  
Sec. 9-313. - Fees for emergency medical transportation and related services. 
(a)  The following fees are hereby established as charges to recipients of emergency medical transportation and related services provided by the Village of Villa Park Fire Department: 
  	Resident	Nonresident
Basic Life Support 	$700.00 	$1,050.00 
Advanced Life Support 1 	800.00 	1,200.00 
Advanced Life Support 2 	1,050.00 	1,400.00 
Mileage 	25.00 	25.00 
Advanced Life Support - No Transport 	0.00 	100.00 
Basic Life Support - No Transport 	0.00 	100.00 
 
Commencing December 1, 2019, there shall be an annual increase of the above fees equivalent to the annual Medicare reimbursement increase or three (3) percent whichever is greater. 
(b)  Collection. The village shall be entitled to collect the fees set forth in this schedule, but the billing and collection of the fees imposed by this section may be assigned by the village pursuant to an agreement approved by the president and board of trustees as the president and board of trustees determine is in the best interests of the village. 
(c)  Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no fee shall be charged for emergency medical transportation services to any person employed by the village when the illness or injury giving rise to emergency medical transportation services is covered by the village's worker's compensation insurance or the person is a full-time permanent employee of the village. 
(d)  Reduction; waiver. The fees imposed by this section may be reduced or waived upon recommendation by the finance director and approval by the village manager in cases where it is deemed to be in the best interests of the village or when payment of the fee would be an undue hardship or the person receiving emergency medical transportation services is found to be incapable of paying the fee. 
(Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 2465, § 1, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 2556, § 1, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 3253, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 3347, § 1, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 3579, § 1, 11-9-09; Ord. No. 3647, § 1, 3-28-11; Ord. No. 3885 , § 1, 10-12-15; Ord. No. 4028 , § 1, 4-23-18)  
Sec. 9-314. - Arson investigator. 
(a)  The classification of arson investigator is hereby established. An arson investigator shall have the same powers of arrest, search and seizure and the securing and service of warrants as police officers within the jurisdiction of the village. 
(b)  While in the actual investigation and matters incident thereto, the arson investigator may carry weapons as may be necessary, but only if that person has satisfactorily completed: 
(1)  A training program, offered or provided by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board, which substantially conforms to standards promulgated pursuant to the Illinois Police Training Act and "an Act in relation to firearms training for peace officers", approved August 29, 1975, as amended; 
(2)  A course in fire and arson investigation approved by the office of the state fire marshal pursuant to the Illinois Protection Training Act; and 
(3)  Training in the law relating to the rights of persons suspected of involvement in criminal activities. 
(c)  Any arson investigator granted the powers enumerated in this section may exercise such powers only during the actual investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of such fires or explosions that are suspected to be arson or arson related crimes. 
(d)  The chief of the fire department may designate, in his sole discretion, a firefighter who meets the aforesaid criteria to perform arson investigation duties. 
(Ord. No. 3157, § 2, 9-30-02)  
Secs. 9-315—9-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Firemen's pension board, § 2-2401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-321. - Established. 
A firemen's pension fund is established to be administered in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1349, § 1, 12-11-72) 
State Law reference— Fund required, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 4-101.  
Sec. 9-322. - Warrants. 
The village president and village clerk, the village officers who are or may be authorized by law to draw warrants upon the village treasurer, upon request made in writing by the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund, shall draw warrants upon the village treasurer, payable to the village treasurer of the pension board for all funds in the hands of the village treasurer belonging to the pension fund. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 4-131.  
Sec. 9-323. - Disbursements. 
All moneys ordered paid from the pension fund shall be paid by the treasurer of the board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund only upon warrants signed by the president of the board and countersigned by the secretary thereof. No warrant shall be drawn except by order of the board duly entered in the records of the proceedings of the board. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108½, § 4-132.  
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL 
 
Sec. 9-401. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Combustible: Any substance with a flash point greater than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Corrosive: Any substance which, in contact with living tissue, causes destruction of tissue by chemical action. (Does not refer to action on inanimate surfaces.) 
Flammable: Any substance which has a flash point of less than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Hazardous material or hazardous substance: Any material or substance or mixture of substances which is toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, radioactive, flammable, combustible, or which generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means and which may cause injury or illness to humans, domestic livestock, or wildlife as defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Act or any federal law. 
Hazardous material incident: An incident which threatens public health or safety involving the actual or potential release of a hazardous substance or hazardous material. 
Irritant: Any substance, not corrosive, which, on immediate, prolonged or repeated contact with normal living tissue will induce local inflammatory reaction. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, firm, company, estate, association or other legal entity. 
Radioactive: Any substance which emits ionizing radiation. 
Strong sensitizer: Any substance which will cause, on normal living tissue through an allergic or photodynamic process, a hypersensitivity which becomes evident on reapplication of the same substance. 
Toxic: Any substance (other than a radioactive substance) which has the capacity to produce bodily injury or illness to humans through ingestion, inhalation, or absorption through any body surface. 
(Ord. No. 2533, § 2, 11-18-91)  
Sec. 9-402. - Control of hazardous substances or hazardous materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, store, deliver or transport hazardous substances or hazardous materials, or cause the use, storage, delivery or transporting of hazardous substances or hazardous materials, in any manner inconsistent with the requirements of chapter 9 of the Villa Park Municipal Code or any other applicable ordinance, state law or federal law. 
(b)  Transportation of hazardous materials by motor vehicle. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle carrying, transporting or containing a hazardous substance or hazardous material to park or stand, other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaging in, loading or unloading, on private property, without the knowledge and express consent of the person who is in charge of the property and who is aware of the nature of the hazardous substance or hazardous material the motor vehicle contains. 
(2)  No motor vehicle shall transport or carry hazardous materials through the corporate limits of the village except on Routes 83, 38 and 64. It shall not be lawful under this article for a motor vehicle carrying, transporting or containing a hazardous substance or material to make deliveries within the village, provided that all such deliveries comply with all applicable ordinances of the village, including but not limited to zoning regulations, and are otherwise done in full accordance with all laws, ordinances, or regulations of any governmental agency or administration. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle carrying, transporting or containing a hazardous substance or hazardous material to fail to comply with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person using, storing, manufacturing, producing, disposing, treating, transporting or causing the use, storage, manufacture, production, disposal, treatment or transportation, of any hazardous substance or hazardous material in any manner which results in a hazardous material incident. 
(Ord. No. 2533, § 2, 11-18-91)  
Sec. 9-403. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Any person causing or permitting a hazardous material incident shall be responsible for all costs incurred in connection with a response to a hazardous material incident, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any and all costs incurred by the village in connection with the operation, maintenance, and staffing required to respond to such hazardous material incident at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour per vehicle (or any fraction of an hour) and the hourly rate of pay, together will all benefits, taxes, administrative overhead, worker's compensation claims, and any other expense or cost, for each employee who participates in any response to a hazardous material incident. 
(2)  Any and all costs incurred by the village for equipment and materials used, damaged, lost, spent, destroyed, or rendered irreparable in connection with a hazardous material incident. 
(3)  Any and all costs, expenses and liabilities set forth in subparagraphs (1) and (2), hereinabove, incurred by any federal, state, or local governmental agency responding to a hazardous material incident. 
(4)  Assumption of, and all liability and costs for, cleanup or removal resulting from a hazardous material incident, including, but not limited to, any independent cleanup contractor required by such hazardous material incident. 
(b)  The village shall prepare and forward to the person or persons causing or permitting a hazardous material incident a bill for the total costs and expenses incurred for which such person or persons are responsible pursuant to this article; provided, however, any cost in connection with any independent cleanup contractor shall be billed directly by such contractor. Payment of the total bill shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any bill or portion of a bill remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days of receipt shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2533, § 2, 11-18-91)  
ARTICLE V. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3595, adopted March 8, 2010, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V pertained to the same subject matter, was comprised of §§ 9-501—9-511, and derived from Ord. No. 2536, adopted Dec. 9, 1991. 
 
Sec. 9-501. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board to be known and designated as the foreign fire insurance board (the "fire board") for the village fire department. The purpose of the board is to receive and account for revenues received from the tax on fire insurance policies sold by foreign (out of state) insurance companies, and to use such funds for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the department, as set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1. 
The tax on fire insurance policies sold by foreign insurance companies is established pursuant to article VI of chapter 23 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-502. - Size and composition of the fire board. 
(a)  The fire board established hereby shall be comprised of seven (7) trustees. The fire chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, shall be one (1) of the trustees. The remaining six (6) trustees shall be elected by the sworn members of the fire department as hereinafter provided. If there are an insufficient number of candidates to fill the trustee positions, the number of fire board members shall be reduced, but not to fewer than three (3) trustees. The trustees of the board shall annually elect the officers of the fire board. 
(b)  Six (6) trustees shall be elected at large by the sworn members of the department from among themselves. The first elected board shall consist of two (2) trustees elected for one-year terms, two (2) trustees elected for two-year terms, and two (2) trustees elected for three-year terms. In every year thereafter, two (2) trustees shall be elected for three-year terms to fill the positions of the two (2) trustees whose terms are expiring that year. Trustees shall be eligible for reelection. Elections shall be held in the first week of November and terms shall begin on the first day of December. Officers shall be elected in accordance with the Australian ballot system. 
(c)  Elected members of the board shall serve until their successors are elected and installed. 
(d)  Vacancies shall be filled by election if more than one (1) year remains in the term of office. Otherwise, the board shall fill the vacancy and appoint as a member a person who would be eligible for election to that vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-503. - Fire board officers. 
(a)  The trustees shall annually elect a chairman, a secretary and a treasurer from among their members in the month following each annual election. 
(b)  The chairman or, in the chairman's absence, the treasurer shall preside over all meetings of the board. 
(c)  The treasurer shall assume the duties of the chairman in the absence or incapacity of the chairman. 
(d)  The secretary shall record and keep accurate minutes of all meetings conducted by the board, which shall include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the meeting; 
(2)  The members of the board recorded as either present or absent; and 
(3)  A summary of discussion on all matters proposed, deliberated, or decided, and a record of any votes taken. 
(e)  The secretary shall make all minutes of board meetings available for public inspection within seven (7) days of approval of such minutes by the board, including posting on its website if one is maintained. If the secretary is absent from a meeting, another board member shall be appointed by the chairman to record the minutes. In addition, the secretary shall be responsible for the board's written communications and shall be the custodian of the board's nonfinancial records. 
(f)  The treasurer shall be responsible for receiving all funds appropriated to the board and implementing expenditures for the maintenance, use and benefit of the department upon the order of the board. The treasurer shall keep accurate and current records of the fund and all accounts maintained thereunder, including all deposits thereto, withdrawals and disbursements therefrom, balances therein, and all other regular and customary financial and accounting information. 
(g)  The officers of the fire board shall develop and maintain a listing of those items that the fire board feels are appropriate expenditures under 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1. 
(h)  The treasurer of the fire board shall give a sufficient bond to the village. This bond shall be approved by the village president conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or her duties under the ordinance and the rules and regulations provided for in this article. The treasurer of the fire board shall receive the appropriated money and shall pay out the money upon the order of the fire board for the maintenance, use and benefit of the department. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-504. - Board meetings. 
(a)  The board shall comply with the Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq. Within thirty (30) days of their election, all trustees must successfully complete an electronic training curriculum on the Open Meetings Act, and thereafter must successfully complete an annual training program, as required by 5 ILCS 120/1.05. 
(b)  The board shall meet at least quarterly and more often as is necessary to discharge the responsibilities imposed on it by law and ordinance. All meetings shall be held in conformity with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. If the board has six (6) or seven (7) members, four (4) members constitute a quorum required to conduct business, and a majority of those present shall be necessary to adopt any motion or resolution, with the exception of a vote to adopt or amend the board's rules and regulations, which shall require the affirmative vote of four (4) members. If the board has four (4) or five (5) members, three (3) members constitute a quorum required to conduct business, and an affirmative vote of three (3) members is necessary to adopt any motion or resolution, including a vote to adopt or amend the board's rules and regulations. If the board has three (3) members, two (2) members constitute a quorum required to conduct business, and an affirmative vote of two (2) members is necessary to adopt any motion or resolution, including a vote to adopt or amend the board's rules and regulations. 
(c)  The board shall establish a regular time and place for its meetings, which shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Board meetings shall be noticed in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, which provides, among other things, that "every public body shall give public notice of the schedule of regular meetings at the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year and shall state the regular dates, times and places of such meetings"; that "an agenda for each regular meeting shall be posted at the principal office of the public body and at the location where the meeting is to be held at least 48 hours in advance of the holding of the meeting"; and that "public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice at the principal office of the body holding the meeting or, if no such office exists, at the building in which the meeting is to be held," and "on its website," if it maintains one (5 ILCS 120/2.02). 
(e)  Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-505. - Budget. 
(a)  Preliminary budget. By November 1 of each year, the officers of the board shall approve a preliminary budget for the expenditure of the funds received pursuant to the foreign fire insurance tax. 
(b)  Final budget. The officers of the board shall, no later than December 1, adopt a final budget for the collection and payment of the foreign fire insurance tax. The final budget shall be approved by ordinance by the village board of trustees in the same fashion as any other village ordinance. 
(c)  Budget amendments. The final budget may be amended at any time by the unanimous vote of the officers of the board and a majority vote of the village board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 4025 , § 3, 4-23-18)  
Sec. 9-506. - Fire board regulations. 
(a)  The trustees of the fire board shall make all needful rules and regulations with respect to the fire board and the management of the money to be appropriated to the fire board. At a minimum, said rules and regulations shall require: 
(1)  The investment of board funds as are not immediately required in such securities as the village board of trustees shall specifically or generally from time to time designate; 
(2)  The deposit of all such monies in the name of the foreign fire insurance board for the village fire department in such banks, savings and loan associates, or other depositories as shall be authorized by the village board of trustees; and 
(3)  The maintenance of the financial books and records of monies received by the fire board; provided, however, that all investments of foreign fire insurance tax shall be made only in those securities which may be purchased by Illinois nonhome rule municipalities under the applicable provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(b)  The board shall authorize use of money from the fund by written resolution setting forth with particularity the items on which funds are to be expended and the amounts approved for expenditure, provided that such items approved for funding shall be contained within the list described in subsection 9-503(g) above. The treasurer shall pay out money from the fund as authorized by resolution of the board. The signatures of two (2) of the three (3) officers of the board shall be required on any check, draft or other order drawn on the account of the fund. 
(c)  The board shall not incur debt or enter into any contract or other agreement for any expenditure in excess of the unencumbered funds currently on deposit in, and authorized for expenditure from, the fund at the time of execution of any such contract or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-507. - Payment of funds. 
Upon receipt of the funds from the insurance companies specified in 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1, the village treasurer shall pay to the treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board such sums. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-508. - Annual audit. 
The trustees of the fire board shall provide to the village board of trustees an annual audit of the financial affairs of the department. The audit shall be performed at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with generally accepted auditing principles by a certified public accountant as part of the annual municipal audit. The annual audit report shall be delivered to the village president, each village trustee and the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
Sec. 9-509. - No interference with operations. 
At no time shall the actions of the officers of the fire board interfere with the powers of the chief, the composition of the fire department, the board of fire and police commissioners, or in any way impede the ordinary operation of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 3595, § 2, 3-8-10)  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE ALARM REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-601. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions hereinafter set forth, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Alarm company: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. 
Alarm user: Jointly and severally, any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization that owns, leases or occupies the premises or property where a fire alarm system is maintained. 
Designated proprietary agent: The agent designated by Villa Park to operate the village system or by DuComm with respect to the operation of the remote receiving station. 
Fire alarm system: A system or portion of a combination system that consists of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals. 
Remote receiving station: DuComm, 600 Wall Street, Glendale Heights, Illinois. 
Village system: The Village of Villa Park alarm receiving and monitoring panel as installed and maintained by ADT/Tyco, at DuComm, 600 Wall Street, Glendale Heights, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-602. - Connection to village system. 
Any property owner, lessee, person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization in control of property may connect automatic fire alarm transmitting equipment to the village's alarm receiving and monitoring panels as installed and maintained by the village operations center at DuComm (hereinafter referred to as "DuComm"). 
The alarm user shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of this article with regard to all applications, requirements, and fees associated with connection to DuComm. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-603. - Required connection of fire alarm systems. 
All new required fire alarm systems, as mandated by BOCA National Building Code 1999 Edition, as now or hereafter amended by chapter 7, article II of the Municipal Code, shall transmit trouble, supervisory, and fire signals to the ADT receiving point in the village via a wireless transmitter in accordance with NFPA 72. Only equipment certified and approved by the remote receiving station and/or its designated proprietary agent may be installed. The designated proprietary agent shall be the only authorized installer of the approved radio transmitters. Existing systems shall be changed to wireless either (a) upon the alarm owner's request; or (b) when the existing equipment is updated; or (c) when an alarm has been in a trouble or out of service condition for a time period of over thirty (30) days caused by a problem with the dedicated telephone fire alarm circuit; or (d) an alarm has three (3) or more line troubles lasting forty-eight (48) hours or more in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-604. - Fire alarm system plan review. 
The following shall apply to all structures except R3 and R4: 
Fire alarm system plans shall be submitted for review for any new fire alarm system and or upgrade to an existing system. No work shall begin prior to the approval of the plan by the Fire Department and the issuance of a permit for the work by the community development department. 
A system upgrade shall be defined as any one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Replacement of the main fire alarm control panel. 
(b)  Replacement of more than one-half (½) the alarm initiating devices. 
(c)  Replacement of more than one-half (½) the alarm notification devices. 
(d)  Any addition of alarm initiating devices. 
(e)  Addition, repair or replacement of any fire alarm wiring. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-605. - Fire alarm system requirements for connection. 
Fire alarm system connections to DuComm shall be made only after compliance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Connection shall not overburden or otherwise interfere with the operation of DuComm. 
(b)  The alarm system shall be installed according to the manufacturer's directions. 
(c)  Fire alarm systems shall be compatible with the village's system. 
(d)  The alarm user shall make arrangements with the company installing the alarm system and with ADT/Tyco for the installation of a wireless transmitter. The designated proprietary agent shall be the only authorized installer of the approved radio transmitters. 
(e)  The alarm user shall purchase and install a standard security lock box in the manner and location prescribed by the fire department and containing keys to all entrances and exits to the building to allow immediate access in emergency situations. At the request of the alarm user, the fire department may permit the installation of a securing lock box tamper switch connected to a security system; however no such connection to the fire alarm system shall be allowed. 
(f)  All fire alarm systems shall be installed, maintained and tested in accordance with NFPA 72 and Chapter 35 of the BOCA national Building Code 1999 Edition, as now or hereafter amended by chapter 7, article II of the Municipal Code. 
(g)  The fire department shall inspect the property prior to connection and make a written finding as to whether the above requirements have been met. For fire alarm systems required to be installed by the fire department, the inspection shall be a prerequisite for the final occupancy permit given by the building official of the village for new construction or remodeling of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-606. - Fees. 
There shall be an alarm system plan review fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per accessory device. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-607. - Alarm system posting requirements. 
The alarm user shall post or cause to be posted at or near the location where such alarm system can be deactivated, a notice containing the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user and the person, firm or corporation responsible for the maintenance and repair of such alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-608. - Maintenance and testing requirements. 
(a)  All alarm users shall maintain the alarm system in good working order. 
(b)  The alarm user shall have any fire alarm system tested according to the following schedule by a licensed testing agency or licensed electrical contractor approved by the fire department. 
Sprinkled buildings—Annually 
Nonsprinkled buildings—Annually 
(1)  Tests under this section shall be conducted according to the standards as set forth in section 9-605(f). Each test shall also include the testing of the systems battery under load conditions. 
(2)  The results of the testing agency or electrical contractors test shall be in writing, signed by the agency or contractor, and kept on file at the premises where the alarm system is being used. A copy of the test results shall be forwarded to the fire department upon completion of the alarm system test. The test shall not be considered completed until the village receives the written results thereof. If the written results are not received by the village within thirty (30) days after the end of the applicable testing interval, the alarm user shall be subject to the additional fee set forth in section 9-617. 
(3)  New and upgraded systems shall be acceptance tested according to the standards as set forth in section 9-605(f). 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 9-609. - Time limits—Alarm sound; response to village notification. 
The alarm user shall respond or cause his representative to appear at the alarm system location within one (1) hour from notification by the village to reset an alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide securing for the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-610. - Automatic telephone alarm prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall install, or cause to be installed, or maintain any automatic telephone alarm in the village. 
Any automatic telephone alarm installed and operative on the effective date of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any such automatic telephone alarm shall be removed by the owner thereof within thirty (30) days following the effective date of this article. Automatic telephone alarms not so removed shall be subject to abatement as a nuisance and to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(b)  No person shall make or cause to be made telephone calls utilizing an automatic telephone alarm to any telephone line which terminates at any office or telephone registered to the village. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-611. - False alarms—Determination; definition. 
Upon receipt of any reports or information from the responding department, the fire department shall determine whether an alarm was a false alarm. A "false alarm" is an alarm signal requiring a response by the fire department when a situation requiring such a response by the fire department does not exist. False alarm shall not include alarms of the following nature: 
(a)  Fire or smoke causes activation as verified by the fire department. 
(b)  Physical damage to the property caused by lightning. 
(c)  Telephone line malfunction as determined by the fire department. 
(d)  Securing alarm systems affected by electrical service interruption as determined by the fire department. 
(e)  The alarm system was newly installed within the last thirty (30) days in full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
Upon determination that the alarm was false, the fire department shall so notify the alarm user. If the alarm user objects to such determination, a written appeal shall be filed with the fire chief within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the fire department's decision. The fire chief, after a review of all information, reports and evidence, including those submitted by the alarm user, shall make a written decision on whether to uphold the fire department's decision within twenty (20) days of receipt of the appeal; such written decision to be sent certified mail to the alarm user. The decision of the fire chief shall be the final decision on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-612. - Conducting tests, maintenance or repair work. 
Whenever an alarm user, or agent(s) of the alarm user, conducts tests, maintenance work, or repair work on any alarm system connected to the village system, the alarm user shall notify DuComm of that fact prior to conducting such tests or work, and shall notify DuComm that such tests or work has been completed immediately after such completion. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-613. - False alarms—Negligence. 
If the fire department responds to a false alarm and it is determined by the fire department that the cause of the false alarm was negligence in failing to contact DuComm as required by section 9-612, the alarm user shall be subject to the fee set forth in section 9-616. This determination of the fire department can be appealed pursuant to the procedures in section 9-611. If an alarm user is assessed the fee under this section, the alarm shall not be counted toward the accumulation of false alarms subject to further fees in section 9-616(d). 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-614. - Alarm systems subject to disconnection from DuComm. 
The following alarm systems shall be subject to disconnection as provided in section 9-615. 
(a)  Any alarm system which does not or no longer meets the requirements for connection as set forth in section 9-605. 
(b)  Any alarm system for which connection fees, false alarm fees or additional charges under this article have been assessed and are thirty (30) days overdue. 
(c)  Any alarm system which has ten (10) or more false alarms within a sixty-day period. 
For properties required to be connected to DuComm according to the Villa Park Municipal Code and subject to disconnection pursuant to this section, the procedures for disconnection in section 9-615 shall be followed, but a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be assessed in lieu of disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-615. - Disconnection procedures. 
Prior to disconnecting the alarm system from DuComm, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(a)  The village shall notify the alarm user by certified mail that the alarm system is subject to disconnection for one (1) of the causes set forth in section 9-614. The alarm user has fifteen (15) days from receipt of the notice to either (1) submit proof to the fire department that the alarm meets the requirements under section 9-605; (2) to pay the outstanding balance due the village; or (3) submit a report to the fire department describing the actions to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarms. 
(b)  If the fire department determines that the proof submitted establishes that the alarm system is in compliance with the requirements of section 9-605, that any overdue payments have been made, or that the action to be taken by the alarm user as described in the report will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the fire department shall notify the alarm user that the alarm system will not be disconnected from DuComm, but that if any subsequent violations of this article occur, the alarm system may be disconnected. 
(c)  If the alarm user is dissatisfied with the decision of the fire department, the alarm user may request in writing a hearing on the matter. Such requests for a hearing must be filed within ten (10) days of the receipt of the fire department's decision. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the alarm user by the fire chief by certified mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be more than twenty-one (21) nor less than ten (10) days after the filing of the request for the hearing. 
(d)  Should the fire department determine that the nature of the alarm user's business or the complexity of the alarm system causes continued false alarms, which are not the result of any substantial negligence or disregard on the part of the alarm user, the fire department may permit the alarm user to retain the alarm system connection to DuComm despite the occurrence of ten (10) or more false alarms. However, the alarm user shall take such actions as the fire department deems necessary to reduce the occurrence of false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-616. - Additional fees and charges. 
In addition to any fines or penalties which may be assessed pursuant to this Code, persons violating provisions of this article shall be subject to the following additional charges: 
(a)  An alarm user who fails to provide the written results of the alarm system test pursuant to section 9-608(b) shall be subject to a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) additional fee. 
(b)  An alarm user who violates any provision of section 9-609 of this article shall be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) charge. 
(c)  An alarm user who violates sections 9-612 and 9-613 of this article shall be subject to a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  If the Villa Park Fire Department responds to four (4) or more false alarms within a twelve-month period, the alarm user shall be subject to the following additional charges: 
Fire alarm systems additional charges for each occurrence: 
Fourth, fifth, or sixth alarm within twelve (12) months ..... $100.00 
Seventh or more false alarms within twelve (12) months ..... 200.00 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-617. - Liability of village limited. 
(a)  The village assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of an alarm system because of the failure or neglect of any person associated with the installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm system, or for the transmission of alarm signals or other relaying of such signals and messages. 
(b)  The village shall not be liable for any claimed failure of service or any consequential damages claimed to result from such failure, or the installation, surveillance or operation of DuComm or any component part of its total automatic alarm system, whether or not due to the negligent, willful or reckless acts or omissions of the village or its employees or agents. 
(c)  The alarm user, by connection to DuComm, agrees that the alarm user shall defend, indemnify, hold harmless and save the Village of Villa Park, its officers and employees, from any claim or liability whatsoever, arising out of the application for connection, the alarm user's connection to DuComm, the operation of DuComm, or the response or nonresponse of village employees to the alarm user's property. Specifically, and without limitation to the foregoing, the alarm user shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officers and employees, from any claim with respect to the property of the alarm user (for example, without limitation, if the property of the alarm user is the situs of the beginning of a fire), which claim arose of the incident on which such claim is based [or] occurred during which the alarm user's alarm transmitting equipment was connected to DuComm. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Sec. 9-618. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 9-618, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2823, § 2, adopted May 13, 1996.  
Sec. 9-619. - Severability clause. 
If any provision or part of this article is declared invalid and of no further force and effect, the other provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2823, § 2, 5-13-96)  
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environmental control board, § 2-2501 et seq.; nuisances, Ch. 15; abandoned vehicles, § 15-401 et seq.; litter control, § 16-114. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean as indicated herein: 
Ashes: The residue from residential fireplaces and barbecue grills. 
Brush: Any and all shrubbery, tree limbs and branches no larger than four (4) inches in diameter and no longer than eight (8) feet in length. 
Domestic garbage: Ashes, garbage, refuse, large refuse items but excluding brush and landscape wastes. 
Dwelling unit: Any single-family dwelling or residence and each unit of a multifamily dwelling of three (3) units or less. 
Garbage: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of products. 
Landscape waste: All accumulations of weeds, grass, thatch, shrubbery cuttings, shrubbery clippings, leaves and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees but expressly excluding sod and any brush larger than one (1) inch in diameter or three (3) feet in length. 
Large refuse items: Shall include discarded water softener tanks, iceboxes, stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, furniture and furnishings, but shall exclude any building materials such as bricks, concrete blocks, structural iron, roofing materials or lumber. 
Refuse: Combustible trash, including but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood (excluding building lumber), excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral waste; the term shall not include earth and waste from building operations; building materials, such as bricks, concrete, concrete block, structural iron and roofing materials; nor shall it include solid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations, such as food processing waste, boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings; street rubbish, street sweepings, dirt, leaves or landscape waste. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 2, 2-11-74; Ord. No. 2389, § 1, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 1, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-102. - Disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any ashes, garbage or refuse (but excluding large refuse items) or material subject to decay except in a disposal device or container meeting specifications established by the village manager. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any landscape waste with domestic garbage for purposes of disposal, and all landscape waste shall be disposed of strictly in accordance with the specific regulations therefor provided in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owners, tenants, licensees, operators or occupants of all multifamily dwellings in excess of three (3) units and any manufacturing, industrial, business or commercial establishment to place or allow garbage, refuse or ashes to remain in any disposal container which does not meet the specifications established by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 1454, §§ 1, 3, 4, 7, 2-11-74; Ord. No. 2389, § 2, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 2, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-103. - Vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any domestic garbage, brush or landscape waste on any public street or alley in the village provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing domestic garbage, brush or landscape waste in a container complying with the provisions of this article preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 5, 2-11-74; Ord. No. 2427, § 3, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-104. - Dumping on another's land. 
It shall be unlawful to dump or place any domestic garbage, landscape waste or brush on any premises or property in the village without the consent of the owner of such premises or property and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article; and it shall be unlawful to dump or place any domestic garbage, landscape waste or brush on any parkway, street, alley or property owned by the village except for the purpose of being picked up by a regularly scheduled scavenger service and then only in accordance with established ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 6, 2-11-74; Ord. No. 2427, § 4, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-105. - Rates for collection and disposal services. 
(a)  Commencing July 1, 2013 the rate for collection and disposal services for garbage, landscape waste, recyclables, white goods, waste tires and other special collections shall be those rates as established in the current contract between the village and the village's collection and disposal service contractor on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(b)  The base rate established in subsection (a) above, shall be increased by a monthly two dollar ($2.00) administrative fee and a monthly fifty cent ($0.50) recycling surcharge. 
(c)  The fees shall be added to each water bill of a dwelling unit as defined in this chapter and shall be multiplied by the number of months covered by that water bill. If a dwelling unit is not billed for water service, then the bill shall be established as if the dwelling unit did receive a water bill. 
(Ord. No. 1925, §§ 2, 4, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2288, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 5, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 2481, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. 2583, § 1, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 3135, § 2, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 3304, § 2, 7-11-05; Ord. No. 3360, § 2, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 3428, § 2, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 3612, § 2, 6-14-10; Ord. No. 3767, § 1, 10-14-13; Ord No. 3911 , § 1, 4-25-16)  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, ASHES AND REFUSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 15; nuisances enumerated, § 15-102(2), (16); changing lot elevation by using garbage or refuse, § 18-104(d). 
 
Sec. 10-201. - Utilization of scavenger service. 
Single-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings of three (3) units or less shall be required to utilize the regular garbage collection service provided by the village subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89)  
Sec. 10-202. - Acceptable containers. 
(a)  All garbage, ashes and refuse shall not be set out on the parkway for purposes of collection except in an approved disposal device or container, the size of which shall be not greater than thirty-five (35) gallons, or in plastic garbage bags, not larger than thirty-five (35) gallons. 
(b)  Large refuse items need not be contained in any container; provided, however, that only one (1) large refuse item shall be disposed of per dwelling unit per week. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 6, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-203. - Placement on parkway. 
Domestic garbage and landscape waste as defined in this chapter shall not be placed or permitted to remain upon any parkway within the village for purposes of being picked up by a regularly scheduled scavenger service sooner than one (1) day before their regularly scheduled day for pickup, and any disposal device or container shall be removed from the parkway no later than one (1) day after the scheduled day for pickup. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 7, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 3083, § 2, 4-9-01)  
Sec. 10-204. - Enforcement. 
In addition to the penalties otherwise provided for herein, in the event that garbage or landscape waste or a disposal device or container is placed or permitted to remain upon the parkway for more than one (1) day or in the event that an owner or occupant not authorized to use village collection services places garbage or landscape waste on the parkway, the director of community development or his/her designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the property owner or occupant demanding that the garbage, landscape waste, disposal device or container be removed from the parkway within forty-eight (48) hours. Said notice shall also advise the owner or occupant that in the event that said garbage or landscape waste or device or container is not removed by the expiration of that time, the village will proceed to remove or cause the removal of said garbage or landscape waste or device or container immediately upon the expiration of the notice and surcharge the account of the owner or occupant for the cost of the removal together with a reasonable fee for processing. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 8, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 3083, § 3, 4-9-01)  
Sec. 10-205. - Regulations for brush removal. 
(a)  Collection. 
(1)  All brush, including thorny species and climbing vines, less than one (1) inch in diameter and three (3) feet in length shall be bundled and tied with string or placed in an authorized container for the disposal of landscape waste. 
(2)  Brush may be placed on the parkway not sooner than one (1) day prior to any regularly scheduled day for pickup. Brush shall be permitted to remain on the parkway for a period of two (2) days following the regularly scheduled day for pickup. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to place on the parkway for disposal by regularly scheduled scavenger service any whole trees or any tree part resulting from the removal of a whole tree or any brush resulting from trimming by outside contractors. All brush larger than four (4) inches in diameter or longer than eight (8) feet in length is not eligible for collection by the village or its contractor but shall be removed by a private contractor retained at the property owner's or occupant's sole expense. 
(b)  Enforcement. In the event that brush is placed or remains on the parkway not in accordance with the provisions contained in this section or brush larger than four (4) inches in diameter or longer than eight (8) feet in length are placed on the parkway, the director of community development or his/her designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the property owner or occupant demanding that the aforesaid brush be removed from the parkway within forty-eight (48) hours. Said notice shall also advise the owner or occupant that in the event that said items are not removed by the expiration of that time, the village will proceed to remove or cause the removal of said items immediately upon the expiration of the notice and surcharge the account of the owner or occupant for the cost of the removal together with a reasonable fee for processing. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 9, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-206. - Regulations for landscape waste removal. 
(a)  All landscape waste shall be disposed of in kraft paper bags approved by the village containing the emblem of the village and the name Villa Park Disposal on said kraft paper bag. It shall be unlawful to place in such kraft paper bags any domestic garbage or brush larger than one (1) inch in diameter and three (3) feet in length. Brush smaller than one (1) inch in diameter and three (3) feet in length or less may be disposed of either in such kraft paper bags or pursuant to section 10-205. 
(b)  Landscape waste may be placed on the parkway not sooner than one (1) day prior to any regularly scheduled day for pickup. 
(Ord. No. 2427, § 10, 6-25-90) 
Editor's note— Former § 10-206 pertained to surcharge for removal, which provisions are now codified in § 10-207.  
Sec. 10-207. - Surcharge for removal. 
In addition to the penalties otherwise provided for herein, there shall be added to the regular charge for garbage collection service provided by section 10-105 a surcharge for removal as provided in either section 10-204 or subsection 10-205(b) of this article, which surcharge shall be equal to the actual cost of removal by the village or a private contractor together with a ten dollar ($10.00) fee for administrative expenses. The surcharge shall be in addition to the regularly charged fees for garbage collection service and shall appear as an addition to the regularly scheduled garbage collection fee. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 11, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 3083, § 4, 4-9-01) 
Editor's note— Former § 10-207 pertained to article interpretation, which provisions are now codified in § 10-208.  
Sec. 10-208. - Interpretation. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be interpreted to the extent practicable, consistent with all other ordinances of the village, so as to give effect to the purposes of all ordinances; but, as to any inconsistency, this article shall supersede and take precedence. 
(b)  Whenever the regularly scheduled day for pickup falls on a holiday, the time period for the placement of garbage or other wastes and the time period for removal of disposal devices or containers, as provided in this article, shall be extended by an additional twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 12, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 3083, § 4, 4-9-01) 
Editor's note— Former § 10-208 pertained to article remedies, which provisions are now codified in § 10-209.  
Sec. 10-209. - Remedies. 
The remedies set forth in this article shall be cumulative to all other provisions concerning the removal of garbage, ashes or refuse, including those set forth in chapter 15 of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 3, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 2427, § 13, 6-25-90)  
Sec. 10-210. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 10-210, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 3083, § 5, adopted Apr. 9, 2001.  
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, Ch. 3; compliance with county health regulations for swimming pools required, § 22-1; water, sewers and disposal, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 11-101. - County authorized to enforce its food and beverage ordinances. 
The county health department is hereby authorized to enforce in the village, the provisions of the county ordinance regulating the sale and handling of food intended for human consumption, and of milk and milk products. No person shall violate such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 642, 11-5-56) 
Cross reference— Food or beverage vending trucks, Ch. 13, Art. II.  
Sec. 11-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3463, § 2, adopted March 10, 2008, repealed § 11-102 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to smoking during public meetings prohibited as enacted by Ord. No. 2249, §§ 1—7, adopted July, 20, 1987.  
Sec. 11-103. - Smoking in public places prohibited. 
(a)  In accordance with the terms and provisions of the Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.), as now existing or hereafter amended, which Act is adopted by reference herein, smoking in public places or places of employment within the Village is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under this Section shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A person who owns, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each subsequent offense occurring within one (1) year from the date of the first offense. 
(Ord. No. 3453, § 2, 1-14-08)  
Chapter 13 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusement license, Ch. 4, Art. II; coin-operated amusement games and similar devices, Ch. 4, Art. III; electronic game rooms, Ch. 4, Art. IV; bicycle license, Ch. 6, Art. II; peddling from parked vehicles, § 14-217; burglar alarm user permits, § 19-221 et seq.; land modification permits, § 19.5-103; solicitors, Ch. 20; retailers' occupation tax, Ch. 23, Art II; service occupation tax, Ch. 23, Art. III; use tax, Ch. 23, Art. IV; utility tax, Ch. 23, Art. V; tax on foreign fire insurance companies, Ch. 23, Art. VI; automobile renting occupation and use tax, Ch. 23, Art. VII; taxicabs, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Power of corporate authorities to set licensing procedures, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 28, 2014, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, § 13-101, pertained to garage sales, and derived from Ord. No. 1914, § 1, adopted June 16, 1980. 
 
DIVISION 1. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Purpose. 
This division is adopted because each commercial establishment located in the village is a basic part of and affects the physical and economic well-being of the village necessitating special services to promote, protect and safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the village and to enable the creation of an accurate record of commercial establishments located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within the village. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-102. - Definitions. 
Business: For purposes of this chapter, the term "business" shall include any and all persons engaging in business. Businesses that operate from distinct spaces or buildings with separate addresses shall be deemed to be separate businesses regardless if such businesses are owned or operated by the same person. 
Educational, governmental, religious or political organizations and home-based businesses shall not be considered businesses for the purpose of registration but may register at their sole discretion. 
Place of business: The premises, main business location or an outlet, branch, or other location thereof, temporary or otherwise, to which the public is expressly or impliedly invited for the purpose of transacting of business. Unless a construction contractor has at least one (1) permanent location within the village, a place of business includes a construction site located therein. Place of business shall not include a business conducted at a personal residence or to an itinerant business that has sales that are of a transient nature not to exceed ten (10) days in the village in one (1) calendar year. 
Engaging in business: Means persons operating, conducting, doing, carrying on, causing to be carried on or pursuing any business, profession, occupation, trade, pursuit or activity for the purpose of profit. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-103. - Registration required. 
(a)  Every place of business, whether or not subject to any other licensing requirements of the village, shall be annually registered with the village as required in this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business at a place of business in the village without obtaining registration. 
(c)  A place of business must be registered prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for that place of business or request for village services. 
(d)  No registration shall be issued to a place of business that does not comply with the Villa Park Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  No registration shall be issued whose business owners or owners of the place of business are indebted to the village. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-104. - Application for registration. 
(a)  All places of business shall be registered with the village no later than December 31 of each year or at such times as the business desires to commence operation at its place of business in the village. 
(b)  Registration forms shall be available on the village website, in Village Hall and from the fire department and departments of community and economic development. Such forms shall include the business name, business address, business phone, business fax, business email, the business owner and manager(s), if operated by manager, with their address and phone number,, the type of business, the square footage of the place of business, the emergency contact person(s) of the business and that person's address and phone number, the building owner's name, address, phone, email and the name(s) of the building owner's emergency contact person(s) and that person's address and phone number, and the number of the certificate of registration issued pursuant to the Retailer's Occupation Tax Act (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1), the Service Occupation Tax Act (65 ILCS 5/8-11-5), and/or the Use Tax Act (65 ILCS 5/8-11-6), if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-105. - Services and assistance to registered businesses. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the village's fire department in conjunction with the village's community development and police departments shall attempt to provide during the registration year not less than one inspection of the place of business for compliance with the village's fire safety, property maintenance, and health, safety and welfare regulations as adopted in the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
(b)  Each registered business shall also receive such additional information and village services from the village's economic development director for the support and development of each registered business to develop that business into a stronger component of the village's business community. 
(c)  Information received from each business shall also be used as part of the notification system for any emergencies regarding that place of business or business. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-106. - Transfer of registration. 
Registration is not transferable to a new business owner, a new location or a new business. A new business occupying a place of business that is currently registered shall obtain a new registration for that place of business. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-107. - Changes to registration. 
If at any time during the term of any registration the information filed with the village for the registration changes, the applicant shall provide the updated or revised information to the department of community development within twenty-one (21) days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Sec. 13-108. - Registration to be posted. 
When a registration certificate is issued to a business owner, the business owner shall post and keep posted the registration in a conspicuous public location upon the place of business within five (5) days of its receipt. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
Secs. 13-109—13-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 13-120. - Garage sales. 
Garage sales or sales otherwise similarly named, wherein personal property, or privately owned merchandise is placed on sale to the public, shall be limited to two (2) sales per year per residence. The length of time of such sale shall be limited to three (3) days. No fee shall be required to conduct such sale. Posting of such signs advertising such sale shall be limited to the property upon which the sale is being held. 
(Ord. No. 3789, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-2014)  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD OR BEVERAGE VENDING TRUCKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Applicability of county health ordinances, § 11-101. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-201. - Traffic regulations. 
No person conducting a business from a vehicle on the public roads, streets and highways within the village shall sell any food or beverage from said vehicles less than fifty (50) feet from the nearest intersecting road, street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 2, 4-19-76)  
Sec. 13-202. - Hours of operation. 
Food or beverages shall be sold from vehicles on the public roads, streets, and highways only during the hours from 11:00 a.m. to sundown daily. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 2, 4-19-76)  
Sec. 13-203. - Vehicle specifications. 
Any vehicle used for the sale of food and beverage upon public roads, streets and highways shall possess the following equipment which shall be in good working order and in operation at the time which the sales are taking place. 
(1)  A sign on the front and back of the vehicle which shall consist of letters no less than five (5) inches in height and shall state "CAUTION, CHILDREN CROSSING." 
(2)  A foldout diamond-shaped sign on the left side of the vehicle which shall consist of letters no less than five (5) inches in height and shall state "SLOW." 
(3)  Two (2) amber lights eight (8) inches in diameter mounted both on front and back of the vehicle capable of flashing alternately and be seen at a distance of five hundred (500) feet in normal daylight. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 2, 4-19-76)  
Sec. 13-204. - Chimes. 
The operator of a food or beverage vending truck shall turn off any monotonous, attention-getting chimes or tunes while waiting for or making a sale and may use same only when the vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 2, 4-19-76)  
Sec. 13-205. - Health regulations. 
(a)  All ice cream or milk vending trucks shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned at the end of each day of use. 
(b)  The operator of a food or beverage vending truck shall comply with all requirements of the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 4, 3-21-49; Ord. No. 1641, § 2, 4-19-76)  
Sec. 13-206. - Inspections. 
The village manager shall cause such inspections to be made as will insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 5, 3-21-49)  
Secs. 13-207—13-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE FOR MILK OR ICE CREAM VENDING TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 13-221. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of any ice cream or milk vending truck without a license issued by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 3-21-49)  
Sec. 13-222. - Application. 
A person desiring the license required by the provisions of this division shall apply to the village clerk upon a form furnished by the clerk giving the information required on the form. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 2, 3-21-49)  
Sec. 13-223. - Fee. 
A person desiring the issuance or renewal of the license required by the provisions of this division shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 541, § 2, 3-21-49) 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to set license fee, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-60-1.  
Sec. 13-224. - Expiration. 
The license required by the provisions of this division shall expire at the end of one year. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 2, 3-21-49)  
Sec. 13-225. - Revocation. 
The board of trustees may revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 6, 3-21-49)  
ARTICLE IV. - VENDING MACHINES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2028, § 2, adopted March 22, 1982, has been treated as amendatory of Art. IV, relative to vending machines, and codified as herein set out in Div. 1, § 13-401 and Div. 2, §§ 13-416—13-420, at the discretion of the editor. Prior to amendment Art. IV contained §§ 13-401, 13-402 and 13-416—13-423 and derived from Ord. No. 1076, §§ 2—12, adopted Aug. 25, 1975 and Ord. No. 1612, §§ 1—5, adopted Dec. 22, 1975. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-401. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise provided by this section, words and phrases shall have their commonly understood meaning: 
Proprietor means any person, corporation, partnership or association who, as owner or lessee, places or displays a vending machine. 
Vending machine means any machine or device which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk dispenses a product(s), commodity or item(s) of personal property and any machine where the operator of the device pays or gives consideration for the privilege of using the machine. "Vending machine" as used in this article shall not mean "coin-operated amusement devices" as defined in Article III, section 4-301, stamp machines in United States Post Offices, or coin-changing machines for no profit. 
(Ord. No. 2028k, § 2(1), 3-22-82)  
Secs. 13-402—13-415. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 13-416. - Required. 
No proprietor shall display a vending machine for operation by the public generally without having first obtained a vending machine license. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 2(2), 3-22-82)  
Sec. 13-417. - Applications. 
(a)  Applications for vending machine licenses shall be in writing, under oath or affirmation and upon a form provided by the village. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Address of applicant; 
(3)  Description of vending machine(s); 
(4)  Proposed location of vending machine(s); 
(5)  Name of person or corporation who will service the vending machine(s); 
(6)  Address of person or corporation who will service the vending machine(s); 
(7)  Phone number of person or corporation who will service the vending machine(s); 
(8)  No prior vending machine license issued to the applicant has been revoked by the village. 
(c)  The application fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall accompany each application. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 2(3), 3-22-82; Ord. No. 3385, § 6, 9-18-06)  
Sec. 13-418. - License fees. 
(a)  The annual fee per machine for vending machines shall be determined by the price each machine charges for the commodity involved and shall be as follows per machine: 
Price of commodity 
(in cents) 	License fee 
$0.01—0.05 	$15.00 
0.06—0.24 	20.00 
0.25—0.49 	25.00 
0.50 and up 	30.00 
 
The licensee under any license issued pursuant to this section that expires on June 1, 2007 shall pay a renewal fee equal to eleven-twelfths ( 11/12 ) of the amount due under this section for the period ending April 14, 2008. Thereafter, on or before each April 15, each such licensee shall pay the full amount due hereunder. 
(b)  The license shall be issued annually effective on April 15 and expiring on April 14 each year. 
(c)  For those proprietors owners and operators not using a machine on or before the 14 th day of October each year, but who acquire and use a machine on or after October 15 th of each year, the annual fee per machine shall be one-half (½) of the fees set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  In the event any license fee established herein has not been paid to the village prior to May 1, a late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the fee due, whichever amount is greater, shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 2(6), 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2113, § 1, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 3385, § 7, 9-18-06)  
Sec. 13-419. - Granting or denial of a license. 
(a)  The village manager, or his designee, shall grant or deny in writing the application for a vending machine license. 
(b)  The basis for denial of a vending machine license shall be: 
(1)  Application for the license is incomplete; 
(2)  A false statement of a material fact has been made in the application for the license; or 
(3)  A prior vending machine license granted under this ordinance to the applicant has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 2(4), 3-22-82)  
Sec. 13-420. - Appeal of denial. 
(a)  An applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a vending machine license to the corporate authorities. The right to a review of a denial is waived unless exercised within thirty (30) days of the denial. 
(b)  The right to appeal shall be exercised by filing a notice of review on a form provided by the village with the office of the village clerk. The date of filing if filed by mail shall be the date which the notice was mailed as evidenced by the postage mark of the United States Postal Service. 
(c)  The hearing before the corporate authorities shall be in the same manner as other administrative hearings. The person requesting the review shall have the burden of proving he was wrongfully denied a license. 
(d)  The decision of the corporate authorities shall be reviewable in the Circuit Court, 18th Judicial Circuit, pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 110, Paragraph 264 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 2(5), 3-22-82)  
Sec. 13-421. - Revocation. 
(a)  A license may be revoked by the village manager. After notice of revocation hearing and a revocation hearing has been held, based upon: 
(1)  Allowing minors to purchase products the sale of which is a violation of the Illinois Revised Statutes; 
(2)  Knowingly failing to maintain a licensed vending machine; or 
(3)  Making a false statement of a material fact on a vending machine license application. 
(b)  Review of the revocation of a vending machine license shall be provided in accordance with section 13-419. 
(Ord. No. 2028, § 2(7), 3-22-82)  
ARTICLE V. - RAFFLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018, enacted Jan. 25, 1982, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—8 as herein set out in §§ 13-501—13-508 was at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference— Licensing of raffles, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 85, § 2301 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-501. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the terms defined in this section have the meanings given them. 
Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the "Criminal Code of 1961," conducted by an organization licensed under this article, in which 
(1)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; 
(2)  The winning change is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 1-25-82)  
Sec. 13-502. - Organizations eligible for license. 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply. 
(1)  Nonprofit: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a non-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
(2)  Charitable: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public. 
(3)  Educational: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorable in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools. 
(4)  Religious: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
(5)  Fraternal: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government. 
(6)  Veterans': An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans, or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(7)  Labor: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 2, 1-25-82)  
Sec. 13-503. - License required; applications; issuance; restrictions; persons ineligible. 
Licenses issued by the village are subject to the following restrictions. 
(1)  No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this article. 
(2)  The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sole or issued, the time period (calendar dates) during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination (calendar dates) of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. 
(3)  The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the non-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization. 
(4)  A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in this article. Each such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) and shall be valid for one raffle. 
(5)  The following are ineligible for any license under this article: 
a.  Any person who has been convicted of a felony; 
b.  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter; 
c.  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
d.  Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in a., b., or c. has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed; 
e.  Any organization in which a person defined in a., b., or c. is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not; 
f.  An organization in which a person defined in a., b., or c. is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 3, 1-25-82; Ord. No. 3962 , §, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-504. - Issuance of license to qualified applicants. 
The village manager shall issue a raffle license to all qualified applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 8, 1-25-82)  
Sec. 13-505. - Conduct of raffles. 
The conduct of raffles is subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game. 
(2)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(3)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(4)  A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this article. 
(5)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license. 
(6)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 4, 1-25-82)  
Sec. 13-505.1. - Limitations. 
(a)  The maximum aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in a single raffle shall be one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) unless the applicant follows the procedure as established in paragraph (e). 
(b)  The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall be one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) unless the applicant follows the procedure as established in paragraph (e). 
(c)  The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(d)  The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold for any raffle shall be three hundred sixty-four (364) days. 
(e)  Any applicant requesting a license for a raffle in which the maximum retail value of all prizes or the maximum retail value of each individual prize will exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.000) must receive prior approval of the village board of trustees. The application will be placed on the meeting agenda for action by the board of trustees prior to the issuance of said license. 
(Ord. No. 3109, § 2, 12-17-01)  
Sec. 13-506. - Raffles manager, bond. 
(a)  All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the licensing authority in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. 
(b)  The village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this article, provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 5, 1-25-82)  
Sec. 13-507. - Records. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. 
(b)  Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. 
(c)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership, and to the village, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. 
(d)  Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. No. 2018, § 6, 1-25-82)  
Sec. 13-508. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 13-508, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2018, § 7, adopted Jan. 25, 1982.  
ARTICLE VI. - MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSING 
 
Sec. 13-601. - Permit required. 
No person, individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other organization, entity or group, including schools for massage therapy, shall engage in the practice of massage without first obtaining a valid massage business license, and in addition, an individual massage practitioner permit for each and every person who has been, is engaged, or will engage in the business or profession of massage therapy. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 3, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 2, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-602. - Zoning districts in which massage therapy clinics shall be allowed. 
Massage businesses shall only be located in such districts as permitted by the village zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 4, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 2, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-603. - Compliance with village codes. 
Massage businesses shall comply with all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations of the Village of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 6, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 2, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-604. - Application for a massage business license. 
The application for a massage business license shall be as follows: 
APPLICATION FOR A MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE 
(1)  Name of applicant ___________. 
(2)  If applicant is a corporation, name officers, directors and major shareholders and attach evidence of incorporation. Information sought herein shall be required for each officer, director or employee who shall directly operate the business herein or who shall perform massage therapy, and for any stockholder owning more than two (2) percent of the corporation stock. 
_____
_____
_____
(3)  If applicant is a partnership, list the names of all partners. Each such partner is required, in addition, to provide all information sought herein for the purposes of licensing. 
_____
_____
_____
(4)  Mailing address(es) of applicant. 
_____
_____
_____
(5)  Legal resident address of applicant, including those of officers, directors and partners, for the past three (3) years. 
_____
_____
_____
(6)  Telephone number(s) of applicant. 
Business  _____ 
Residential  _____ 
(7)  A cashiers check representing a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in enclosed for an individual applicant, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a corporation or partnership. 
(8)  Applicant's: 
(a) Date of birth 	_____
(b) Height 	_____
(c) Weight 	_____
(d) Eye color 	_____
(e) Hair color 	_____
(f) Social Security No. 	_____
(g) Driver's License No. 	_____
 
(9)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of this application. 
_____
_____
(10)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age (if applicable). 
(11)  Massage or similar business history of the applicant, including whether the applicant has ever had any related license, permit or similar approval, in any jurisdiction, revoked or suspended. 
_____
_____
(If additional space is needed, append additional sheets). 
(12)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime, ordinance violation, forfeited bond or plead nolo contendere, other than as related to misdemeanor traffic violations, within the past five (5) years. 
No _______ 
Yes _______ 
If yes, explain in detail, naming offenses, dates and jurisdictions. 
_____
_____
(13)  Name and address of recognized massage training school attended, dates of attendance, evidence of graduation, certificate or diploma or degree awarded, or evidence of active membership in good standing of the American Massage Therapy Association, demonstrating that the applicant, and/or any person who shall be engaged in the active practice of massage at the location described herein shall be qualified and competent to engage in the business or profession of massage therapy. 
(14)  Names of proposed massage business. _____ 
_____
_____
(15)  Addresses of proposed massage business. 
_____
_____
(16)  Whether property named above is owned or leased. 
Owned _______ 
Leased _______ 
(a)  If leased, 
1.  Term of lease  _____ 
2.  Monthly rental  _____ 
3.  Landlord 
A.  Name  _____ 
B.  Address  _____ 
C.  Telephone No.  _____ 
(17)  Exact nature of the massage to be administered, by kind, type, method or art, including supplementary aids and/or substances to be used or applied therein. 
_____
_____
(18)  Number of massage practitioners projected. 
_____
(19)  A diagram of the premises to be employed in the practice of massage, detailing facilities to be used, including massage rooms, tubs, sinks, any and all showers, toilets, stream baths, dressing facilities, locker rooms, provisions for soiled linen, sterilizers and the like. 
(20)  By this application, the applicant agrees that all such facilities shall be subject to inspection and approval of: 
(a)  The Village or County Health Inspector, 
(b)  The Village Fire Inspector, 
(c)  The Village Building Inspector, 
and that such facilities shall comply in all respects, with all applicable Codes and Ordinances of the Village. 
(21)  By this application, the applicant agrees that the information provided herein may be forwarded to the village police chief for investigation thereof. Said chief shall have the right to fingerprint and, or photograph the applicant and shall have the right to confirm any or all information provided herein. 
(22)  The applicant shall provide a photograph front facial view and a photograph, side facial view with this application, if applicable. 
(23)  The Village of Villa Park shall have sixty (60) days from the date of this application to approve or deny said application. If such application is denied, reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. 
(24)  Such license shall be issued, after approval, upon payment of the separate licensing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(25)  The license issued pursuant to this application shall expire December 31 of the year of issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended, and shall renewed annually, upon payment of the annual renewal fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), no less than six (6) weeks prior to expiration. 
CERTIFICATE 
I, _______, the applicant herein, do hereby certify and swear upon oath that the statements, information and representations made and set forth in this application are true and correct, to the best of my knowledge. 
Signature of Applicant 
___________ 
Subscribed and sworn to by _______ on 
_______, 19___. 
_______ 
Notary Public 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 6, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 2273, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 3112, §§ 3, 4, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-605. - Application for an individual massage practitioner permit. 
The application for an individual massage practitioner permit shall be as follows: 
APPLICATION FOR AN INDIVIDUAL MASSAGE 
PRACTITIONER PERMIT 
VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK 
(1)  Name of Applicant  _____ 
(2)  Applicant's residence address  _____ 
_____
(3)  Applicant's: 
(a)  Age  _____ 
(b)  Height  _____ 
(c)  Weight  _____ 
(d)  Eye color  _____ 
(e)  Hair color  _____ 
(f)  Social Security No.  _____ 
(g)  Driver's License No.  _____ 
(4)  Applicant's telephone number(s): 
Residential  _____ 
Business  _____ 
(5)  A cashier's check representing a nonrefundable application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is enclosed herewith. 
(6)  Applicant's business, occupation or employment for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of this application: 
_____
_____
(7)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever had any similar permit or license suspended or revoked, in this or any other jurisdiction within the last five (5) years. 
Yes _______ 
No _______ 
If yes, explain in detail, naming offenses, dates and jurisdictions. 
_____
(9)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime, ordinance violation, forfeited bond or plead nolo contendere, other than as related to misdemeanor traffic violations, within the past five (5) years. 
Yes _______ 
No _______ 
(10)  Name and address of recognized massage training school attended, dates of attendance, and append evidence of graduation certificate or diploma or degree awarded, or provide evidence that the applicant is an active member in good standing of the American Massage Therapy Association, demonstrating that the applicant is professionally qualified and competent by latest existing professional standards to engage in the business or profession of massage. 
(11)  Name and address of massage business. 
_____
_____
(12)  Exact nature of the massage to be administered, by kind, type, method or art, including supplementary aids and/or substances to be used or applied therein. 
_____
_____
(13)  Appended hereto is certificate from a licensed physician that the applicant has been examined and subjected to blood and urine and, or, other laboratory tests and has been found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease, skin disease or tuberculosis. 
(14)  By this application, the applicant agrees that the information provided herein may be forwarded to the village police chief for investigation thereof. Said chief shall have the right to fingerprint and or photograph the applicant and shall have the right to confirm any or all information provided herein. 
(15)  The applicant shall provide a photograph, front facial view and a photograph, side facial view, with this application. 
(16)  The Village of Villa Park shall have sixty (60) days from the date of this application to approve or deny said application. If such application is denied, reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. 
(17)  Such permit shall be issued after approval, upon payment of the annual permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(18)  The permit issued pursuant to this application shall expire December 31 of each year, unless sooner revoked or suspended and shall be renewed annually upon payment of the annual renewal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), no less than 6 weeks prior to expiration of the permit. 
CERTIFICATE 
I, _______, the applicant herein, do hereby certify and swear upon oath that the statements, information and representations made and set forth in this application are true and correct, to the best of my knowledge. 
Signature of Applicant 
___________ 
Subscribed and sworn to by _______ on 
_______, 19___. 
___________ 
Notary Public 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 7, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 2273, § 2, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 3112, §§ 5, 6, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-605.1. - Approval of original license application and approval of renewal licenses. 
All original applications for a massage business license shall be approved by a majority of a quorum of the president and board of trustees, and the license shall be signed and issued by the village manager on behalf of the Village of Villa Park following such approval. All original applications for individual massage practitioner permit shall be approved by the village manager on behalf of the Village of Villa Park. Renewals of all licenses and permits shall be made and issued by the village manager on behalf of the Village of Villa Park on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2273, § 3, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 3112, § 7, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-606. - License and permit fees, renewal and transferability. 
All massage related licenses and permits shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire on December 31 and shall be non-transferable. Application fees shall be payable only upon the initial application and not as a renewal, unless the applicant has had such license or permit previously suspended or revoked. Renewal license fees shall be payable six (6) weeks in advance of license or permit expiration. The initial license or permit fee shall be prorated on a quarterly basis upon in which yearly quarter the initial license or permit has been obtained. Fees paid shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 8, 3-16-87)  
Sec. 13-607. - Inspections. 
Village enforcement authorities shall have the right to inspect the premises of a massage business during business hours for the purposes of determining compliance with this article or any other code or ordinance of the village, in the valid exercise of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 9, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-608. - Suspension or revocations. 
Any massage license or permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked, upon good cause shown, at the discretion of the village board, after due notice and public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 10, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-609. - Display of license and, or permits. 
Every massage business license and massage practitioner permit granted shall be displayed in a conspicuous place where it may readily be observed by persons entering the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 11, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-610. - Nontransferability. 
Any massage business license issued hereunder shall be valid only at the location specified upon the initial application and shall be nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 12, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-611. - Compliance with village codes; facilities necessary. 
No massage business license shall be issued unless such establishment complies with applicable village codes and ordinances as to: 
(1)  Building, including lighting and ventilation. 
(2)  Fire and fire safety. 
(3)  Health and sanitation. 
(4)  Safety. 
(5)  Signage. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 13, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-612. - Hours of operation. 
No massage business shall be open to the public for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 14, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-613. - Unlawful activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or administer massage for any illegal purposes: i.e., in any manner calculated to arouse, appeal or gratify sexual desires, lust or to engage in prurient contact with the genitalia of any person, for any consideration of any kind. Violation hereof shall constitute grounds for revocation of any license or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 15, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-614. - Uniforms. 
Massage practitioners shall wear nontransparent uniforms or garments covering the torso and genitalia while attending patrons. Such garments shall be clean and kept in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 16, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-615. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No person on the premises of any massage business shall sell, dispense, provide, give, keep or cause to be sold, dispensed, provided, given or kept, any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 17, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-616. - Tipping. 
Massage practitioners shall not solicit tips or gratuities and "tipping" shall not be encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 18, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-617. - Minor patrons. 
Patrons under eighteen (18) years of age, shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 19, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-618. - Dressing rooms. 
Dressing room facilities shall be provided, to be used separately by each sex, including separate bathing facilities, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 20, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-619. - Genital areas of patrons. 
Genital areas of patrons must be covered while in the presence of a massage practitioner or employee and it shall be unlawful for any patron to expose their genitalia to a massage practitioner or employee for any prurient purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 21, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-620. - Linens. 
All massage businesses shall have on hand at all times a sufficient quantity of clean, laundered linens, as sheets and towels and similar, in sufficient quantity, which shall be changed after each use by a patron. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 22, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-621. - Massage therapist or technician handwashing. 
Each massage practitioner shall wash their hands in hot running water with soap or disinfectant before administering massage therapy to each patron. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 23, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-622. - Cleanliness of supplementary aids. 
Any and all supplementary aids or devices shall be suitably washed and/or disinfected before and between each use by a patron. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 24, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-623. - Application of regulation to pre-existing business. 
Provisions of this article shall be applicable to all massage businesses, schools and individuals, engaged in the practice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 25, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3112, § 8, 1-21-02)  
Sec. 13-624. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Licensed medical doctors, doctors of osteopathic medicine, chiropractors or licensed physical therapists. 
(2)  Licensed nurses or nursing homes which administer such massages in the normal course of their medical duties. 
(3)  Any physical trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers such athletic-related massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)  Any licensed barber or beautician who administers a massage in the normal course of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 2225, § 26, 3-16-87)  
Secs. 13-625—13-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 13-701. - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of this article is to provide regulations governing the filming and/or taping of certain television shows, commercials, feature films and/or video tapes, movie productions and other related activities within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park, including the use in such productions of the streets, rights-of-way, equipment and personnel of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2654, § 1, 8-16-93)  
Sec. 13-702. - Village approval required. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person, firm, individual, corporation, association, partnership, or any other organization, entity or group, shall engage in the production of feature films, television shows, commercials, or other commercial filming, taping, or videotaping without first obtaining the approval of the village as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2654, § 1, 8-16-93)  
Sec. 13-703. - General requirements. 
(a)  Application. Prior to commencement of any filming activities, the producer, his representative, or an agent for the production company, shall submit to the village manager or his designee, an application for commercial filming or taping in a form prescribed by village manager or his designee and approved by the village attorney. Included within the application shall be a proposed "Notice to Affected Property Owners," as set forth in subparagraph (b) of this section. In addition, applicants shall submit such other information as may be requested by the village manager. The producer or his representative shall sign the application. 
Upon approval of the application, the producer shall enter into such agreements with the village as determined necessary by the village manager and village attorney. Any such agreement must be signed by the village manager or his designee prior to any production activity taking place, and a signed copy will be returned to the producer or his representative. 
Authorization shall be granted for a specific period of time and the hours of production shall be designated on the approval, giving due consideration to the requirements of the production. 
Any producer or production company intending to commence filming or taping within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park, shall be required to complete and return such informational forms as may be reasonably requested by the village, whether as part of the application submitted or at any other time. 
(b)  Notice to affected property owners. Prior to commencement of production, and at a time set by the village, the producer shall circulate a notice to all property owners in the area of production as defined by the village's representative. Such notice shall include a short description of the proposed project and the filming or taping schedule. A copy of the notice shall be reviewed by the village prior to circulation. The producer shall record any reaction from residents and shall submit a report to the village manager or his designee noting any residents' reactions, along with a list of the addresses and phone numbers of all property owners within the affected area. This completed report must be delivered to the office of the village manager not less than five (5) days prior to the commencement of the production. 
(c)  On-site location coordinator. For the duration of the production, the producer shall provide a permanent on-site location coordinator who shall act as liaison between the production company, the village, property owner(s) and village residents. The on-site location coordinator shall be available at the location during the filming period. The producer shall provide the following information regarding the on-site location coordinator: 
(1)  Name 
(2)  Title 
(3)  On—Site Location Phone 
(4)  Office Phone 
(5)  Beeper Number 
(d)  Security. The applicant shall contact the Villa Park Police Department as soon as filming locations and schedules are known. The village will review all plans for production and advise the applicant of the extent of the security that must be provided. All traffic protection and devices (signs, barricades, etc.) shall be provided by the applicant. 
(e)  Use of village personnel/equipment. The producer shall pay for the costs of any police, fire, public works, or other village personnel assigned to the project (whether specifically requested by the producer or not) at a rate equal to the salary and benefits paid to the individual employee by the village, including overtime pay as necessary. Remuneration rates for the use of any village equipment shall be established on a case-by-case basis, giving due consideration to the nature of the vehicle, cost of the vehicle, the proposed use of the vehicle, comparable schedules for vehicle usage adopted by any other public agency, and the useful life of the vehicle. 
(f)  Use of village property. Producer shall pay a fee for inconvenience caused by use of public property in accordance with the following rate schedule: 
Disruptive use 	$500.00 per day 
Nondisruptive use 	$250.00 per day 
Total closure of a public street or right-of-way 	$50.00 per hour 
Partial closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way 	$25.00 per hour 
 
The above fees shall be paid upon the conclusion of production. Based upon the schedule submitted by the producer at the time of application, the village may require a deposit against costs and expenses anticipated to become due to the village. If it appears that damage to property, public streets, or rights-of-way may occur, producer shall make a deposit in an amount equal to one and one-half (1½) times the anticipated cost of restoration. Upon completion of the restoration and determination of actual cost, any excess restoration deposit shall be returned to the producer. In the event of any deficiency in the deposit, the corporate authorities shall submit an invoice to the producer and producer shall pay same within thirty (30) days. 
(g)  Alterations to property. Upon completion of the production, producer shall restore any and all property of the village to its original condition, unless the corporate authorities have previously agreed to allow any alteration to the property to remain. 
(h)  Control of hours and locations; inspections, etc. 
(1)  The village reserves the right or shall have the right to regulate the hours and general locations of filming and taping to the extent necessary to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the community. Normal operating hours for movie production shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and filming during other than such normal operating hours shall be so controlled so as not to cause a nuisance. The village shall at all times have the authority to determine the extent of use of public streets, rights-of-way, and public property owned by the village, and general location of the film production activities. 
(2)  Producer shall advise the village manager or his designee of any potential for extraordinary noise, smoke, light, vibrations, etc., that may occur during the production and the times when such will occur. The village may request the producer to provide special notice to affected property owners in the vicinity of the production regarding the anticipated potential for any extraordinary noise, smoke, light, vibrations, etc. 
(3)  The village shall have the right to inspect any location to be used for filming or taping, to inspect all structures and/or devices and equipment to be used in connection with the filming or taping, and the producer or production company shall fully and completely cooperate with the village in granting access at all reasonable times for purposes of inspection. 
(i)  Parking of production vehicles. Adequate arrangements shall be made for off-street parking of production vehicles not utilized during actual filming or taping, and there shall be no parking on village streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless permission is received from the office of the village manager. Should street parking that interferes with vehicular traffic be necessary for the production, the village shall be entitled to the fees in subparagraph (f) above. 
(j)  Insurance. The producer shall secure a policy or policies of insurance, naming the Village of Villa Park, its corporate authorities, elected officials, officers, boards, commissions, attorneys, employees and agents as additional insured with respect to any and all claims which arise out of, or are in any way related to, the operations of the film maker in filming, taping, production, or movie production, while present within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park, such policies to be in the following amounts and coverages: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate general liability, including bodily injury and property damage; and automobile liability, including bodily injury and property damage. The producer shall provide a certificate of insurance evidencing that the village has been named as an additional insured on the appropriate policies of insurance, and no production activity shall take place until the certificate of insurance is provided. Upon request by the village, the producer shall furnish copies of the actual endorsement. 
(k)  Indemnification. The producer shall sign an indemnification and hold harmless agreement in substantially the following form: 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the producer hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Villa Park, its officials, agents and employees, against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, patent claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may in anywise accrue against the municipality, its officials, agents and employees, arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the performance of this work by producer, its employees, or subcontractors, or which may in anywise result therefrom, except that arising out of the sole legal cause of the municipality, its agents or employees, the producer shall, at its own expense, appear, defend and pay all charges of attorneys and all costs and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in connections therewith, and, if any judgment shall be rendered against the municipality, its officials, agents and employees, in any such action, the producer shall, at its own expense, satisfy and discharge the same. The person signing below further certifies that he or she is authorized on behalf of the producer to execute this agreement and bind the producer to the agreement. 
The agreement shall be executed by the village manager on behalf of the village. 
(l)  Liability. The producer shall pay all fees assessed by the village and shall reimburse the village for all costs and expenses incurred by the village related to any filming or taping activity undertaken by the applicant. The producer shall pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or private property resulting from or occurring in connection with the production and restore the property to its condition prior to the production. 
(Ord. No. 2654, § 1, 8-16-93)  
Sec. 13-704. - Applicability. 
The provisions set forth in this article shall not apply to the following types of filming or videotaping: 
(a)  Any filming or videotaping undertaken solely for personal use and not intended as part of any commercial enterprise for future viewing on a fee basis or for resale to the general public, or for broadcast to the general public, including but not limited to filming and videotaping of weddings, sporting events, musical events, educational films, or instructional films. 
(b)  Videotaping of newscasts and any similar filming or videotaping not intended for resale to the general public and not intended for viewing on a fee basis, but which may be broadcast by network or cable television to the general public as part of any regularly scheduled or special news program. 
(c)  Any filming or videotaping for commercial purposes of any commercial, educational video, instructional video, music video, television show, movie, film, etc., involving a production crew of ten (10) people or less, except when such filming or videotaping involves the use of public streets or rights-of-way, or village property (real or personal), or village personnel, or village equipment. Whenever such film or videotape involves the use of public streets or rights-of-way, or village property (real or personal), or village personnel, or village equipment, then the provisions of this article shall apply. Whenever any production claimed exempt under this subsection occurs in a residential zoning district, the producer shall notify the village not less than three (3) business days in advance of the filming or taping. In addition, the producer or filmmaker shall also timely notify the residents in the affected area on a form approved by the village of the date filming is to commence. 
(Ord. No. 2654, § 1, 8-16-93)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNBROKERS 
 
Sec. 13-801. - Pawnbroker defined. 
Every person or company engaged in the business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other thing advanced to the pawner or pledger shall be held and is hereby declared and defined to be a pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-802. - License required; license fee. 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without having a valid license therefor, as hereinafter provided. The annual fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-803. - Application for license. 
(a)  An application for any license provided for in this article shall be made to the village manager, in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all the partners of a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, and verified by oath or affidavit, and filed with the village clerk. Such application shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one (1) person or his nominee, the name and address of such person. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed as set forth in the corporate charter. 
(4)  The length of time said applicant has been in business, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)  The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time application is made. 
(6)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(7)  A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(8)  A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in any ordinance or state law. 
(9)  Whether a previous pawnbroker license issued by any state or subdivision thereof has been revoked and the reasons therefor. 
(10)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village, in the conduct of his place of business. 
(11)  Such other statements and information as may be required on such form. 
(b)  When any applicant for license is a corporation, said application shall be signed by the president and secretary thereof, and should the applicant be a partnership, then each and every member of the partnership including silent or limited partners, if any, shall sign such application. 
(c)  In each instance where business is being conducted by a manager or agent, such person or persons must comply with the applicable provisions of this section. 
(d)  The chief of police shall investigate any applicant for a pawnbroker's license and shall file a report with the village manager prior to the issuance of any such license. 
(e)  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(f)  Any person holding a valid pawnbroker license issued by the village shall not be required to obtain a secondhand goods dealer license. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 3675, § 2.1, 11-14-11)  
Sec. 13-804. - Signed memorandum, contract or note. 
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any property a memorandum, contract, or note signed by him containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles or other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money, value of things loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on the loan, the name and residence of the person making the pawn or pledge, and the amount of any fees. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-805. - Records required to be kept—Identification required. 
(a)  Every pawn and loan broker shall keep a standard record book in computer (electronic) form which has been approved in writing by the Police Chief of the Village of Villa Park, in which shall be recorded at the time of each and every loan or taking of a pledge, an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles and other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money, value or thing loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person making such pawn or pledge. Such entry shall include the serial number or identification number of items received which are required to bear such number. Every pawnbroker shall also record an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all goods, articles and other things purchased or received for the purpose of resale or loan collateral by the pawnbroker from any source, not in the course of a pledge or loan, the time of such purchase or receipt and the name and address of the person or business which sold or delivered such goods, articles, or other things to the pawnbroker. No entry shall be erased, deleted, mutilated or changed. 
(b)  The pawn or loan broker shall also have installed, and operating at all times during business hours, a video surveillance camera positioned so as to record all transactions, as well as the facial features of those persons selling any item or pawning or pledging any item. Said video surveillance shall be recorded, stored and maintained for viewing at the request of the police department for at least thirty (30) days from the date of the transaction. 
(c)  Every pawnbroker shall require two (2) forms of identification to be shown him by each person pledging or pawning any goods, articles or other things to the pawnbroker. One (1) of the two (2) forms of identification must include his or her residence address. These forms of identification shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: Driver's license, Social Security card, utility bill, employee or student identification card, credit card, or a civic, union or professional association membership card. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 3675, § 2.2, 11-14-11)  
Sec. 13-806. - Inspections by police. 
The police chief or any officer designated by him shall have general supervision over all pawn or loan brokers, and shall also have power to inspect their respective places of business, computer generated records, video surveillance records, digital photographs taken, and all articles or things kept therein, whenever he shall deem it necessary to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 3675, § 2.2, 11-14-11)  
Sec. 13-807. - Daily report. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the chief of police of the village, on each day before the hour of 12:00 p.m. noon, a legible and exact copy from computer records as required by section 13-805 in the form specified by the police chief, that lists all personal property and other valuable things received on deposit or purchased during the preceding day, together with the exact time when received or purchased, and a description of the person or persons by whom left in pledge, or from whom the same were purchased. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96; Ord. No. 3675, § 2.2, 11-14-11)  
Sec. 13-808. - Property from minor. 
No pawnbroker shall take or receive any pawn or pledge for any advancement or loan, any property of any kind from any minor who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or the ownership of which is in, or which is claimed by, any such minor, or which may be in the possession or under the control of any such minor. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-809. - Property from intoxicated person or thief—Return of stolen property. 
No pawnbroker shall purchase or take any article in pawn or pledge from any person appearing to be intoxicated, nor from any person known to have been convicted of theft. A law enforcement officer may provide such criminal conviction information to a pawnbroker. When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been pawned, such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the money advanced by the pawnbroker thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker may have placed upon the same. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-810. - Sale of property. 
No personal property received on deposit or pledge, or purchased by any such pawnbroker, shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such pawnbroker for the space of twenty-four (24) hours after the delivery of the copy and statement required by section 13-807 to be delivered to the chief of police; and no personal property pawned or pledged shall be sold or disposed of by any such pawnbroker within one (1) year from the time when the pawner or pledger shall make default in the payment of interest on the money so advanced by such pawnbroker, unless by the written consent of such pawner or pledger. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-811. - Employment of minors prohibited. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is not eighteen (18) years of age or over, and no pawnbroker shall employ a person of less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-812. - Personal nature of license. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be a purely personal privilege, valid for not to exceed one (1) year after issuance unless sooner revoked or expired as provided by ordinance, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-813. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  No licensee holding a pawnbroker's license or his agent or employee shall, in the conduct of the licensed business or upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Violate any law of the State of Illinois; or 
(2)  Violate any village ordinance or resolution regulating pawnbrokers; or 
(3)  Suffer or permit a violation of any law of the State of Illinois; or 
(4)  Suffer or permit a violation of a village ordinance or resolution regulating pawnbrokers. 
(b)  The village manager may revoke or suspend any license for any violation of this article. 
(c)  A violation of subsection (a) may be proved by evidence that the licensee or his agent or employee has been convicted of a violation of the law of the State of Illinois in the conduct of the licensed business or upon the licensed premises, or has been found guilty of violating any village ordinance regulating pawnbrokers. 
(d)  Evidence that any person, including but not limited to an agent or employee of the licensee, other than the licensee has been convicted of violating a statute of the state regulating pawnbrokers shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(e)  Proof by a preponderance of evidence before the village manager of facts which establish a violation of any state statute, or village ordinance or resolution shall be sufficient cause for revocation or suspension of any license issued by the village, irrespective of whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any court. 
(f)  Should any applicant for license make a false or fraudulent statement in such application, the same shall be sufficient cause for revocation or suspension by the village manager of such license. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Sec. 13-814. - Hearing and decision. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the village manager with written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. The village manager shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 2, 6-24-96)  
Secs. 13-815—13-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3156, § 2, adopted Sept. 30, 2002, effective Jan. 1, 2003, repealed art. IX, §§ 13-901—13-911, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee as enacted by Ord. No. 2907, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 27, 1997. The user is directed to ch. 23, art. IX of this Code for similar provisions. 
 
Secs. 13-901—13-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TATTOO AND 
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS [8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2018, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 13-1001—13-1014, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2964, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 2007. 
 
Sec. 13-1001. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and terms defined in the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act (410 ILCS 54/1 et seq.) and Title 77, Chapter 1, subchapter m, Part 797 of the Illinois Administrative Code (33 Ill. Reg. 246) are hereby adopted into this article 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1002. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain and/or operate a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment without first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1003. - Application; fee. 
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall file an application upon a form provided by the village manager and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the village. The village manager shall, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, refer copies of such application and all additional information to the police department, director of community development and village president. The village departments shall, within forty-five (45) days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment, and make recommendations to the clerk concerning compliance with the codes of the village. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the respective village departments, the village manager shall notify the applicant as to whether his application has been granted, denied or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1004. - Duration of license; renewal. 
Any license as provided for herein shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire on December 31. The annual fee for renewal of such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall be payable six (6) weeks in advance of the expiration of the license. If more than six (6) months of such current year shall have expired, a license fee of one-half the full fee shall be charged. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1005. - Premises. 
No tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall receive a license or be operated, established or maintained unless the establishment shall comply with each of the following minimum requirements and regulations: 
(1)  The establishment shall have a certificate of compliance with or inspection by the DuPage County Health Department, if available, 
(2)  The requirements and regulations of the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act and Title 77, Chapter 1, subchapter m, Part 797 of the Illinois Administrative Code (33 Ill. Reg. 246) hereby adopted into this article by reference, 
(3)  No tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be open to the public for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., 
(4)  The main entrance door of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be visible from a public street and shall remain unlocked during business hours. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1006. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  The licensee or operator shall comply with the requirements and regulations of the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act and Title 77, Chapter 1, subchapter m, Part 797 of the Illinois Administrative Code (33 Ill. Reg. 246) hereby adopted into this article by reference. 
(b)  No person while on the premises of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall possess, sell, dispense, provide, give, keep or maintain any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  No intoxicated person shall be tattooed by a licensee on the license premises. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1007. - Inspections. 
Any village department or agency may make an inspection of each establishment granted a license under the provisions of this article for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this article or if an inspection is refused to seek a court order or warrant to investigate and enter the establishment. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1008. - License revocation and suspension. 
It shall be cause for revocation or suspension that a licensee has violated the provisions of this article or any code or ordinance of the village, or Title 77, Chapter 1, subchapter m, Part 797.1700(c) of the Illinois Administrative Code relative to the operation of the business or use of the premises, has made a false statement on any application for license under this article. No license shall be revoked or suspended without notice and hearing first being provided to the licensee. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1009. - Transfer of license prohibited. 
No license for the operation of a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be transferable. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1010. - Display of license required. 
Each licensee shall display a valid current license in a conspicuous place within the licensed establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the establishment. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
Sec. 13-1011. - Tattooing or body piercing of minors. 
In accordance with 720 ILCS 5/12C-35, no person may tattoo a person under the age of eighteen (18) except by a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches. In accordance with 720 ILCS 5/12C-40, no person may body pierce a minor under the age of eighteen (18) without permission of that minor's parents or legal guardians. 
( Ord. No. 4047 , § 1, 8-27-18)  
ARTICLE XI. - CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3444, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 2007, amended art. XI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 2967, § 2, 12-21-98; as subsequently amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
Sec. 13-1101. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights-of-way and the village as a whole. 
(b)  Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(c)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(d)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(e)  Conflicts with other articles. This article supersedes all policies, resolutions, ordinances, or parts thereof adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(f)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(g)  Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1102. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI means American National Standards Institute. 
Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this article. 
ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
Bore or boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
Cable operator is that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
Cable service is that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Cable system is that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
Carrier pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
Clear zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
Coating means protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
Code means the Municipal Code of the Village of Villa Park. 
Conductor means wire carrying electrical current. 
Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
Construction or construct means the installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
Crossing facility means a facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
Director of public works means the village director of public works or his or her designee. 
Disrupt the right-of-way, for the purposes of this article, means any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: Excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
Encasement means provision of a protective casing. 
Equipment means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material or laying bare by digging. 
Extra heavy pipe means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article, except those owned by the village. 
Freestanding facility means a ground-mounted facility that is not a crossing facility, an overhead facility, or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, equipment enclosure, meter station, equipment cabinet or similar ground-mounted appurtenance. 
Frontage road means roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway. 
Hazardous material means any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristic, is determined by the director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
Highway Code means the Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Highway means a right-of-way used for vehicular traffic, including rural or urban roads or streets, whether classified as arterial, collector, minor or local. Highway includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
IDOT means Illinois Department of Transportation. 
ILCC means Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
Joint use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities. 
J.U.L.I.E. means the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators Utility Notification Program. 
Major intersection means the intersection of two (2) or more arterial highways. 
Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
Overhead facility means a facility that is mounted on a pole. 
Parallel facility means a facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
Pavement cut means the removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 13-1104 and 13-1105 of this article. 
Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Petroleum products pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
Prompt means that which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days. 
Public entity means a legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
Right-of-way means any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the village. Right-of-way shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Security fund means that amount of security required pursuant to section 13-1110. 
Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
Sound engineering judgment means a decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
Telecommunications includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility, as defined in this article. 
Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
Video service is that term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(V). 
Village means the Village of Villa Park. 
Village standards means any codes, ordinances or regulations of the village which are applicable to construction of utility facilities in village rights-of-way. 
Water lines means pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
Wet boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1103. - Annual registration required. 
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person and evidence of insurance as required in section 13-1108 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1104. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the director of public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or confidential by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in section 13-1108 of this article; 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 13-1110 of this article; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see, section 13-1121); and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village. 
(d)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
(1)  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ILCC or other jurisdictional authority; 
(2)  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
(3)  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
(4)  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District and other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or 
(5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
(e)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(f)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to chapter 13, article 9 of this Code or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1105. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of public works that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Additional village review of applications of telecommunications retailers. 
(1)  Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed and subject to the variance procedure if applicable. 
(2)  Except in cases where a variance is required, in the event the director or public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 13-1104 of this article, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional village review of applications of holders of state authorization. Under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1106. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted, no property right or other interest created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on village rights-of-way to the extent of the village's property rights therein. The permit does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way, including, without limitation, such rights as may exist by virtue of 605 ILCS 5/9-113 (the Illinois Highway Code). 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Preconstruction meeting required. Unless waived by the public works director, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village, with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1107. - Revised permit drawings. 
In the event the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 13-1121 of this article. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1108. - Utility insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar agreement, or section 13-1108.1, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (1) and (2) below. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
c.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability; and 
d.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for environmental liability; 
(2)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for environmental liability; 
(3)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(4)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(5)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the village. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the village manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a) or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. Self-insurance shall be primary, and any village policies of insurance shall be deemed secondary. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07; Ord. No. 3759, § 2, 8-26-13)  
Sec. 13-1108.1. - Insurance for residential and commercial permits. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Each owner of residential or commercial property, occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way, shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the owner as named insured and naming the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed below. The owner's insurance shall be primary, and any village policies of insurance shall be deemed secondary. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) below, for work including water service, sanitary service, storm drains and all nonresidential work, commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any (1) one accident; 
c.  Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all other types of liability; and 
d.  Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for environmental liability; or 
(2)  For residential flat work, including driveway aprons, sidewalks and curbs, the limits shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each of the coverages listed in subsection (1) above; and 
(3)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident; and 
(4)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(5)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The owner shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request from the village. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
 "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the village manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Effect of insurance on owner's liability. The legal liability of the owner to the village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(f)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be by valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. 
(Ord. No. 3759, § 1, 8-26-13)  
Sec. 13-1109. - Indemnification. 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1110. - Security. 
(a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this article; and 
(3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law. 
(b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee; 
(2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and 
(3)  Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn. 
(c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (c) for any single phase. 
(d)  Withdrawals from cash security funds. The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund if the fund is a cash security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(e)  Replenishment of cash security funds. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the cash security fund, the permittee shall restore the cash security fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest on cash security funds. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the cash security fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the cash security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of cash security fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the cash security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the cash security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Other security funds. Withdrawals, replenishment, renewal and closing of letter of credit or surety bond security funds shall be governed by the terms of the letter of credit or surety bond. 
(i)  Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1111. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Non-compliance with this article; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section 13-1111. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives. Upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the village: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of correction, removal or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1112. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right-of-way. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1113. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
(3)  Highway Design Manual; 
(4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
(5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
(6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
(7)  Flagger's Handbook; and 
(8)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations. 
(b)  Village standards. In addition, all applicable village standards, as defined in this article, shall also apply to construction in the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interpretation of village standards and principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this article, the director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1114. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notice when access is blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 13-1120 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1115. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection: 
(1)  No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the director of public works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
b.  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two (2) feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
c.  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four (4) feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
d.  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
e.  Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
b.  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
c.  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line, and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. 
(1)  No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in culverts or drainage facilities. 
(3)  Ninety (90) degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code § 305); 
b.  Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
c.  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
b.  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal Regulations. (49 C.F.R. 192.707 (1989)). 
(d)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  Immediately upon filing a permit application which includes a freestanding facility, the utility shall meet with the director of public works and schedule an on-site review. In accordance with the standards and purposes of this article, the village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way, as appropriate to mitigate the impact upon the right-of-way and adjoining property. 
(2)  The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(f)  Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities, including freestanding facilities, may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
b.  The type, length value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
c.  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
d.  The proposed method of attachment; 
e.  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
f.  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
g.  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
h.  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
1.  The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
2.  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1116. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
1.  Boring or jacking. 
a.  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
b.  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
c.  Borings with diameters greater than six (6) inches. Borings over six (6) inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one (1) inch (25 mm). 
d.  Borings with diameters six (6) inches or less. Borings of six (6) inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
e.  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved shall be bored under or around the root system. 
2.  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" or with village standards, whichever standards are more restrictive. 
a.  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only one-half (½) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works. 
b.  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
c.  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved. 
3.  Backfilling. 
a.  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" or with village standards, whichever standards are more restrictive. When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
b.  For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction-of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works. 
4.  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if: 
a.  Required by sound engineering judgment, as determined by the director of public works; and 
b.  Appropriate traffic control measures are approved by the director of public works. 
If a variance to the limitations set forth in this paragraph (4) is permitted under section 13-1121, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the director of public works. 
b.  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village. 
c.  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
d.  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
5.  Encasement. 
a.  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village. 
b.  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
c.  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
d.  In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
e.  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided; 
f.  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
6.  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
TYPE OF FACILITY 	MINIMUM COVER 
Electric lines 	30 inches (0.8 m) 
Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines 	18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by Village) 
Gas or Petroleum Products 	30 inches (0.8 m) 
Water Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
 
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
a.  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code § 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
b.  Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
c.  Underground facilities. 
(1)  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
(2)  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if (a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
(3)  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
d.  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
a.  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
b.  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
c.  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
d.  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in v Village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192—Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" and village standards. 
(6)  Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way by variance, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of the vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" and village standards, the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the village. No materials may be stored in the floodway or floodplain. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(e)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1117. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities—Compliance with state laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations and, additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities—Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article. 
(1)  Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
(2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1118. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way, including municipal sidewalks and other facilities and improvements. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the village shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that the abandoned facility be removed, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person at the village's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1119. - Cleanup and restoration. 
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project and as per village standards. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1120. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty-eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1121. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one (1) or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the director of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One (1) or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provisions; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the director of public works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the director of public works under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to the board of trustees or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The board of trustees shall commence its consideration of the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The board of trustees shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1122. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 13-1122, entitled "Penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 3444, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 2007.  
Sec. 13-1123. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1124. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 3444, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1125. - Personal wireless telecommunication facilities. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the terms as defined in Section 10 of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-0585) (the "Act") shall be used in this section. 
(b)  Regulations of small wireless facilities. Small wireless facilities shall be permitted on utility poles and wireless support structures subject to the regulations of this article and the following regulations: 
(1)  Zoning classification. Small wireless facilities are classified as permitted accessory uses and not subject to zoning review or approval when collocated in village rights-of-way in any zoning district or outside rights-of-way on property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial uses. 
(2)  Permit required. The village requires an applicant to obtain a permit to collocate a small wireless facility as provided in this section. 
(3)  Information required for permit. The applicant shall provide the village with the information as part of the application as described in section 15(d)(2)(A) through (F) of the Act. 
(4)  Collocation on new utility pole. The village shall require that for the collocation on a new utility pole it be collated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed collocation. 
(5)  Height. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure. The height of a new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure shall be the higher of ten (10) feet above the tallest existing utility pole as provided in section 15(d)(5) of the Act or forty-five (45) feet above ground level. 
(6)  Additional regulations. The applicant shall also comply with the regulations contained in section 15(d)(6) of the Act, subparagraphs (A) through (I). 
(c)  Permit processing. 
(1)  Initial receipt and review of an application. The village shall within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. 
(2)  Procedure to process. The village shall follow the procedure in section 15(d)(8) of the Act. 
(3)  Condition for replacement of pole. The village may condition the collocation on the replacement of the utility pole as provided in section 15(d)(9) of the Act. 
(4)  Tolling of time periods. Tolling of time periods shall be as provided in section 15(d)(10) of the Act. 
(5)  Multiple locations. Applications for multiple locations shall comply with section 15(d)(11) of the Act. 
(6)  Collocation completion. When a permit is issued for collocation, the collocation shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days in compliance with section 15(d)(12) of the Act. 
(7)  Duration of permit. The duration of the permit shall be for five (5) years in compliance with section 15(d)(13) of the Act. 
(8)  Fees. The fee to collocate a single small wireless facility shall be six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for collocation of a single small wireless facility or three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure. A fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged for a small wireless facility including a new utility pole. The fee shall accompany the application. 
(9)  Exemption from fees. Fee exemptions shall be as stated in section 15(f) of the Act. 
(10)  Village-owned infrastructure. Small wireless facilities shall only be mounted to village owned infrastructure including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signal, towers or buildings, if authorized by a license agreement between the owner and the village. 
(11)  Base of equipment above grade. The operator of a small wireless facility shall locate the base of the equipment or appurtenances on a pole at a height of no lower than eight (8) feet above grade. 
(12)  Screening. In the event that the operator of a small wireless facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or appurtenances are to be installed at grade, screening shall be installed to minimize the visibility of the facility. Screening must be installed at least three (3) feet from the equipment installed at-grade and eight (8) feet from a roadway. 
(13)  Color. A small wireless facility, including all related equipment and appurtenances, shall be a color that blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure or infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate cover or cable shield. 
(14)  Electrical code. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the facility shall be installed in accordance with the electrical code currently adopted by the village and in force at the time of the installation of the facility. In no event shall wiring and cabling serving the facility interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video service operator, electric utility or telephone utility. 
(15)  Structural integrity. The small wireless facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment must be designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in accordance with applicable standards established in Chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety Code for utility poles, Rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading forces on utility poles, in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in TIA/EIA Section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel wireless support structures and the applicable industry standard for other existing structures. For any facility attached to village-owned infrastructure or, in the discretion of the village, for a utility pole, tower, or alternative antenna structure, the operator of the facility must provide the village with a structural evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation that the proposed installation passes the standards described above. The evaluation must be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois. 
(16)  Signs. Other than signs required by federal law or regulations or identification and location markings, installation of signs on a small wireless facility is prohibited. 
(17)  Screening. If screening is required under this section, it shall be natural landscaping material or a fence subject to the approval of the village and shall comply with all regulations of the village. Appropriate landscaping shall be located and maintained and shall provide the maximum achievable screening, as determined by the village, from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than nine (9) feet in height. Landscape screening when permitted in the right of way, shall be provided with a clearance of three (3) feet in all directions from the facility. The color of housing for ground-mounted equipment must blend with the surroundings. For a covered structure, the maximum reasonably achievable screening must be provided between such facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or private streets. In lieu of the operator installing the screening, the village, at its sole discretion, may accept a fee from the operator of the facility for the acquisition, installation, or maintenance of landscaping material by the village. 
(18)  Variance requirements. Each location of a personal wireless telecommunication facility within a right of way shall meet all of the requirements of this section unless a variance is requested pursuant to the procedure and standards set forth in section 13-1121 of this article. 
(d)  Removal of abandoned small wireless facilities. Small wireless facilities that are not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility must remove the small wireless facilities within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the village in compliance with section 15(k) of the Act. 
(e)  Indemnification and insurance. A wireless provider shall indemnify the village as provided in section 30 of the Act and provide a certificate of insurance to the village in compliance with the requirements for a permit within the village's right-of-way in section 13-1108 of the village Code. 
( Ord. No. 3961 , § 2, 2-27-17; Ord. No. 4033 , § 5-21-18)  
ARTICLE XII. - SCAVENGERS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2976, adopted Mar. 15, 1999, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as art. IX, §§ 13-901—13-911. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as art. XII, §§ 13-1201—13-1211, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 13-1201. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions hereinafter set forth, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Brush means any and all shrubbery, tree limbs and branches no larger than four (4) inches in diameter and no longer than four (4) feet in length. 
Commercial means any property within the village which is not residential. 
Curbside means a position immediately behind the curb and within the parkway area used for the collection of refuse, yard waste and recycling containers. 
Domestic garbage includes ashes, garbage, refuse, large refuse items, but excluding brush, landscape wastes, and white goods. 
Garbage means wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Landscape waste means all accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, brush, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. 
Recyclables means materials to be picked up in separate collections from refuse including, but not limited to, green, brown and clear glass containers; aluminum, steel and bi-metal cans; HDPE and PET plastic bottles (including detergent, milk, water jugs and soda bottles); newspapers, magazines, telephone books, mixed paper, paperboard, aerosol cans, aseptic packaging, paint cans, six-pack rings, polystyrene containers, and corrugated cardboard; and such other materials as may be approved for delivery to any intermediate processing facility approved by the County of DuPage or operated by the County of DuPage or other approved recycling facility. 
Refuse means combustible trash, including, but not limited to paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to metals, tin cans, metal furniture, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, and other mineral waste; the term shall specifically include small amounts of building and construction materials resulting from "do-it-yourself" projects; the term shall not (except for "do-it-yourself" projects) include land clearing debris, earth and waste from building operations, building or construction materials, such as bricks, concrete, concrete block, structural iron and roofing materials, nor shall it include solid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations, such as food processing waste, boiler- house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings; street rubbish, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, or landscape waste. 
Residential means all single-family, duplex and triplex residential properties within the village. 
White goods means any domestic and/or commercial large appliance which contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, PCB containing capacitors, mercury switches, or other hazardous components. Examples include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges (both electric and gas), humidifiers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, furnaces and other similar large appliances. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1202. - License required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or the collection or disposal of residential or commercial domestic garbage, refuse, landscape waste, recyclables or white goods in the village without having first secured a license therefor. 
(b)  The license period shall be from May 1 through April 30 of the following year. Before a license may be issued hereunder, the scavenger shall pay the village a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1203. - Application for license. 
Application for license shall be made prior to May 1. Application for license shall be made to the village clerk, and payment for such license shall be tendered at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1204. - Insurance reporting requirement. 
Such application shall be accompanied by copies of all insurance certificates required by law or otherwise held by the scavenger. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1205. - Vehicles. 
Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be watertight and equipped with airtight covers. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1206. - Dumping. 
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse, garbage or other waste in any place within the village limits, excepting with the written permission of the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1207. - Exclusive method of disposal. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article IX, where the village has entered into a contract with a private scavenger with respect to the disposal of residential or commercial domestic garbage, landscape waste, refuse, recyclables or white goods collected within the village, then that contract shall constitute the exclusive method for the collection and disposal of such materials within the village in accordance with the terms thereof. 
(b)  Insurance requirements and any other matters pertinent to the regulation of scavenger service, which may be provided for in a contract with the village, shall be governed exclusively by the contract documents. The license fees set forth in the ordinances of the village shall be paid by the contractor per said contract document. 
(c)  Any scavenger who collects or disposes of residential or commercial domestic garbage, landscape waste, recyclables or white goods collected within the village in a manner contrary to the village's exclusive method for disposal shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1208. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to provide collection services within the village unless such scavenger also provides a recycling program. The recycling program required by this section shall, at a minimum, permit customers to separately dispose of the following materials for recycling: 
(1)  Nonpaper items: Cloudy white HDPE (#2) plastic milk and water jugs; colored HDPE (#2) plastic blow molded containers; PET (#1) plastic blow molded containers; LDPE and HDPE soft plastic 6 and 12 pack rings; brown, green and clear glass containers; aluminum formed containers/ wrap; steel/tin/bi-metal cans; aerosol cans; formed steel containers; aluminum cans; polystyrene (#6); and aseptic packaging and Gabletop containers. 
(2)  Paper items: Corrugated cardboard; chipboard (paperboard); newspaper (ONP); magazines and catalogs (glossy and nonglossy); telephone directories; brown kraft paper bags; frozen food packages; mixed paper; and wet strength carrier stock. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than persons authorized by the village, to collect, pick up, or otherwise dispose of any recyclable materials described hereinabove, which have been set out at curbside for collection. Recyclable materials, which are combined with garbage or waste by the customer and not separately packaged, may be collected by a licensed scavenger. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1209. - Reporting requirement. 
A report shall be supplied to the village by such licensed scavenger, in a format acceptable to the village, within fifteen (15) days of the end of each quarter and year. The report shall set forth the amount of: (a) residential recyclables; (b) residential landscape wastes and brush; (c) domestic residential garbage; (d) commercial recyclables; and (e) commercial garbage collected. The licensed scavenger shall also supply monthly, quarterly and yearly reports setting forth the amount of solid waste collected within the village during each month, quarter and year. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1210. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to collect or dispose of any refuse, garbage, or other waste between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 2, 3-15-99)  
Sec. 13-1211. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 13-1211, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2976, § 2, adopted Mar. 15, 1999.  
ARTICLE XIII. - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE 
 
Sec. 13-1301. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
Cable operator: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5). 
Cable service: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
Commission: The Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Gross revenues: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder or cable operator for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's or cable operator's cable service or video service area within the village. 
A.  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
1.  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
2.  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
3.  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
4.  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to, activation, installation and repair charges. 
5.  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to, service order and service termination charges. 
6.  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
7.  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or cable operator or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the network to provide cable service or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
8.  Compensation received by the holder or cable operator that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection 9. 
9.  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder or cable operator can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
10.  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
B.  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
1.  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
2.  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
3.  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder or cable operator to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
4.  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
5.  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
6.  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
7.  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
C.  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder or cable operator shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
Holder: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
PEG: Public, education and governmental. 
PEG access support fee: The amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder or cable operator to the village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
Service: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
Service provider fee: The amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder or cable operator to a municipality for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
Video service: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet. 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1302. - Cable/video service provider fee imposed. 
(a)  Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder or cable operator providing cable service or video service in the village. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five (5) percent of the holder's or cable operator's gross revenues. 
(c)  Notice to the village. The holder or cable operator shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village. 
(d)  Holder's liability. The holder or cable operator shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder or cable operator. The ordinance adopting this article shall be sent by the village clerk via regular or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village and to any cable operator. 
(e)  Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement in effect with the village in which a fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under section 13-1302(b). 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1303. - Peg access support fee imposed. 
(a)  PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder or cable operator providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to section 13-1302. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be one percent of the holder's or cable operator's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village as of January 1, 2007, as provided in 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)(1). 
(c)  Payment. The holder or cable operator shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in section 13-1302. 
(d)  Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(e)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that operator owes under subsection (b) hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1304. - Applicable principles. 
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1305. - No impact on other taxes due from holder or cable operator. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder or cable operator from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1306. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(a)  Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village in chapter 23, article X of the Village Code pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should he construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1307. - Late fees/payments. 
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by chapter 23, article X of the Village Code adopted by this municipality pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 3445, § 2, 11-26-07)  
ARTICLE XIV. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 3446 provided that this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication in the manner provided by law. The provisions of this ordinance as to incumbent cable operators shall take effect on Jan. 1, 2008. 
 
Sec. 13-1401. - Customer service and privacy protection law. 
(a)  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the village's boundaries. 
(b)  Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3446, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1402. - Enforcement. 
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. 
(Ord. No. 3446, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1403. - Penalties. 
The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach and shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
A.  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
B.  The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
C.  A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B. 
(Ord. No. 3446, § 2, 11-26-07)  
Sec. 13-1404. - Customer credits. 
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits, and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. No. 3446, § 2, 11-26-07)  
ARTICLE XV. - SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax, locate and regulate all places of business of dealers in junk, rags and any secondhand article whatsoever, 625 ILCS 5/11-42-3. 
 
Sec. 13-1501. - Licenses; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or sell any type of secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or other property without having first obtained from the village and kept in full effect a license therefor. This shall include, but not be limited to, the purchase and sale of personal items, metals, scrap metal, electronic and digital devices, jewelry and gems. The license period shall be from May 1 through April 30 of the following year. Application for license shall be made to the village clerk, and payment for such license shall be tendered at the time of application. Before a license may be issued hereunder, the secondhand goods dealer shall pay the village a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year or portion thereof and shall submit a license application: 
(1)  Application for a secondhand goods dealer license shall be made on a form provided by the village clerk, who shall provide a copy of the application to the Chief of Police, or his designee, to investigate each licensee applicant. No license shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, if any owner, manager, partner, officer, director or shareholder owning more than five (5) percent of the shares of stock in the corporation has been convicted of any felony offense or convicted of the offense(s) of possession of stolen goods, burglary, robbery, or who has been convicted of any criminal offense involving dishonesty or moral turpitude. 
(2)  Every applicant for a secondhand goods dealer license, as well as every owner, partner, manager, officer, director, employee, and in this case, of a corporate applicant, every shareholder owning more than five (5) percent of the shares of stock in the corporation shall undergo a criminal background investigation, which investigation may include fingerprinting, prior to the issuance of a secondhand goods dealer license. For the second and subsequent applicant, a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) each shall be paid for the required background check. 
(b)  Secondhand good is defined as any item of merchandise which was owned or used by any person other than the manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall apply to those isolated transactions commonly known as "garage sales," as defined in section 13-101. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall apply to those persons whose business is not primarily dealing in secondhand goods, and who may in the ordinary and regular course of their business receive or take a secondhand article in trade and subsequently dispose of the same. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall apply to charitable organizations that do not purchase goods for resale. 
(f)  Nothing herein shall apply to purchase or sale of items of used clothing, used books, used or antique furniture or any personal property for which a title is issued. 
(g)  No more than fourteen (14) secondhand goods dealer licenses shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11; Ord. No. 3705, § 1, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 13-1502. - License to indicate place of business. 
Any license for a secondhand dealer issued under the provisions of this division shall designate the premises in which the person so licensed shall carry on the business for which he is licensed. Such business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other place than that designated by the license. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1503. - Purchases from minors. 
No secondhand dealer shall purchase any goods, article or thing whatsoever from any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1504. - Records required; inspection of records and goods. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer shall keep a permanent record book in which shall be legibly written in ink at the time of each purchase, an accurate account and description of the article or thing so purchased or sold, and the name and residence of the person to whom or from whom such purchase was made. The record book as well as every article of merchandise shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any member of the police force. 
(b)  In addition to a record book, the secondhand goods dealer shall maintain such records required by this section in a computer form which has been approved in writing by the Police Chief of the Village of Villa Park. 
(c)  The secondhand goods dealer shall also have installed, and operating at all times during business hours, a video surveillance camera positioned so as to record all transactions, as well as the facial features of those persons selling any item to the secondhand goods dealer or pawning or pledging any item, or in the alternative shall take and keep on record a picture of those persons. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1505. - Daily report. 
It shall be the duty of every licensed person under this article to make out and deliver to the police chief in person or via email, every day before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy of the book or computer records required in section 13-1504 in the form specified by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1506. - Inspection of premises by police. 
The police chief or any officer designated by him shall have general supervision over all dealers in secondhand articles and shall also have power to inspect their respective places of business, record book, computer generated records, video surveillance records, digital photographs taken, and all secondhand articles or things kept therein, whenever he shall deem it necessary to do so. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1507. - Stolen goods. 
(a)  Every secondhand store dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen, shall upon demand, produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination, and it shall be the duty of every dealer hereunder to report to the police department any article or thing which was sold to him or which is offered to him for purchase if he shall have reason to believe that the article or thing was stolen. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any secondhand goods dealer to knowingly purchase any article from any person appearing to be intoxicated or under the influence of any drug or controlled substance or from any person known to have been convicted of theft, burglary, deceptive practices, robbery or armed robbery. It shall further be the duty of every secondhand goods dealer, or agent or employee thereof, to return any sold property to the rightful owner of such property without the payment of the money advanced by secondhand goods dealer, or employee or agent, or any other cost or charge of any kind any such property which has been stolen. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1508. - Prohibited items. 
No secondhand goods dealer, or agent or employee thereof, shall receive or purchase any firearm, stun gun or taser or any article, the possession of which is prohibited pursuant to section 24-1(a)(1) of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1509. - Hours of operation. 
Every secondhand store dealer shall be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
Sec. 13-1510. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 13-1510, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 3665, § 2, adopted Aug. 8, 2011.  
ARTICLE XVI. - REVOCATION OF LICENSES 
 
Sec. 13-1601. - Revocation or suspension; hearing. 
(a)  Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the village administrator by reason of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, following a hearing. 
(b)  When a hearing is set by the village administrator in a revocation or suspension procedure, the licensee shall receive not less than twenty (20) days' written notice, which notice shall contain charges made, as well as the time and place when the hearing will be held. 
(c)  At a hearing conducted pursuant to this article, the licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present witnesses, to testify and cross-examine any other witnesses. Proceedings shall be conducted under oath. 
(d)  The village administrator shall preside at the hearing and shall make the final determination. 
(e)  If any decision adverse to the licensee is made by the village administrator after a hearing as provided above, the village administrator shall provide the licensee with a written reason for such decision, as well as a notice of the licensee's right to seek judicial review of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 3665, § 2, 8-8-11)  
ARTICLE XVII. - PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 13-1701. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Assembly. Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, gathering, or group of ten (10) or more persons, animals, or vehicles, or combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, parkway, or other public place, which assembly substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular travel or which occupies any public area, other than a parade, as defined in this section. 
Block party. An assembly of village residents on a public residential street for a distance not to exceed one (1) block and for a time period not to exceed twelve (12) hours. 
Parade. Any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, destination, or goal, upon any public place which parade, march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or control. 
Sidewalk. Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved. 
Street. Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1702. - Permit required; exemptions. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the activity of a parade or assembly without a permit issued under the provisions of this article. The permit shall not authorize the use of sound amplifying equipment in conjunction with a parade or assembly without a separate permit. 
(b)  Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(3)  Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs first coming into public knowledge within three (3) days of such parade or assembly, provided that the organizers thereof give written notice to the village at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such parade or assembly. 
(4)  Block parties, when approval of the date, time and place has been given by the village manager, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld unless the event conflicts with any other approved parade, event or assembly of the village or such circumstances which limit or impair the ability to provide emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1703. - Application for permits. 
(a)  A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit (other than a block party) shall file an application with the chief of police or his designee on forms provided by such officer, and the application shall be signed by the applicant and notarized. 
(b)  For single, nonrecurring parades or public assemblies, an application for a permit shall be filed with the chief of police at least ten (10) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police may waive the minimum ten-day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the village services required in connection with the event, the chief of police determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety. 
(c)  For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such parades or assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with the chief of police at least sixty (60) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date and time which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police may waive the minimum sixty-day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such a parade or assembly; 
(2)  If the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the designated person who will be responsible for the receipt and holding of the permit; 
(4)  The date when the parade or assembly is to be conducted; 
(5)  The amount of any admission or attendance charge expected to be required from those participating; 
(6)  The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point, the location of speaker's platforms and the total time and distance expected; 
(7)  The appropriate number of persons who will, and animals and vehicles which will, constitute such parade or assembly and the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(8)  The hours when such parade or assembly will start and terminate; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the parade or assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed or public area to be assembled upon; 
(10)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or assembly; 
(11)  The time at which units of the parade or assembly will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1704. - Permit fees. 
(a)  A nonrefundable fee as established by the village board to cover administrative costs of processing the permit shall be paid to the village by the applicant when the application is filed. 
(b)  If the application is for the use of any village property or if any village services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges for those services in accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by the village board. 
(c)  The applicant shall also be responsible for reimbursement of additional village costs not reimbursed in subsection (b) above, including but not limited to personnel and equipment that shall be paid no later than thirty (30) days following the event. 
(d)  The village board may reduce or waive its costs when done so on a nondiscriminatory basis when in the best interest of the village and there shall be no costs reimbursed for police protection when the sole purpose of the parade or public assembly is for the purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1705. - Action on permits. 
The chief of police shall either, within forty-eight (48) hours, issue a written permit for the holding of a parade or assembly or deny the application. Applications may be denied on the basis of incompleteness or as not being in compliance with this article. The reasons for denial shall be made known to applicant, in writing, at the time of denial. The applicant shall be allowed to correct or complete the improper application and resubmit it to the chief of police or immediately appeal pursuant to section 13-1710. If a corrected application is resubmitted the chief of police shall issue the permit or deny the application within forty-eight (48) hours, in writing, as with an original application. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1706. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided herein unless, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The information contained in the application is false or intentionally misleading in some material or substantial regard; 
(2)  The parade or assembly will endanger public health, welfare or safety for the reasons set forth herein and that reasonable adjustments to the village traffic control, street and property maintenance, or police, fire or ambulance protection would not alleviate such danger; 
(3)  The time, duration, route and size of the parade or assembly will substantially and unreasonably disrupt the movement of traffic; 
(4)  The parade or assembly is of a size or nature that it would require the diversion of such a great number of police officers of the village to properly police the line of movement or assembly area and the areas contiguous thereto as to impair reasonable police protection to the village; 
(5)  The permittee has failed to provide for the services of sufficient monitors to control the orderly conduct of the parade or assembly; 
(6)  The permittee has failed to provide a reasonable means of informing all the persons participating therein of the terms and conditions of the permit; 
(7)  The concentration or number of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, is such as to prevent or substantially impair police, fire and ambulance vehicles and/or personnel from responding to emergency calls within the village, including within the immediate area of the proposed parade or assembly; 
(8)  The parade will not progress from its assembly area to its disbanding area as expeditiously as reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade; 
(9)  The parade or assembly will interfere with another parade or assembly for which a permit has previously been granted except as set forth in section 13-1708; 
(10)  The parade or assembly is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
(11)  The assembly on a public sidewalk in a business district will interfere with the normal egress and ingress of pedestrians to and from a business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1707. - Nondiscrimination. 
The chief of police shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying the application and shall not deny any permit based upon political, religious, ethnic, racial or gender-related grounds or upon sexual orientation or disability. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1708. - Multiple permits. 
If the chief of police shall receive more than one (1) application for a parade or assembly at the same time and the same place, or on the same day, the application filed first in time shall take precedence. An application shall be considered to be at the same time if the event is scheduled to commence within two (2) hours before or after the holding of another event at the same place. An application shall be considered to be at the same place if the assembly is to be conducted within one-half mile of another assembly. If the chief of police receives an application for more than one (1) parade or assembly in a single day, the chief of police may set a time for the duration of each parade or assembly, which time shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than three (3) hours. The chief of police shall issue permits for more than a single parade during one (1) day in accordance with the requirements of this section and section 13-1705; provided, however, that the chief of police may not issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the issuance of an additional permit would require the continuing diversion of so great a number of police officers or other village personnel so as to prevent normal police protection or other services to the village. A single permit may cover more than one (1) group or person if their identities are properly reported on the application. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1709. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property. 
(e)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or other object lawfully participating or lawfully used in a parade or public assembly. 
(f)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1710. - Appeal to village board. 
(a)  Any final decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the corporate authorities by the applicant, permittee, or any person affected by the decision. Any appeal shall be filed with the village president within two (2) business days after notice of the decision. The corporate authorities shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled village board meeting held more than two (2) days and less than fourteen (14) days after the filing of the appeal. If no such meeting is scheduled or if a regularly scheduled meeting is not held within such time, the mayor shall call a special board meeting to consider and act upon the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the filing of such appeal. 
(b)  In the event that the village board rejects an applicant's appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, nothing in this article shall be construed, nor is intended, to prevent or prohibit an applicant from seeking immediate judicial review from a denial of a permit request or from any action or inaction on the part of the village, its officers or agents. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1711. - Hours. 
All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times other than peak traffic periods (7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday) and not before 12:00 noon on Sundays. All assemblies shall conclude by 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1712. - Traffic limits. 
Parades and assemblies shall be limited to such numbers as will not obstruct traffic either vehicular or pedestrian in an unreasonable manner. The chief of police may impose as a condition of the permit reasonable regulations as to spacing of paraders, length of parade, duration of the parade or assembly so police manpower will not be diverted for too long a period of time from its other duties, giving consideration to the day of the week, the expected amount of vehicle and pedestrian traffic, weather conditions and the holiday conditions, if any. The time requested may be reset or diminished if necessary to avoid relocating or rerouting overly large amounts of vehicles or pedestrian traffic covered by peak periods of traffic. The chief of police may then issue a permit with those conditions. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1713. - Distributing literature. 
Literature may be passed from person to person, but may not be put upon or affixed to any public or private property without the permission of the owner of the property. The materials cannot be passed out to moving cars or cars on public or private roadways. Material can be handed out to passersby on sidewalks if such distribution does not unreasonably interfere with the flow of the pedestrian traffic. If permittee chooses to hand out any such material then the permittee shall be responsible for removing any discarded materials from the area of the parade or assembly. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1714. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public assembly permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this article or when a public emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of police services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
Sec. 13-1715. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or entity violating the terms and conditions of this article shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 1-108 each and every day that the violation is allowed to exist. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a distinct and separate offense under the terms of this article. In addition, the corporate authority may take whatever action it deems appropriate to enforce the terms of this article, including an action for injunction. All attorney fees and costs incurred by the municipality in enforcing the terms of this article shall be paid by the violator. 
(Ord. No. 3682, § 1, 1-9-12)  
ARTICLE XVIII. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT 
 
Sec. 13-1801. - Purpose. 
The purpose of a special event permit is to establish a single point of contact with the village by an applicant for a special event for coordination of the activities of the special event and the various and separate village approvals for any related activities. 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-1802. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Special event: means any event in the village that: uses village park or other village-owned property, temporarily provides food service, will use a public address or sound system, will use portable toilets, will conduct a raffle, will require additional refuse receptacles, will require safety or special fencing, will require special street lighting or electrical service, will require special water service, will use stages or other temporary structures, will require the closing of a village street, will require the closing of an off-street parking facility, will require the use of village barricades, will require the services of the police or fire department, will require an emergency evacuation plan, will sell or serve alcoholic beverages, will display fireworks, will need the services of village maintenance workers or other employees, or will require an additional village license or permit. 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-1803. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the activity of a special event without a permit issued under the provisions of this article. The permit shall not authorize any activity that is also required to have a separate license or permit as required by the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-1804. - Application for permit. 
A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application and site plan with the department of public works on forms provided by that department not less than thirty (30) days prior to the event and attach all other related village forms for other activities separately licensed or permitted by the village. Applications filed less than thirty (30) days before the event may be accepted by the village if the village still has sufficient time to review the application which must be accompanied with a late filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-1805. - Permit fee—Payment of costs. 
A nonrefundable fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be paid to the village by the applicant when the application is filed in addition to any other fee for related activities separately licensed or permitted. Special events sponsored or co-sponsored by the village shall be exempt from the special event fee. 
In addition, the applicant shall pay any village cost as established by the village for additional services provided by the village as stated on the most recent list of fees for available village services. The applicant shall pay to the village prior to the event all fees and costs that can be determined prior to issuance of the permit and any balance within thirty (30) days after the event. 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-1806. - Action on permit. 
Applications may be denied on the basis of incompleteness or as not being in compliance with this article or in compliance with any other ordinance, rule or regulation for a related permit or license. The reason(s) for the denial shall be made known to the applicant in writing at the time of denial. The applicant shall be allowed to correct or complete the application and resubmit it to the department of public works or appeal to the village manager by the procedure provided in article XVI. 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
Sec. 13-1807. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) each day that the violation exists. 
( Ord. No. 3962 , § 3, 3-13-17)  
ARTICLE XIX. - CHARITABLE GAMES 
 
Sec. 13-1901. - Charitable games defined. 
Charitable games shall be defined as Section 30/2 of the Charitable Games Act (230 ILCS 30/2) and includes the fourteen (14) games of chance involving cards, dice, wheels, random selection of numbers, and gambling tickets which may be conducted at charitable games events listed as follows: roulette, blackjack, poker, pull tabs, craps, bang, beat the dealer, big six, gin rummy, five card stud poker, chuck-a-luck, keno, hold-em poker, and merchandise wheel. 
( Ord. No. 4027 , § 1, 4-23-18)  
Sec. 13-1902. - Exceptions to gambling. 
None of the sections of the Municipal Code of Villa Park dealing with gambling shall apply to participation in charitable games, as defined in this article when said game is conducted by nonprofit organizations possessing the required state license and meeting the requirements and regulations of the Charitable Games Act. 
( Ord. No. 4027 , § 1, 4-23-18)  
Sec. 13-1903. - Minors. 
(a)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall make a wager on any charitable game. No person, nonprofit organization or premises owner, where such games are held, shall permit a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age to make a wager on any charitable game. 
(b)  Each nonprofit organization or premises owner, where such games shall be conducted, shall prominently display or cause to be displayed a sign indicating the prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section. Each nonprofit organization, supplier of devices and/or premises owner, where such games will be conducted, shall provide or cause to be provided proper supervision and security to ensure that the prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section is followed. Further, each premises owner shall affirmatively advise each nonprofit organization using its premises of said provision. 
( Ord. No. 4027 , § 1, 4-23-18)  
Sec. 13-1904. - Conduct of games. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Charitable Games Act, no state licensee shall hold charitable games night more than four (4) days with one each quarter of the calendar year nor rent or provide its premises for the conducting by another eligible charitable organization of more than twelve (12) charitable games nights, including its games, with not more than three (3) days per quarter of a calendar year that the premises are used. 
(b)  Within fourteen (14) days of receiving the necessary license from the Illinois Department of Revenue, but in no event less than seven (7) days before the commencement of any charitable games event, the licensee shall furnish to the chief of police a copy of said license, the specific dates and location of the charitable games event, and the name, address and the date of birth of the person in charge of the event, and each and every member of the organization engaged in the management or operation of the event. 
(c)  The license, the documentation for the license and the premises where the charitable games event is held shall be subject to inspection by the police department at any time during the event. 
( Ord. No. 4027 , § 1, 4-23-18)  
Chapter 14 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and safety commission, Ch. 2, Art. XXII, bicycles, Ch. 6; routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents, § 9-209; vehicles causing litter, § 10-103; vehicle license tax, Ch. 13, Art. III; traffic regulation for food and beverage vehicles, § 13-201; abandoned vehicles, Ch. 15, Art. IV; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; parades and open-air meetings, Ch. 21, Art. IV; protection of curbs and sidewalks from vehicles, § 21-102; taxicab stands, § 24-106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Emergency vehicle: Vehicles of the police or fire department, ambulances, or any vehicle conveying a village official or utility, state or county employees in response to an emergency official call. 
Loading zone: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Operator: Every person, other than a chauffeur, who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
Parkway: That area between the outer edge of the traveled portion of the highway and the nearest lot line. 
Property line: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting thereon. 
Right-of-way: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. I, 7-11-61)  
Sec. 14-102. - Provisions of Illinois Vehicle Code adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.), as now existing or hereafter amended, except for those provisions which by their nature can have no application to the village, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as if set forth at length herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(b)  Citations for violations of the aforesaid chapters of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference herein may be issued by authorized personnel of the village, using the appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section which shall, by the effect of this section, represent identically and specially numbered sections of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
(c)  Without limiting the generality of subsection (a) hereinabove: 
(1)  The following provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby expressly adopted by reference pursuant to the authority granted in 625 ILCS 5/20-204; Sections 11-501, 11-501.1, 11-501.2, 11-501.4, 11-501.4-1, 11-501.5, 11-501.6, 11-501.7, and 11-501.8, excepting Section 11-501(d). 
Reference to this subsection 14-102(c) can be made in the following manner: Villa Park Municipal Code, chapter 14, article I, subsection 14-102(c) followed by the applicable Illinois Vehicle Code section number, e.g., subsection 14-102(c) of the Village Park Village Code/IVC 11-501(a). 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3) herein below, the court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under this subsection, in addition to any sentencing alternative selected by the court, shall impose a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. In the event the Illinois Vehicle Code imposes a minimum fine greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for such an offense, the greater of the statutory minimum fine or seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed. 
(3)  With respect to vehicle equipment compliance violations, upon making a finding of guilty, the court or the administrative hearing officer shall impose a fine in accordance with the fine schedule set forth in section 14-220 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3514, § 2, 10-13-08; Ord. No. 3532, § 2, 2-23-09)  
Sec. 14-103. - Authority of police to enforce chapter and to direct traffic. 
The members of the police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and are hereby authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XVII, § 2, 7-11-67) 
State Law reference— Obedience to police officers, 625 ILCS 5/11-203.  
Sec. 14-104. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Except as otherwise posted, it shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on any street or highway in the village. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated below in the indicated area: 
Addison Road, north of St. Charles Road, thirty (30) miles per hour. 
St. Charles Road, thirty (30) miles per hour. 
Harvard Avenue, at the entrance to the North Side Swim Pool parking lot, ten (10) miles per hour. 
Van Buren Street for a distance of two hundred (200) feet east of Villa Avenue, twenty (20) miles per hour; the balance of the street, twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Wildwood Avenue, between Euclid Avenue and Villa Avenue, twenty (20) miles per hour. 
Yale Avenue from the entrance to the North Side Swim Pool to the parking area, ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 661, § 1, 7-22-57; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. 1179, § 3, 6-8-70; Ord. No. 1221, § 1, 3-1-71; Ord. No. 1363, § 1, 1-29-73; Ord. No. 2027, § 9, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2171, § 1, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 2335, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 2786, § 1, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 2972, § 3, 1-18-99) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(10), 5/11-604.  
Sec. 14-105. - One-way streets. 
(a)  The following streets shall be one-way in the direction indicated: 
Cornell Street, going south between Kenilworth and Central. 
Cortesi Avenue (formerly known as New Street) going north between Central Boulevard and Great Western Railroad right-of-way. 
Myrtle Avenue, going south between the Great Western Railroad right-of-way and Central Boulevard. 
Stone Road, going east between North Avenue and Third Avenue. 
Terrace Street, going east from Ardmore Avenue and Douglas Avenue. 
(b)  The following streets shall be designated as one-way streets on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.: 
Addison Avenue, going south from Madison Street to Adams Street. 
Harvard Avenue, going north from Plymouth Street to Ridge Road. 
Harvard Avenue, going south from Ridge Road to Plymouth Avenue. 
Ridge Road, going east from Yale Avenue to Princeton Avenue. 
Ridge Road, going west from Harvard Avenue to Michigan Avenue. 
Ridge Road, going west from Princeton Avenue to Yale Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, going west from Yale Avenue to Harvard Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, going north from Plymouth to Sunset Drive. 
Yale Avenue, going south from Ridge Road to Plymouth Street. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. IX, § 4, 7-11-61; Ord. No. 838, 9-10-62; Ord. No. 839, 9-10-62; Ord. No. 972, § 3, 11-7-66; Ord. No. 1242, § 2, 5-24-71; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 1-21-74; Ord. No. 1514, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 4-2-79; Ord. No. 1970, § 1(a), 4-6-81; Ord. No. 2042, § 3, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 2149, § 3, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 2170, § 1, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 2206, § 1, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 2237, § 1, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 2266, § 1, 12-14-87; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-28-91; Ord. No. 3117, § 1, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 3742, § 2, 4-22-13; Ord. No. 3975 , § 2, 5-22-17; Ord. No. 4045 , § 2, 8-13-18) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to designate one-way streets, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 11-208(a)f. (625 ILCS 5/11-208).  
Sec. 14-106. - Through streets. 
Through street, as used in this section, shall mean every street on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets are required by law to yield the right-of-way on such street in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign. 
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute through streets which require a stop sign or yield sign at all intersecting streets: 
North Avenue (Route 64) east and west, from Villa Avenue to Kramer Avenue. 
Roosevelt Road east and west, from Euclid Avenue to Wisconsin Avenue. 
St. Charles Road east and west, from Riverside Drive to Westmore Avenue. 
All vehicles shall stop before entering the through streets designated herein at intersections. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. IX, § 7, 7-11-61; Ord. No. 837, § 1, 9-10-62; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-19-67; Ord. No. 1032, 12-18-67; Ord. No. 1083, § 1, 10-7-68; Ord. No. 1171, §§ 1—3, 3-16-70; Ord. No. 1175, §§ 2a, 2b, 5-4-70; Ord. No. 1177; Ord. No. 1179, §§ 1b, 1c, 6-8-70; Ord. No. 1202, §§ 2, 2a, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1217, §§ 1a, 1b, 2-1-77; Ord. No. 1238, 5-17-71; Ord. No. 2507, § 1, 7-15-91) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to designate through streets, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 11-208(a)6. (625 ILCS 5/11-208).  
Sec. 14-107. - Stop streets. 
Stop signs shall be erected so as to require drivers of vehicles to bring such vehicles to a full stop on the following first-named streets: 
Adams Street, at its intersection with Addison Road, while traveling in a westerly direction. 
Adams Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Adams Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Adams Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Addison Road, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Addison Road, at its intersection with Madison Street, northbound. 
Addison Road, at its intersection with School Street. 
Addison Road, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Addison Road, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Addison Road, at its intersection with Washington Street, northbound. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Ardmore Avenue (frontage), at its intersection with Schiller Street, southbound. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with School Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with High Ridge Road. 
Ardmore Avenue, at its intersection with Riordan Road. 
Ardmore Avenue Frontage Road, between Ardmore Avenue and Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Ardmore Avenue Frontage Road, between Ardmore Avenue and Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Schiller Street, while traveling in a northerly direction. 
Astor Court, at its intersection with Myrtle Avenue, eastbound. 
Astor Court, at its intersection with Summit Avenue, westbound. 
Beach Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue, eastbound. 
Belden Avenue, at its intersection with Yale Avenue. 
Beverly Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Beverly Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive, northbound. 
Beverly Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street, northbound. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Holly Court. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue, northbound. (Not maintained by the village.) 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street, northbound. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Terrace Street, southbound. 
Bierman Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Blackstone Place, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, at its intersection with Cornell Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, at its intersection with Villa Avenue, eastbound. 
Charles Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Charles Avenue, at its intersection with Oak Street. 
Charles Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Chatham Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by the village.) 
Chatham Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Chatham Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive, northbound. 
Chatham Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Congress Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue, westbound. 
Congress Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue, eastbound. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Adams Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Harrison Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Monroe Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Oak Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Van Buren Street. 
Cornell Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Cortesi Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Crescent Drive, at its intersection with Villa Avenue, eastbound. 
Cross Street, at its intersection with Julia Drive. 
Cross Street, at its intersection with Terry Lane. 
Division Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Division Street, at its intersection with Cornell Avenue. 
Division Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Division Street, at its intersection with Second Avenue. 
Division Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Division Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Douglas Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Douglas Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with Armitage Avenue. 
Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with Hill Street. 
Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by the village.) 
Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Ellsworth Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Second Avenue. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Astor Court. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Harrison Street. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Julia Drive. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Monroe Street. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Terry Lane. 
Euclid Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Fairfield Avenue, at its intersection with Monterey Avenue, westbound. 
Frank Street, at its intersection with Grant Avenue. 
Frank Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Fulton Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Fulton Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Gerard Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Gerard Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Grant Avenue, at its intersection with Monroe Street. 
Grant Avenue, at its intersection with Terry Lane. 
Grant Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Hamilton Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Hamilton Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Harrison Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Harrison Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Harrison Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Armitage Avenue. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.) 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with School Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Harvard Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Highland Avenue, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Highland Avenue, at its intersection with Monterey Avenue. 
Highland Avenue, at its intersection with Route 83. (Not maintained by village.) 
Highland Avenue, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Highland Avenue, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Highridge Road, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Highridge Road, at its intersection with Willowbrook Road. 
Hill Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Holly Court, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Holly Court, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Home Avenue, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Home Avenue, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Hugo Court, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Hugo Court, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Oak Street. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Illinois Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Iowa Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Iowa Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Iowa Avenue, at its intersection with Stone Road. 
Iowa Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Iowa Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Jackson Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Jackson Street, at its intersection with Michigan Avenue. 
Jackson Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
James Street, at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. 
James Street, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Julia Drive, at its intersection with Harrison Street. 
Julia Drive, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue, at its intersection with Cornell Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Kolberg Court, at its intersection with Villa Avenue, westbound. 
Kramer Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.) 
Leslie Lane, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Leslie Lane, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Leslie Lane, at its intersection with Willowcrest Drive. 
Lincoln Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.) 
Lincoln Avenue, at its intersection with Pleasant Avenue. 
Lincoln Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Lincoln Avenue, at its intersection with Terrace Street. 
Lincoln Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Madison Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Madison Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Madison Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Madison Street, at its intersection with Route 83 Frontage Road, east side. 
Madison Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Madison Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Maple Street, at its intersection with Illinois Avenue. 
Maple Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Maple Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Merle Street, at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. 
Merle Street, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Adams Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.). 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Roosevelt Road. (Not maintained by village.) 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with School Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Michigan Avenue, at its intersection with Woodrow Street. 
Mission Avenue, at its intersection with Pleasant Avenue. 
Mission Avenue, at its intersection with Terrace Street. 
Monroe Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Monroe Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Monroe Street, at its intersection with Myrtle Avenue, while traveling in an easterly direction. 
Monroe Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Monterey Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Monterey Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Avenue. 
Monterey Avenue, at its intersection with Riordon Road. 
Monterey Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Monterey Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Monterey Avenue, at its intersection with Wildwood Avenue. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street, while traveling in a southerly direction. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Harrison Street, wile traveling in a southerly direction. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Julia Drive, while traveling in a northerly direction. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, southbound. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Oak Street, while traveling in a northerly direction. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Myrtle Avenue, at its intersection with Terry Lane, while traveling in a southerly direction. 
North Avenue Frontage Road, at its intersection with Kramer Avenue. 
North Avenue Frontage Road, at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. 
North Terrace Parking Lot driveway, at its exit onto the southernmost junction of Westmore Avenue and Terrace Street, northbound. 
Oak Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Oak Street, at its intersection with Division Street, while traveling in a westerly direction. 
Oak Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue, while traveling in an easterly direction. 
Oak Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Blackstone Place, southbound. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Riordon Road. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Van Buren Street, northbound. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Oakland Avenue, at its intersection with Wildwood Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Cornell Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Monterey Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Riverside Drive. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Pine Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue, while traveling in a westerly direction. 
Pine Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Pleasant Avenue, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Ellsworth Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.) 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road, while traveling in a northerly direction. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Terrace Street, while traveling in a southerly direction. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Princeton Avenue, at its intersection with Wild Fire Drive. 
Rand Road, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Rand Road, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Rand Road, at its intersection with Willowcrest Drive. 
Ridge Road at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Ridge Road at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. 
Ridge Road, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Riordon Road, at its intersection with Villa Avenue, westbound. 
Riverside Drive, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Riverside Drive, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Riverside Drive, at its intersection with Park Boulevard. 
Riverside Drive, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Roy Drive, at its intersection with Lincoln Drive. 
Roy Drive, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Route 83 Frontage Road, between Route 83 and West Street, at its intersection with Monroe Street, southbound. 
Schiller Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue, eastbound. 
Schiller Street, at its intersection with Princeton Avenue. 
Schiller Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Schiller Street, at its intersection with Yale Avenue, while traveling in a westerly direction. 
School Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
School Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Holly Court. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Terrace Street. 
Second Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Stone Road, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Harrison Street. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Maple Street. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Oak Street, while traveling in a northerly direction. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Summit Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Sunset Drive, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Sunset Drive, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue, while traveling in an easterly direction. 
Sunset Drive, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue, westbound. 
Sunset Drive, at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Terrace Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Terrace Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Terrace Street, at its intersection with Mission Avenue. 
Terrace Street, at its northernmost intersection with Westmore Avenue, eastbound. 
Terrace Street, at its southernmost intersection with Westmore Avenue, westbound. 
Terry Lane, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Terry Lane, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Holly Court. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Stone Road. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Terrace Street. 
Third Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Van Buren Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Van Buren Street, at its intersection with Cornell Avenue. 
Van Buren Street, at its intersection with the Route 83 Frontage Road. 
Van Buren Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Van Buren Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue, while traveling in a westerly direction or emerging from the school. 
Vermont Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Vermont Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Vermont Street, at its intersection with Ellsworth Avenue. 
Vermont Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Vermont Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Vermont Street, at its intersection with Westmore Avenue. 
Villa Avenue, at its intersection with Harrison Street. 
Villa Avenue, at its intersection with Highland Avenue. 
Villa Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue. 
Villa Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Villa Avenue, at its intersection with Van Buren Street. 
Villa Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Monterey Avenue. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Route 83, eastbound. (Not maintained by village.) 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Summit Avenue. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Westmore Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Westmore Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Westmore Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Westmore Avenue, at its southernmost intersection with Terrace Street, southbound. 
Wild Fire Drive, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue, westbound. 
Wild Fire Drive, at its intersection with Yale Avenue. 
Wild Fire Drive, at its intersection with Princeton Avenue. 
Wild Fire Drive, at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue, eastbound. 
Wildwood Avenue, at its intersection with Monterey Avenue. 
Wildwood Avenue, at its intersection with Villa Avenue. 
Willowcrest Drive, at its intersection with Leslie Lane. 
Willowcrest Drive, at its intersection with Rand Road. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Adams Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Jackson Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.) 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Ridge Road. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with School Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Stone Road. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Sunset Drive. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, at its intersection with Woodrow Street. 
Woodrow Street, at its intersection with Addison Road. 
Woodrow Street, at its intersection with Harvard Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Adams Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Armitage Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Central Boulevard, southbound. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Division Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Kenilworth Avenue, northbound. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Madison Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Monroe Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with North Avenue. (Not maintained by village.) 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Park Boulevard, northbound. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Plymouth Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with School Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with St. Charles Road. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Vermont Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Belden Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, at its intersection with Wild Fire Drive. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-9-67; Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 12-18-67; Ord. No. 1102, § 2, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1107, § 1, 4-21-69; Ord. No. 1128, § 1, 7-7-69; Ord. No. 1132, § 1, 8-18-69; Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 12-15-69; Ord. No. 1171, §§ 3—5, 3-16-70; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 5-4-70; Ord. No. 1176, § 1, 5-18-70; Ord. No. 1179, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-70; Ord. No. 1202, § 1, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. 1237, §§ 1—1d, 5-17-71; Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. 1240, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. 1266, § 1, 10-25-71; Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 12-20-71; Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 3-5-73; Ord. No. 1384, § 1, 3-19-73; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 5-21-73; Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 5-21-73; Ord. No. 1401, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-73; Ord. No. 1406, § 1, 6-18-73; Ord. No. 1411, § 1, 7-23-73; Ord. No. 1412, § 1, 7-23-73; Ord. No. 1437, § 1, 11-5-74; Ord. No. 1455, § 1, 2-18-74; Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 7-22-74; Ord. No. 1546, § 1, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1865, § 1, 8-27-79; Ord. No. 1878, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. 1888, § 1, 1-11-80; Ord. No. 1937, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-80; Ord. No. 1959, § 1, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 1971, § 1, 4-6-81; Ord. No. 2275, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 2430-A, § 2, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 2507, § 2, 7-15-91; Ord. No. 2552, §§ 1—4, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2601, § 1, 11-9-92; Ord. No. 2606, § 1, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 2611, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 2639, § 1, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 2653, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 2666, §§ 1, 2, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 2668, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2785, § 1, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 3063, § 1, 10-23-00; Ord. No. 3294, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 3382, § 1, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 3430, § 1, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 3442, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 3519, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-08; Ord. No. 3742, § 1, 4-22-13) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to designate stop streets, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.  
Sec. 14-108. - No right turns. 
No person shall cause a motor vehicle to make a right turn at any of the following locations: 
The exit from the commercial property on the east side of Oakland Avenue south of St. Charles Road. 
Frontage Road at Monterey Avenue. 
Roosevelt Road at Monterey Avenue. 
Van Buren Avenue eastbound, at Highway 83 Frontage Road. 
Westbound North Avenue at Yale Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 5-10-76; Ord. No. 1908, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 3382, § 2, 8-28-06) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to prohibit turns at intersections, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.  
Sec. 14-109. - No left turns. 
No person shall cause a motor vehicle to make a left turn at any of the following locations: 
Addison Road, northbound at Terrace Street. 
Addison Road, southbound at Division Street. 
Ardmore Avenue southbound at the Chicago and Northwestern Railway parking lot. 
Ardmore Avenue northbound at Terrace Street. 
Highway 83 Frontage Road, northbound at Van Buren Street. 
(Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 10-6-69; Ord. No. 1908, § 2, 5-5-80; Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 11-8-99; Ord. No. 3020, § 1, 2-21-00) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to prohibit turns at intersections, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.  
Sec. 14-110. - U-turns. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a forward or reverse circle or "U" turn on any street within the business district, or at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. VIII, § 5, 7-11-61) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to prohibit "U" turns, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)11.  
Sec. 14-111. - Negligent driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any public street or highway within the corporate limits of the village negligently or without due caution in a manner as will endanger or is likely to endanger persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. V, § 3, 7-11-61)  
Sec. 14-112. - Accident reports. 
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident shall file a written report of such accident with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. IV, § 7, 7-11-61) 
State Law reference— Power of local authorities to require accident reports, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 11-415. (625 ILCS 5/11-415)  
Sec. 14-113. - Toy vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds or any other toy vehicle, to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XIII, § 14, 7-11-67)  
Sec. 14-114. - Riding on running boards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle, or any part of a vehicle not provided for passenger seating. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XIII, § 15, 7-11-67)  
Sec. 14-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3656, adopted June 13, 2011, repealed § 14-115, which had pertained to unnecessary noise, and derived from Ord. No. 791, adopted July 11, 1961. Similar provisions can be found in § 15-601 et seq.  
Sec. 14-116. - Load limits. 
(a)  Definition of words and phrases. The following words and phrases when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition is set forth in another article of this Code. 
Commercial vehicle means any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. A commercial vehicle shall be any vehicle or a combination of vehicles with a manufacturers GVWR, GCWR, registered weight, combined registered weight or actual weight on a scale of ten thousand one (10,001) pounds or more. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon. 
Highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Implement of husbandry means every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For this article, motor vehicles are divided into two (2) divisions: 
(1)  First division: Those motor vehicles, which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons. 
(2)  Second division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living quarters, those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division. 
Permit route means the route authorized by the issuing authority with proper jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying an indivisible load that exceeds legal dimensions or weight or a combination thereof. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Tandem axles means any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than forty (40) inches and not more than ninety-six (96) inches apart, measured to the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series. 
Trailer means every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Village means the Village of Villa Park 
(b)  Overweight and/or over dimension vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in the 625 ILCS 5/15-102 (width), 625 ILCS 5/15-103 (height), 625 ILCS 5/15-107 (length), and 625 ILCS 5/15-111 (weight). 
(2)  Size and weights limitations while operating on village streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations owned or operated by or for any governmental body or to implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid over weight and/or dimension permit issued by the village under the authority of subsection (c). 
(3)  Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-15-111, 15-316 and 15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions. 
(4)  Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(c)  Permits for overweight and/or over dimension vehicles. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within the jurisdiction of the village which exceeds the legal dimensions and weights provided in 625 ILCS, 5/15-102 (width), ILCS 625 ILCS 5/15-103 (height), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107 (length), and 625 ILCS 5/15-111 (weight). 
(2)  The village with respect to any street or highway under its jurisdiction may upon application to the village on forms provided by the village and good cause being shown therefore issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in subsection (c)(1). The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special permit application: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle. 
b.  Applicant's name. 
c.  Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round trip, or multiple routing. 
d.  Description of the object or vehicle to be moved. 
e.  The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
f.  The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles. 
g.  Maximum gross weight of the vehicle. 
h.  The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load. 
i.  Requested routing over village streets to and from a specific location. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  A one-way or single trip movement means one (1) move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for seven (7) consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the village. 
(2)  Round trip movement means two (2) trips over the same route in opposite directions, or upon an alternate route as prescribed by the police department on the permit. Round trip permits are effective for fourteen (14) consecutive days from the date of issuance. 
(3)  Multiple move permits when granted by the village shall be for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, and shall provide the applicant the ability to make unlimited moves on village streets. Multiple move permits are only available for weights under on one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) pounds, load width less than sixteen (16) feet, height less than fifteen (15) feet, and length less than one hundred forty-five (145) feet. 
(e)  The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based on the below chart for a single routing which will be valid for seven (7) calendar days, round trip routing valid for fourteen (14) calendar days and multiple routings valid for a base period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the chief of police or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load or routing is permitted without expressed written permission by the chief of police or his designee and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies. In addition to the below listed fees, the owner or his or her agent shall pay any administrative or service fees associated with the electronic issuance of any and all permits. 
Fee Schedule 
	Fee
	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Multiple Move 
Permit size—Weight (with load) 
Up to 100,000 pounds 	50 	75 	200 
100,001—120,000 	75 	100 	250 
120,001—150,000 	100 	125 	
Over 150,000 	150 	200 	
Permit size—Width (with load greater than 8'6") 
Up to 12' 	25 	40 	150 
14' 	50 	75 	200 
16' 	75 	100 	
Greater than 16' wide 	100 	125 	
Permit size—Height (with load greater than 13'6" high) 
15' 	25 	40 	150 
Greater than 15' high 	50 	75 	
Permit size—Length (with load) 
115' 	25 	40 	150 
145' 	50 	75 	
Greater than 145' long 	75 	100 	
 
Note: If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension issues, the total fee will be based on the highest individual weight or dimension fee. Any application for a permit which exceeds the maximum weight and dimensions listed in schedule (e) is subject to special assessment fees at the discretion of the chief of police or his designee. 
(f)  Police escorts are generally required for vehicles operating under a valid overweight or over dimension permit which exceeds the weight and size limits described in schedule (e), and when, in the discretion of the police chief or his designee, is necessary to protect life safety, traffic flow and infrastructure. 
(g)  The permittee must make all arrangements with the police department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the move. 
(h)  Fees for police escort, when required, shall be in addition to the permit fees. The applicant shall pay the cost for a police vehicle escort at the overtime rate of the hired police officer, per any collective bargaining agreement, at a minimum of two (2) hours pay. 
(i)  The chief of police or his designee is authorized to approve the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required fees, the village shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over village streets. The permit shall be specific and contain: 
(1)  Permit number. 
(2)  The dates the permit is valid. 
(3)  Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip routing. 
(4)  The description of object or vehicle to be moved. 
(5)  Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height. 
(6)  The authorized routing over Village streets including the origin and termination point within the village. 
(7)  The fee paid. 
(8)  The date and signature of the chief of police or his designee. Permits issued electronically shall be considered signed by the chief of police or his designee. 
(9)  In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general public and Village streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the village manager for informational purposes. Any provisions listed on an approved permit will not be more restrictive than those afforded by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) OPER 993 form or the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guidelines. 
(j)  It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that: 
(1)  The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements; 
(2)  All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not be exceeded; 
(3)  All operation, registration and license requirements have been complied with; 
(4)  All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal requirements have been met; and 
(5)  The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. The permittee agrees to hold the village harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the village for any claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement. 
(k)  The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies at all times while operating on streets within the village and shall be exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or authorized official of the village. Electronic display of a permit on a device which may be inspected is authorized. 
(l)  Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a village permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, and either or both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty, and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(m)  Vehicles prohibited on certain streets. 
(1)  As provided under the authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-111 and 15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted. Vehicles operating under the authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-111 or 15-316 shall use the most direct route to points of loading and unloading. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to park a commercial motor vehicle on a residential street while said truck is running between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(n)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will be fined according to the penalties provided in chapter 15 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.) hereby adopted by reference into this chapter. 
(2)  In addition to seeking a fine, as hereinabove provided, the village attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the village to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 5, 7-7-75; Ord. No. 2003, § 5, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 2678, § 1, 1-17-94; Ord. No. 4060 , § 1, 12-10-18)  
Sec. 14-117. - Snowmobiles. 
(a)  No person shall exercise any degree of physical control of a snowmobile on any street or highway or on any municipally owned park, parkway or parking lot within the village. 
(b)  No person shall cross or drive a snowmobile upon any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1170, § 1, 3-16-70) 
State Law reference— The Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, § 601-1 et seq. (625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.)  
Sec. 14-118. - Vehicles on public property. 
(a)  No person shall operate upon any publicly owned property in the village any motorized vehicle which has not been properly registered in Illinois or which does not have proper evidence of registration in Illinois displayed thereon. No person shall operate any motorized vehicle within the village upon publicly owned property of the village unless such motorized vehicle shall have attached thereto and displayed thereon when and as required by law, proper evidence of registration in Illinois as prescribed by statute, and then such motorized vehicle shall only be operated on the roadway, improved alleys, driveways and designated parking areas. 
(b)  Motorized vehicle is defined as every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, all motorized vehicles having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground and every motorcycle, motor scooter or bicycle with motor attached. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use by the village of motorized vehicles upon any publicly owned property. 
(Ord. No. 1812, §§ 1—4, 9-19-78)  
Sec. 14-119. - Impeding traffic by snow removal. 
It shall be unlawful to place, permit, shovel, push, plow, or otherwise cause snow to be located upon, or placed by another upon a public street or a public sidewalk, which impedes or interferes with motor vehicle traffic or pedestrian traffic, or makes travel thereon dangerous. Nothing contained in this section 14-119 shall apply to employees of the village while on duty for the village who are removing, shoveling, pushing or plowing snow from public rights-of-way within the village under the direction of the superintendent of operations. "Public street" as used in this section 14-119 shall include the improved portion of any public right-of-way from curb to opposite curb. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 7, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 2314, § 1, 11-21-88) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003, § 7, enacted Nov. 23, 1981, amended the Code with the addition of a new § 14-225, which provisions, at the discretion of the editor, have been redesignated as § 14-119 for purposes of classification. 
Cross reference— No parking on certain streets when there is a need for snow removal, §§ 14-205, 14-205.1.  
Sec. 14-120. - Prohibition of excessive engine idling. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health and welfare and the environment by reducing noise, emissions and conserving fuel. 
(b)  Idling prohibition. No person using a motor vehicle that operates on diesel fuel shall cause or allow that motor vehicle to idle for more than a total of ten (10) minutes within any sixty-minute period, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds; 
(2)  The motor vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of on-highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the direction of a law enforcement official; 
(3)  The motor vehicle idles when operating defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment solely to prevent a safety or health emergency; 
(4)  A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, other emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle used in an emergency capacity, idles while in an emergency or training mode and not for the convenience of the vehicle operator; 
(5)  The primary propulsion engine idles for maintenance, servicing, repairing, or diagnostic purposes if idling is necessary for such activity; 
(6)  The motor vehicle idles as part of a government inspection to verify that all equipment is in good working order, provided idling is required as part of the inspection; 
(7)  When idling of the motor vehicle is required to operate auxiliary equipment to accomplish the intended use of the vehicle such as loading, unloading, mixing, or processing cargo; controlling cargo temperature; construction operations; or farming operations; provided, however, that this exemption does not apply when the vehicle is idling solely for cabin comfort or to operate nonessential equipment such as air conditioning, heating, microwave ovens, or televisions; 
(8)  An armored motor vehicle idles when a person remains inside the vehicle to guard the contents or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded; 
(9)  A bus idles a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in any sixty (60) minute period to maintain passenger comfort while nondriver passengers are on board; 
(10)  If the motor vehicle has a sleeping berth, when the operator is occupying the vehicle during a rest or sleep period and idling of the vehicle is required to operate air conditioning or heating; 
(11)  When the motor vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over which the operator has no control; 
(12)  The motor vehicle is a bus owned by a public transit authority and that bus is being operated on a designated bus route or on a street or highway between designated bus routes for the provision of public transportation; 
(13)  The motor vehicle is an implement of husbandry exempt from registration under state law; 
(14)  The motor vehicle is owned by an electric utility and is operated for electricity generation or hydraulic pressure to power equipment necessary in the restoration, repair, modification or installation of electric utility service; or 
(15)  The outdoor temperature is less than thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit or greater than eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit. When the outdoor temperature is thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit or higher and eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit or lower, a person who operates a motor vehicle operating on diesel fuel may not cause or allow the motor vehicle to idle for a period greater than thirty (30) minutes in any sixty-minute period while waiting to weigh, load, or unload cargo or freight, unless the vehicle is in a line of vehicles that regularly and periodically moves forward. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following matters are excepted from the regulations of this section: 
(1)  The operation of an auxiliary power unit or generator set as an alternative to idling the main engine of a motor vehicle operating on diesel fuel; and 
(2)  An owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to another entity or person operating the vehicle is not responsible for a violation of this section by such other entity or person. 
(d)  Violations; penalties. Any person convicted of any violation of this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first conviction and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second or subsequent conviction within any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 3788, § 1, 4-28-14)  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes, § 9-211. 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, 625 ILCS 5/11-301; power of local authorities to regulate standing and parking, 625 ILCS 5/11-201(a)1. 
 
Sec. 14-200. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited—In specific places. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb of a street; 
b.  On a sidewalk; 
c.  Within an intersection; 
d.  On a crosswalk; 
e.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
f.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
g.  On any railroad tracks; 
h.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking; 
i.  On any controlled access highway; 
j.  In the area between roadways of a divided highway including crossovers. 
(2)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
d.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
e.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly sign posted). 
f.  Stop, stand or park in a posted "Fire Lane." 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 1, 11-23-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003, § 1, adopted Nov. 23, 1981, added a new § 14-219 to the Code, which section, at the discretion of the editor, has been redesignated as § 14-200 for purposes of classification.  
Sec. 14-201. - Same—Chicago and Northwestern Railroad Station area. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on that area of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad Station as measured on the north from the existing platform located on said lot and on the south as the lot line and on the east and west by projected lines representing an extension of the Cornell right-of-way extended in a northerly direction from the south lot line to the south edge of the platform. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 4-8-74)  
Sec. 14-202. - Same—Parkways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle on a parkway. 
(Ord. No. 791, § 16, 7-11-61)  
Sec. 14-203. - No parking—Restrictions for school days. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in any of the following locations: 
Cornell Avenue, west side, from a point two hundred eight (208) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Central Boulevard to a point six hundred twenty (620) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Central Boulevard. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from School Street to a point two hundred (200) feet south of School Street. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from the north right-of-way line of School Street to a point five hundred ninety (590) feet north of the north right-of-way line of School Street. 
Harvard Avenue, east side, from the north right-of-way line of the easterly intersection of Sunset Drive to the north right-of-way line of Ridge Road. 
Jackson Avenue , south side, from the west driveway of Jackson Middle School to Michigan Avenue. 
School Street, south side, from Harvard Avenue to Yale Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, north side, from the east right-of-way line of Harvard Avenue to a point of eighty-eight (88) feet east of the right-of-way line of Harvard Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, west side, the north right-of-way line of Sunset Drive to the north right-of-way line of Ridge Road. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from a point seventy-three (73) feet south of the south curbline of the northernmost parking lot entrance to Albright Middle School (opposite Van Buren Street, hereinafter south curb) to a point one hundred fifty-three (153) feet south of said south curb. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. in any of the following locations: 
Wisconsin Street, west side, from St. Charles Road to Elm Street. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle for a period in excess of one (1) hour on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in any of the following locations: 
Sunset Drive, south side, between Harvard Avenue and Yale Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, south side, from a point fifty-one (51) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Yale Avenue to the east right-of-way line of Harvard Avenue. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have business at Albright Middle School or with Salt Creek School District 48 at Albright Middle School to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in the parking spaces on the north side of East Harrison Street between South Myrtle Avenue and South Villa Avenue. Persons permitted to park shall include but not be limited to employees of the district or school, parents or relatives with children attending the school, visitors to the district offices or the school, and vendors or persons making deliveries to the district or school. 
(Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1175, 5-4-70; Ord. No. 1203, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1204, § 2, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. 1242, § 1, 5-24-71; Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-12-71; Ord. No. 1947, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-80; Ord. No. 2071, § 1, 4-18-83; Ord. No. 2090, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-83; Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 2599, § 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 2684, § 1, 2-21-94; Ord. No. 2720, § 1, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 3297, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 3431, §§ 1, 2, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 3597, § 2, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 3945 , § 1, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 4022 , § 1, 3-26-18; Ord. No. 4045 , §§ 3—6, 8-13-18)  
Sec. 14-204. - Loading zones. 
(a)  Freight. During the times specified herein it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight-carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any of the following places: 
In any public alley. 
Directly in front of the entrance to any theater when such theater is open for business. 
Within seventy-five (75) feet along the curb before the entrance to a public building, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sunday. 
Ardmore Avenue , east side, from a point one hundred fifty-seven (157) feet to two hundred thirty-eight (238) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Vermont Street. 
(b)  School. In the following loading zones no person shall stop, stand or park on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. except to load and unload school children: 
Cornell Avenue, at the main entrance to the St. Alexander's School building and for a distance seventy (70) feet north of the main entrance and for a distance two hundred seventy (270) feet south of said front entrance. 
Highland Avenue, north side, between Oakland Avenue and Monterey Avenue. 
Monterey Avenue, west side, from a point twenty (20) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Highland Avenue to a point one hundred twenty-five (125) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Highland Avenue. 
Myrtle Avenue, east side, from a point two hundred (200) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Harrison Street to a point five hundred eleven (511) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Harrison Street. 
Oakland Avenue, east side, from a point twenty (20) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Highland Avenue to a point one hundred twenty-five (125) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Highland Avenue. 
(c)  Buses. In the following areas, no person shall stand, park or stop a vehicle, except for buses which may stop for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers: 
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad Station parking lot area adjacent to the north side of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad Station. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XII, § 7, 7-11-61; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1126, § 1, 6-16-69; Ord. No. 1164, § 2, 12-15-69; Ord. No. 1203, § 1a, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1204, § 2a, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1966, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 2345, §§ 4, 5, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 3842, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-14; Ord. No. 4020 , § 1, 3-26-18; Ord. No. 4021 , § 1, 3-26-18; Ord. No. 4045 , §§ 7, 8, 8-13-18) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 1966, adopted Feb. 16, 1981, have been included as subsection (c) of § 14-204 at the editor's discretion. Said provisions were nonamendatory of the Code.  
Sec. 14-205. - Snow routes—After accumulation of two or more inches of snow. 
(a)  No person shall park a motor vehicle at any time after the accumulation of two (2) or more inches of snow and until said snow has been removed, at the locations set forth herein. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall be restricted to the following streets: 
Addison Avenue from St. Charles Road to North Avenue. 
Ardmore Avenue from North Avenue to Roosevelt Road. 
Harvard Avenue from St. Charles Road to Jackson Street. 
Highland Avenue from Ardmore Avenue to Route 83. 
Jackson Street from Addison Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
Madison Street from Addison Avenue to Route 83. 
Plymouth Street from Villa Avenue to Westmore Avenue. 
Summit Avenue from Kenilworth Avenue to Harrison Street. 
Vermont Street from Villa Avenue to Westmore Avenue. 
Villa Avenue from Roosevelt Road to North Avenue. 
Washington Street from Addison Avenue to Route 83. 
(c)  An owner or operator of a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section shall be responsible for towing expenses, and that said vehicle violating the provisions of this section may be towed from the public streets and property within the village whenever said vehicle shall constitute a traffic hazard or causes the impeding of traffic because of its position in relation to a public street set forth above within the village and pursuant to law. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 1544, §§ 1—3, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1961, §§ 1—3, 6, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 3431, §§ 3, 4, 7-16-07) 
Cross reference— Impeding traffic by snow removal, § 14-119.  
Sec. 14-205.1. - Same—After accumulation of one inch or more of snow in certain commercial or business areas. 
Between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, trailer or any other similar obstruction to be parked on any street integrally connected parking area, and any village, commercial or business area, when there is need for snow removal by village employees. The definition for the need for snow removal shall be when one (1) inch or more of snow has fallen. For the purposes of this section business or commercial areas are defined specially as follows: 
Addison Avenue from Sunset to North Avenue. 
Ardmore Avenue between Highland Avenue and School Street. 
Central Boulevard between Myrtle Avenue and Villa Avenue. 
Main Street from Myrtle Avenue to its easterly end. 
New Street in its entirety. 
Park Boulevard and Central Boulevard between Princeton and Cornell. 
Villa Avenue from Crescent Drive to St. Charles Road. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 6, 11-23-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003, § 6, adopted Nov. 23, 1981, added a new § 14-224, which provisions, for purposes of classification, have been redesignated as § 14-205.1. 
Cross reference— Impeding traffic by snow removal, § 14-119.  
Sec. 14-206. - Overnight parking prohibited. 
Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked a motor vehicle, trailer or any other similar obstruction on any street or integrally connected parking area except for the purposes of facilitating street cleaning, snow removal, and police surveillance. 
(Ord. No. 981, § 4, 2-20-67)  
Sec. 14-207. - No parking zones. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall park a vehicle on either side of the street on any street less than nineteen (19) feet in width as measured in a straight line, perpendicular to the curb, from the pavement side on one (1) curb to one (1) pavement side of the opposite curb. 
(1)  Parking is allowed on both sides of Grant Avenue from Washington Street south to the dead end terminus of Grant Avenue. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle on one (1) side of the street on any street less than twenty-nine (29) feet but at least nineteen (19) feet wide, measured as in paragraph (a) above. The no parking side is to be designated as the fire hydrant side. If no clearly defined fire hydrant side exists, the traffic and safety commission will recommend the no parking side; however, parking is allowed on both sides of the street on streets twenty-nine (29) feet and over in width, as measured in paragraph (a) above. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places: 
Adams Street, north side, from Addison Road to Summit Avenue. 
Addison Road, east side, from Jackson Street to Park Boulevard. 
Addison Road, both sides, from Stone Road to the north village limits. 
Addison Road, both sides, from Terrace Street to Stone Road between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
Addison Road, both sides, from Division Street to St. Charles Road between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
Addison Road, both sides, from Division Street to Terrace Street. 
Adele Court , both sides from Ellsworth Avenue to and including the cul-de-sac between 7:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. nightly beginning Friday and ending Sunday morning. 
Adele Street, both sides, from Harvard Avenue to Yale Avenue. 
Ardmore Avenue, west frontage road, both sides, from Ridge Road to Ardmore Avenue. 
Ardmore Avenue, west side, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of the centerline of North Avenue to Park Boulevard. 
Ardmore Avenue, west side, from Highland Avenue to the south village limits. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of the centerline of North Avenue to Sunset Drive. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from Highland Avenue to Jackson Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from the north right-of-way line of Harrison Avenue to a point one hundred forty (140) feet north. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from a point one hundred twenty (120) feet south of the south line of Harrison Street to the south village limits. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from Sunset Drive to a point fifty (50) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Plymouth Street, between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from a point fifty (50) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Plymouth Street to the north right-of-way line of Plymouth Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from the south right-of-way line of Plymouth Street to a point fifty (50) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Plymouth Street. 
Ardmore Avenue, east side, from a point fifty (50) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Plymouth Street to Vermont Street, between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
Ardmore Avenue , east side, from Terrace Street to Park Boulevard. 
Ardmore Avenue , east side, from Vermont Street to Terrace Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Armitage Street, south side, from Yale Avenue to Harvard Avenue. 
Adams Street, north side, from Addison Road to Summit Avenue. 
Astor Court, south side, from Summit Avenue to Myrtle Avenue. 
Beach Street, north side, from Villa Avenue to the west end. 
Beach Street, south side, from Villa Avenue to the west end between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Beverly Avenue, west side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern parking lot. 
Beverly Avenue, east side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern parking lot between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Bierman Avenue, east side, from Terrace Street to North Avenue. 
Bierman Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to Division Street. 
Blackstone Place, both sides, from Villa Avenue to Monterey Avenue. 
Calduto Circle, south side, from Oakland Avenue to and including the cul-de-sac. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from Villa Avenue to Cornell Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from Princeton Avenue to Addison Road. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from the east right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue to a point eighty-five (85) feet east of such right-of-way. 
Central Boulevard, south side, from the west right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue to a point one hundred (100) feet west of such right-of-way. 
Charles Avenue, east side, for two hundred (200) feet south of St. Charles Road. 
Charles Avenue, west side, from Oak Street to Wildwood Avenue. 
Chatham Avenue, east side, from the north line of North Avenue in a northerly direction for fifty (50) feet. 
Chatham Avenue, west side, from the north line of North Avenue in a northerly direction to the village limits. 
Chatham Avenue, west side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern parking lot. 
Chatham Avenue, east side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern parking lot between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Congress Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
Cornell Avenue, east side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way south to Oak Street. 
Cornell Avenue, west side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Oak Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Cornell Avenue, west side, from a point one hundred sixteen (116) feet north of Central Boulevard to a point two hundred eight (208) feet north of Central Boulevard on Sundays until 12:00 noon. 
Cornell Avenue, west side, from a point one hundred twenty (120) feet south of Highland Avenue to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south of Highland Avenue. 
Cornell Avenue, east side, from Kenilworth Avenue to Harrison Street. 
Cornell Avenue, east side, from Oak Street to Elm Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Cornell Avenue, east side, from Oak Street to St. Charles Road. 
Cornell Avenue, west side, from the north right-of-way line of Central Boulevard to a point one hundred sixteen (116) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Central Boulevard. 
Cortesi Avenue , east side, from Central Boulevard to a point one hundred forty-six (146) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Kenilworth Avenue. 
Cortesi Avenue , north side, from Myrtle Avenue to a point one hundred seventy-six (176) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Myrtle Avenue. 
Cortesi Avenue , south side, from the east right-of-way line of Myrtle Avenue to a point twenty-five (25) feet east. 
Cortesi Avenue , south side, from the west right-of-way line of Cortesi Avenue to a point thirty-six (36) feet west. 
Cross Street, east side, from Terry Lane to Julia Drive. 
Division Street, south side, from Cornell Avenue to Summit Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Division Street, south side, from Ardmore Avenue to Westmore Avenue. 
Division Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Addison Road between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Division Street, north side, from Cornell Avenue to Villa Avenue. 
Douglas Avenue, west side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern parking lot. 
Douglas Avenue, east side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern parking lot between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Ellsworth Avenue, east side, from Hill Street to Schiller Street, including the entire turn around at the north dead end. 
Ellsworth Avenue, west side, from the center line of Schiller Street right-of-way to a point eighty-five (85) feet south. 
Ellsworth Avenue, west side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way. 
Ellsworth Avenue, east side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Ellsworth Avenue , both sides, from North Avenue - Illinois Route 64 to Armitage Avenue between 7:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. nightly beginning Friday and ending Sunday morning. 
Elm Street, south side, from Yale Avenue to Illinois Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Elm Street, north side, from Westmore Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
Elm Street, north side, from Euclid Avenue to Villa Avenue. 
Euclid Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to Central Boulevard. 
Euclid Avenue, east side, from Park Boulevard to Washington Street. 
Euclid Avenue, east side, from Division Street to St. Charles Road. 
Euclid Avenue, east side, from Monroe Street to Harrison Street. 
Euclid Avenue, east side, from Roosevelt Road to a point two hundred one (201) feet north of Roosevelt Road. 
Euclid Avenue, west side, from Washington Street to Madison Street. 
Euclid Avenue, west side, from Division Street to a point one hundred seventy-five (175) feet south of the Division Street right-of-way. 
Frank Street, north side, from Summit Avenue to Grant Street. 
Fulton Avenue, west side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way. 
Fulton Avenue, east side, from Sunset Drive to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Gerard Avenue, east side, from Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Plymouth Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Gerard Avenue, west side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Plymouth Street. 
Grant Avenue, east side, from Terry Lane to Monroe Street. 
Hamilton Street, east side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Plymouth Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Hamilton Street, west side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Plymouth Street. 
Harrison Street, both sides, from Summit Avenue to Julia Drive. 
Harrison Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
Harrison Street, north side, from Julia Drive to Villa Avenue. 
Harrison Street, south side, from Oakland Avenue to corporate limits. 
Harvard Avenue, east side, from the north right-of-way line of Ridge Road to Jackson Street. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from Plymouth Street to Division Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to a point one hundred twenty-eight (128) feet north of the north right-of-way line of St. Charles Road. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to Kenilworth Avenue. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from Central Boulevard to Park Boulevard. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from North Avenue to the Canadian National right-of-way. 
Harvard Avenue, west side, from Sunset Drive (west) to Sunset Drive (east). 
Harvard Avenue, both sides, from North Avenue north to the north end of North Park Mall property; except that parking is allowed on the west side of Harvard Avenue from the north entrance of North Park Mall to the north end of North Park Mall property. 
High Ridge Road, both sides, from Ardmore Avenue to the west corporate limits of the village. 
Highland Avenue, south side, from Princeton Avenue to Route 83. 
Hill Street, south and west sides, from Ardmore Avenue east to the village limits. 
Hill Street, north side, from Villa Avenue west to the village limits. 
Holly Court, north side, from Westmore Avenue to Addison Road. 
Home Avenue, south side, from Ardmore Avenue to Harvard Avenue. 
Hugo Court, east side. 
Illinois Avenue, east side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Division Street. 
Illinois Avenue, west side, from the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way to Division Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Illinois Avenue, east side, from Kenilworth Avenue to Madison Street. 
Illinois Avenue, west side, from Oak Street to Elm Street, between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Illinois Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to Wildwood Avenue. 
Illinois Avenue, east side from Oak Street to St. Charles Road. 
Illinois Avenue, east side, from a point 132 feet south of the south right-of-way line of St. Charles Road to a point 162 feet south of the south right-of-way line of St. Charles Road. 
Iowa Avenue, west side, from Stone Road to a point five hundred fifty (550) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Vermont Street. 
Jackson Street, north side, from Addison Road to Leslie Lane. 
Jackson Street, south side, from Leslie Lane to Ardmore Avenue. 
Jackson Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
James Street, north side, from Westmore Avenue to Lincoln Avenue. 
Julia Drive, north and west side, from Harrison Street to Villa Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Addison Road. 
Kenilworth Avenue , north side, from Euclid Avenue to Cornell Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue , north side, from Cortesi Avenue to a point one hundred twenty-one (121) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Myrtle Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue, both sides, from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue , both sides, from Villa Avenue to Cortesi Avenue. 
Kolberg Court, south side, from Villa Avenue to Wayside Drive. 
Lane Drive, south side, from Oakland Avenue to Wayside Drive. 
Leslie Lane, east and north sides, from Ardmore Avenue to Jackson Street. 
Leslie Lane, west side, from Willowcrest Drive to Jackson Street between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on school days. 
Leslie Lane, south side, from Willowcrest Drive to Ardmore Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on school days. 
Lincoln Avenue, east side, from Terrace Street to Pleasant Avenue and from Vermont Street to North Avenue. 
Madison Street, south side, from Riverside Drive to Route 83 Frontage Road. 
Madison Street, north side, from Addison Road to Route 83. 
Madison Street, north side from the east Route 83 Frontage Road east to, and including, the entire turn around at the east dead end. 
Maple Street, north side, from Illinois Avenue to Villa Avenue. 
Maple Street, south side, from Illinois Avenue to Villa Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Merle Street, north side, from Westmore Avenue to Lincoln Avenue. 
Michigan Avenue, east side, from Division Street to St. Charles Road. 
Michigan Avenue, west side, from Madison Street to Jackson Street. 
Michigan Avenue, east side, from Park Boulevard to Madison Street. 
Michigan Avenue, west side, from Stone Road to Vermont Avenue. 
Michigan Avenue, east side, from Roosevelt Road south to village limits. 
Michigan Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to the former Chicago & Great Western right-of-way. 
Michigan Avenue, east side, from North Avenue to the Chicago, Central and Pacific right-of-way. 
Monroe Street, north side, from Harvard Avenue to Myrtle Avenue. 
Monterey Avenue, east side, from Blackstone Place to Roosevelt Road. 
Monterey Avenue, east side, from St. Charles Road to Park Boulevard. 
Monterey Avenue, west side, from Kolberg Court to Blackstone Place. 
Monterey Avenue, west side, from Park Boulevard to Madison Street. 
Monterey Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to a point one hundred thirty-five (135) feet south of the south right-of-way line of St. Charles Road. 
Myrtle Avenue, east side, from Kenilworth Avenue to Harrison Street. 
Myrtle Avenue, east side, from Oak Street to Division Street. 
Myrtle Avenue , west side, from Cortesi Avenue to Kenilworth Avenue. 
North Avenue, both sides, for its entire length except for any frontage road within the right-of-way of North Avenue. 
North Avenue, frontage road, both sides, from the centerline of Lincoln Avenue to a point seventy-five (75) feet east and from the centerline of Lincoln Avenue to a point two hundred (200) feet west. 
North Avenue frontage road, immediately south of and parallel with North Avenue - Illinois Route 64, on the south side, from North Kramer Avenue west to the North Avenue - Illinois Route 64 right-of-way. 
Oak Street, south from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue. 
Oak Street, south from Cornell Avenue to Summit Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Oak Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Oak Street, north side, from Cornell Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
Oak Street, north side, from Division Street to Villa Avenue. 
Oakland Avenue, east side, from St. Charles Road to Wildwood Avenue. 
Oakland Avenue, west side, from Madison Street to Park Boulevard. 
Oakland Avenue, west side, from Van Buren Street to Blackstone Place. 
Orchard Hill Court, west side, from Harrison Street to a point one hundred thirty-seven (137) feet south of Harrison Street. 
Ovaltine Court , south side, from Villa Avenue east to the alley. 
Park Boulevard, north side, commencing at a point one hundred ninety (190) feet west of the centerline of Ardmore Avenue to a point two hundred fifteen (215) feet west of the centerline of Ardmore Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, north side, from the centerline of Monterey Avenue (north of Park Boulevard) to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west of the centerline of Monterey Avenue (north of Park Boulevard). 
Park Boulevard, south side, from Cornell Avenue east to the village limits. 
Park Boulevard, south side, from Princeton Avenue to Addison Road. 
Pine Street, north side, from Summit to Villa Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Pleasant Avenue, north side, from Westmore west to the village limits. 
Plymouth Street, north side, from Beverly Avenue to Villa Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Plymouth Street, north side, from Iowa Avenue to Addison Road. 
Plymouth Street, south side, from Villa Avenue to Lincoln Avenue. 
Plymouth Street, north side, from Yale Avenue to Beverly Avenue. 
Princeton Avenue, east side, from Division Street to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way. 
Princeton Avenue, east side, from Elm Street to Division Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Princeton Avenue, east side, from Kenilworth Avenue to Madison Street. 
Princeton Avenue , east side, from Terrace Street to a point three hundred ten (310) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Plymouth Street. 
Princeton Avenue, west side, from Adele Avenue to the Chicago, Central & Pacific Railroad right-of-way. 
Princeton Avenue, west side, from Division Street to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Princeton Avenue, west side, from Division Street to St. Charles Road. 
Princeton Avenue , west side, from a point three hundred ten (310) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Plymouth Street to Ridge Road. 
Princeton Avenue, west side, from Terrace Street to Plymouth Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Rand Road, east and north sides, from Ardmore to Jackson Street. 
Rand Road, south side, from Willowcrest Drive to Ardmore Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on school days. 
Ridge Road, north side, from Addison Road to Michigan Avenue. 
Ridge Road, north side, from Yale Avenue to Ardmore Avenue. 
Ridge Road, south side, from Addison Road to Lincoln Avenue. 
Ridge Road, south side, from Michigan Avenue to Harvard Avenue. 
Riordan Road, south side, from Villa Avenue to the corporate limits. 
Roosevelt Road, both sides, entire length. 
Route 83 Frontage Road, both sides, from Madison Street to a line four hundred fifty (450) feet south of the south line of Madison Street. 
Route 83 (Kingery Highway), also known as F.A. Route 102, both sides, the entire length. 
Roy Drive, north and east sides, from Ridge Road to Lincoln Avenue. 
St. Charles Road, both sides, the entire length. 
Schiller Street, north side, from Villa Avenue to Ellsworth, excluding those portions not within the corporate limits. 
Schiller Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to a point sixty (60) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue. 
Schiller Street, south side, from Yale Avenue to Ardmore Avenue. 
School Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to the west village limits. 
Second Avenue, east side, from Holly Court to St. Charles Road between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
Second Avenue, east side, from Terrace Street to North Avenue. 
Second Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to Division Street. 
Sidney Court , both sides from Ellsworth Avenue to and including the cul-de-sac between 7:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. nightly beginning Friday and ending Sunday morning. 
Stone Road, north side, from North Avenue to Michigan Avenue. 
Summit Avenue, east side, from Division Street to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Summit Avenue, east side, from Kenilworth Avenue to the village limits. 
Summit Avenue, west side, from Central Boulevard to Park Boulevard. 
Summit Avenue, west side, from Wildwood Avenue to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way. 
Sunset Drive, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Fulton Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Sunset Drive, north side, from a point eighty-eight (88) feet east of the right-of-way line of Harvard Avenue to the west right-of-way line of Yale Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, south side, from Ardmore Avenue to Fulton Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, south side, from the village limits to Harvard Avenue. 
Sunset Drive, south side, from the west right-of-way line of Yale Avenue to a point of fifty-one (51) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Yale Avenue. 
Terrace Street, both sides, from Yale Avenue to Ardmore Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Terrace Street, north side, from Addison Road to Mission Avenue. 
Terrace Street, south side, from Mission Avenue to Westwood Street. 
Terrace Street, south side, from the centerline of Westmore Avenue to a point one hundred sixteen (116) feet east of the centerline of Westmore Avenue. 
Terry Lane, south side, from Summit Avenue to Villa Avenue. 
Third Avenue, west side, from Holly Court to Stone Road. 
Van Buren Street, both sides, from Villa Avenue to Route 83 Frontage Road. 
Van Buren Street, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Summit Avenue. 
Vermont Street, north side, from Villa Avenue to Harvard Avenue. 
Vermont Street, north side, from Iowa Avenue to the village limits. 
Vermont Street, south side, from Harvard Avenue to Villa Avenue between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Villa Avenue, east side, from a point forty-four (44) feet south of the centerline of Central Boulevard to Madison Street. 
Villa Avenue, east side, from Madison Street to Roosevelt Road. 
Villa Avenue, east side, from North Avenue to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way. 
Villa Avenue, east side, from St. Charles Road to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Wildwood Avenue. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from St. Charles to Wildwood Avenue. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from St. Charles to North Avenue. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from the south curbline of the northernmost parking lot entrance to Albright Middle School (opposite Van Buren Street, hereinafter south curb ) to a point seventy-three (73) feet south of said south curb. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from Harrison Street to Roosevelt Road. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from Madison Street to Van Buren Street extended. 
Villa Avenue, west side, from Central Boulevard to Park Boulevard. 
Washington Street, north side, from Addison Road to Route 83. 
Wayside Drive, west side, from Harrison Street to the corporate limits. 
Westmore Avenue, east side, from St. Charles Road to the Chicago and Northwestern right-of-way. 
Westmore Avenue, east side, from North Avenue to Terrace Street. 
Wildwood Avenue , north side, from Illinois Avenue to a point one hundred ninety (190) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Euclid Avenue. 
Wildwood Avenue, south side, from 145 feet west of Villa Avenue to Route 83. 
Willowcrest Drive, north side, from Rand Road to a point one hundred seven (107) feet west of Leslie Lane. 
Willowcrest Drive, south side, between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on school days. 
Willowcrest Drive cul-de-sac, from the south side of Willowcrest Drive to a point one hundred seven (107) feet west of Leslie Lane on the north side of Willowcrest Drive, between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on school days. 
Wisconsin Avenue, east side, from Division Street to St. Charles Road. 
Wisconsin Avenue, east side, from Park Boulevard to Madison Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, west side, from Kenilworth Avenue to Central Boulevard. 
Wisconsin Avenue, west side, from Madison Street to Jackson Street. 
Wisconsin Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road to Elm Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
Wisconsin Avenue, west side, from Stone Road to Vermont Avenue. 
Woodrow Street, north side, from Addison Road to Harvard Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, east side, from Elm Street to Division Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Yale Avenue, east side, from Kenilworth Avenue to Central Boulevard. 
Yale Avenue, east side, from North Avenue to Armitage Avenue. 
Yale Avenue, east side, from Terrace Street to Plymouth Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except weekends and holidays. 
Yale Avenue, east side, from a point four hundred forty-nine (449) feet north of the south right-of-way line of Plymouth Street to a point five hundred seventy-two (572) feet north of the south right-of-way line of Plymouth Street. 
Yale Avenue, west side, from North Avenue to the Canadian National Railroad right-of-way. 
The roadway running between Yale Avenue and Harvard Avenue through the municipal swim pool and park areas on both sides. 
Yale Avenue, west side, from Park Boulevard to Jackson Street. 
Yale Avenue, west side, from Ridge Road to St. Charles Road. 
(d)  (1)  In addition to the parking restrictions imposed in the preceding subsections of this section 14-207, the village police department, with the approval and concurrence of the village manager, may impose restrictions or prohibitions on parking on village streets or village property as needed to accommodate special events which, due to their nature, create special traffic considerations or prohibitions for a limited period of time. Said parking restrictions or prohibitions as may be imposed will be clearly marked and posted by temporary signs. 
(2)  An owner or operator of a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section shall be responsible for towing expenses, and said vehicle violating the provisions of this section may be towed from the public streets or property within the village whenever said vehicle shall constitute a traffic hazard or causes the impending of traffic because of its position in relation to a public street or public property set forth above within the village and pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. X, 7-11-61; Ord. No. 827, § 1, 7-2-62; Ord. No. 831, § 1, 8-6-62; Ord. No. 839, 9-10-62; Ord. No. 853, § 1, 3-4-63; Ord. No. 872, § 1, 7-2-62; Ord. No. 961, § 7-11-66; Ord. No. 964, § 1, 7-18-66; Ord. No. 972, § 1, 11-7-66; Ord. No. 976, § 2, 11-2-66; Ord. No. 981, §§ 1—3, 2-20-67; Ord. No. 984, § 1, 3-6-67; Ord. No. 1021, § 1, 11-6-67; Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 1-15-68; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 1-15-68; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 9-15-69; Ord. No. 1202, § 3, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1203, §§ 1, 2, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1204, §§ 1—3, 11-16-70; Ord. No. 1210, § 1, 1-18-71; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-8-71, Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 10-11-71; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 1390, § 1, 4-30-73; Ord. No. 1435, § 1, 11-5-73; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 5-10-73; Ord. No. 1469, § 2, 6-3-74; Ord. No. 1475, §§ 1, 3, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 1484, § 1, 7-30-74; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 10-14-74; Ord. No. 1508, § 1, 11-8-74; Ord. No. 1510, § 2, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 1539, § 1, 4-7-75; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, 7-25-75; Ord. No. 1569, § 1, 8-4-75; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 8-11-75; Ord. No. 1594, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-75; Ord. No. 1595, § 1, 11-13-75; Ord. No. 1619, § 1, 2-7-76; Ord. No. 1639, § 2, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 1645, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-76; Ord. No. 1652, § 1, 5-10-76; Ord. No. 1653, § 1, 6-21-76; Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 11-8-76; Ord. No. 1679, §§ 1, 2, 11-22-76; Ord. No. 1699, § 1, 3-28-77; Ord. No. 1719, § 1, 6-27-77; Ord. No. 1722, §§ 1—4, 7, 8, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1735, § 1, 9-6-77; Ord. No. 1758, § 1, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 1760, § 1, 12-5-77; Ord. No. 1773, § 1, 12-23-78; Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-15-78; Ord. No. 1819, § 1, 12-11-78; Ord. No. 1824, § 1, 1-8-79; Ord. No. 1829, §§ 1—4, 1-24-79; Ord. No. 1849, §§ 1—3, 6-4-79; Ord. No. 1870, §§ 1—4, 10-22-79; Ord. No. 1891, §§ 1—3, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 1897, § 1, 3-17-80; Ord. No. 1943, § 1, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 1945, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 1947, § 3, 12-1-80; Ord. No. 1949, § 1, 12-1-80; Ord. No. 1960, §§ 1—3, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 1965, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-81; Ord. No. 1970, § 1(b), 4-6-81; Ord. No. 1976, § 1, 4-27-81; Ord. No. 1998, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-81; Ord. No. 2014, § 1, 1-4-82; Ord. No. 2027, §§ 1—5, 8, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2042, §§ 1, 2, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 2056, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 2070, § 1, 4-11-83; Ord. No. 2079, § 1, 5-9-83; Ord. No. 2080, § 1, 5-23-83; Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 11-14-83; Ord. No. 2117, §§ 1—3, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 2149, §§ 1, 2, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 2165, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-85; Ord. No. 2173, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 2207, § 1, 10-20-86; Ord. No. 2213, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 2259, § 1, 9-21-87; Ord. No. 2310, §§ 1, 2, 10-24-88; Ord. No. 2322, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-89; Ord. No. 2379, § 1, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 2417, § 4, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 2459, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2463, §§ 1—4, 2-11-91; Ord. No. 2490, §§ 1—4, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 2547, § 1, 1-13-92; Ord. No. 2548, § 1, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 2597, §§ 1, 2, 10-26-92; Ord. No. 2599, §§ 2, 3, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 2601, § 2, 11-9-92; Ord. No. 2618, § 1, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 2621, § 1, 2-22-93; Ord. No. 2666, §§ 3, 4, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 2690, § 1, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 2720, §§ 2, 3, 8-8-94; Ord. No. 2739, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 2749, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-95; Ord. No. 2760, § 1, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 2799, § 1, 12-11-95; Ord. No. 2857, §§ 1, 2, 11-11-96; Ord. No. 2858, § 1, 11-11-96; Ord. No. 2860, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-96; Ord. No. 2917, § 2, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 2919, § 2, 1-19-98; Ord. No. 2972, §§ 1, 2, 1-18-99; Ord. No. 3023, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 3044, § 1, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 3045, § 1, 7-24-00; Ord. No. 3116, § 1, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 3189, § 2, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 3264, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 3431, §§ 5, 6, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 3598, §§ 2, 3, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 3694, § 1, 3-26-12; Ord. No. 3892 , §§ 1, 2, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 3909 , §§ 1, 2, 4-11-16; Ord. No. 3946, §1, 2, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 4020 , §§ 2, 3, 3-26-18; Ord. No. 4021 , §§ 2, 3, 3-26-18; Ord. No. 4029 , § 1, 4-23-18; Ord. No. 4045 , §§ 9, 10, 8-13-18) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2712, adopted June 27, 1994, provided that vehicles displaying valid quarterly or daily parking permits for the Chicago & NorthWestern commuter parking lot shall be exempt from any 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. parking restrictions imposed pursuant to section 14-207(c) for the following locations only: 
Yale Avenue between Plymouth Street and Elm Street 
Princeton Avenue between Plymouth Street and Elm Street 
Ardmore Avenue between Plymouth Street and Elm Street 
Beverly Avenue between Plymouth Street and the CNW tracks 
Chatham Avenue between Plymouth Street and the CNW tracks 
Douglas Avenue between Plymouth Street and the CNW tracks 
Ellsworth Avenue between Plymouth Street and the CNW tracks 
Cornell Avenue between the CNW tracks and Oak Street 
Illinois Avenue between the CNW tracks and Division Street 
Summit Avenue between the CNW tracks and Division Street 
Plymouth Street between Yale Avenue and Ellsworth Avenue 
Vermont Street between Yale Avenue and Ellsworth Avenue 
Terrace Street between Yale Avenue and Douglas Avenue 
Maple Street between Illinois Avenue and Summit Avenue 
Division Street between Yale Avenue and Summit Avenue 
Oak Street between Ardmore Avenue and Cornell Avenue 
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval according to law and shall expire on December 31, 1994, unless otherwise sooner repealed by the corporate authorities.  
Sec. 14-208. - Restricted parking hours. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer period than two (2) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. within the following areas: 
Ardmore Avenue, both sides, from Park Boulevard to Highland Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, both sides, from Princeton Avenue to Ardmore Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from Princeton Avenue to Ardmore Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
Central Boulevard, south side, from Princeton Avenue to a point one hundred (100) feet west of the west right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from a point eighty-five (85) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue, to a point one hundred seventy-six (176) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
Central Boulevard, south side, from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
Cornell Avenue, east side, from Park Boulevard to Highland Avenue. 
Euclid Avenue, east side, from the south right-of-way line of St. Charles Road to a point one hundred forty-two (142) feet south of the south right-of-way line of St. Charles Road. 
Park Boulevard, south side, from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
Park Boulevard, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer period than four (4) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. within the following areas: 
Park Boulevard, north side, from Ardmore Avenue to Cornell Avenue, Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XII, § 8, 7-11-61; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 4-26-65; Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 6-16-69; Ord. No. 1451, § 1, 2-11-74; Ord. No. 1631, § 1, 3-29-76; Ord. No. 1722, §§ 1, 6, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 2207, §§ 6, 7, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 2334, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 2417, §§ 2, 3, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 2652, § 1, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 2909, § 2, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 2910, § 2, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 3189, §§ 3, 4, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 4020 , § 4, 3-26-18)  
Sec. 14-208.5. - Three-hour parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle for in excess of three (3) hours at any of the following locations: 
Villa Avenue , east side, from a point one hundred fifty (150) feet north of Wildwood Avenue to the centerline of Central Boulevard extended from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
Ovaltine Court , north side, from Villa Avenue east to the alley from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 4020 , § 11, 3-26-18)  
Sec. 14-209. - Thirty-minute parking. 
No person shall park a motor vehicle for in excess of thirty (30) minutes at any of the following locations: 
Oakland Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road southward a distance of 258.3 feet between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, legal holidays excepted. 
Villa Avenue , west side, from Wildwood Avenue to Central Boulevard from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1785, § 1, 4-24-78; Ord. No. 4020 , § 5, 3-26-18)  
Sec. 14-210. - Fifteen-minute parking. 
No person shall park a motor vehicle for in excess of fifteen (15) minutes at any of the following locations: 
Police station parking lot, easternmost parking row, from a point forty-seven (47) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Home Avenue to a point sixty-seven (67) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Home Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. At all other times, there will be no time restrictions on parking at the aforementioned location. 
Police station parking lot, westernmost parking row, from a point three (3) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Home Avenue to a point twenty-one (21) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Home Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 2271, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 2345, §§ 2, 3, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 3189, § 5, 7-14-03)  
Sec. 14-211. - Parking in business districts. 
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any business district for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any business district between 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XII, § 8(b), (c), 7-11-61) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, provisions concerning parking in business and commercial areas when there is a need for snow removal have been deleted from this section inasmuch as § 14-205.1 contains similar provisions.  
Sec. 14-212. - Central Boulevard parking lot. 
(a)  This section applies to that municipal parking lot located at the southwest corner of Central and Villa Avenue. 
(b)  There shall be no parking on the south side of the municipal parking lot west of Villa Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 1388, §§ 1—4, 4-23-73; Ord. No. 1632, §§ 1, 3, 3-29-76; Ord. No. 2117, § 4, 7-9-84; Ord. No. 4020 , §§ 6, 7, 3-26-18)  
Sec. 14-213. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4020 , § 8, adopted Mar. 26, 2018, repealed § 14-213, which pertained to Cortesi Street municipal parking lot and derived from Ord. No. 1722, § 9, adopted July 5, 1977; and Ord. No. 2247, § 1, adopted July 6, 1987.  
Sec. 14-214. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4020 , § 9, adopted Mar. 26, 2018, repealed § 14-214, which pertained to Park Boulevard parking lot and derived from Ord. No. 1652, § 1, adopted May 10, 1976.  
Sec. 14-215. - Permit parking. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 14-216, no person shall park a motor vehicle on the following described village-owned parking facilities from 12:01 a.m. Monday through 12:01 a.m. Saturday without a valid village permit issued and displayed in accordance with either subsections (b) or (c) below: 
(1)  A parcel of land including Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 in Townley's Villa Park Highlands and the abutting street right-of-way located between Ardmore and Douglas Avenues adjacent to the north side of the Chicago and North Western Railroad right-of-way. 
(2)  Those parking facilities located at the Jefferson Park municipal swimming pool located at 341 North Harvard Avenue. 
(3)  A parcel of land bounded on the west by North Ardmore Avenue, on the north by the Chicago and Northwestern Railway, on the east by North Illinois Avenue, and on the south by 334 and 336 North Illinois, 329 and 328 North Cornell Avenue and 331 North Ardmore Avenue (part of Lots 53 and 54 of Robertson's Villa Park Subdivision). 
(b)  Quarterly fee permits. 
(1)  Permits for display on vehicles using the aforedescribed commuter parking facilities may be obtained by submitting the appropriate written application to the Village Finance Department, 20 S. Ardmore, Villa Park, Illinois 60181-2696, accompanied by the appropriate quarterly permit fee. Permits shall be sold on a quarterly basis and the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per quarter for each permit, irrespective of residency, or pro rata for any fraction of a quarter remaining at the time of purchase. Each person requesting a permit shall provide all information listed on the application, including vehicle license plate number(s) for each vehicle that will be authorized to use the permit; provided, however, that not more than two (2) vehicles shall be authorized to use the same quarterly permit, but not at the same time. The permit shall be issued only for the particular vehicle or vehicles for which a vehicle license plate number is listed on the application and shall be valid only if affixed and displayed on only one (1) of such vehicles, unless transfer to a different vehicle is authorized by the village finance department. Such authorization to transfer shall be valid only if in writing. 
(2)  Parking permits are to be affixed to the top edge of the rear window, equal distance from each side (center). In the case of a vehicle with a rear window of material other than glass, or without a rear window (i.e., panel trucks, vans, etc.) the permit may be affixed to the lower right side of the front window (passenger side). Should instances arise that are not specifically addressed in this section regarding location of permits, the finance director may issue such regulations regarding display of permits as are consistent with the provisions and intent of this section, and shall notify purchasers of permits of such regulations. The permit shall at all times be clearly displayed. Quarterly permits shall be valid only in spaces designated for quarterly permit parking. In the event the permit is affixed and displayed on a vehicle other than either a vehicle for which the permit was issued, or a vehicle for which a transfer was authorized in writing, the permit shall not be valid for the remainder of the quarter, and all fees paid for the permit shall be forfeited. 
(3)  Parking of any vehicle with an invalid or void permit shall be a violation of this section and subject to the penalties set forth in section 14-218, in addition to the fee forfeiture provided above. The village manager, or his designee, may require applicants to complete such form or forms as may be necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Daily fee permits. Permits will be sold at the village police department for display on vehicles using the above-described commuter parking facilities on a daily basis at four dollars ($4.00) per day. Daily fee permits may be purchased for more than one (1) day but shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) consecutive days, and shall be displayed in the same manner as quarterly permits. Vehicles using daily fee permits must park in the area designed for quarterly permit parking and not in those daily parking spaces governed by section 14-216, below. 
(d)  Designated parking stalls. Parking shall be allowed only in properly designated parking stalls. It shall be a violation of this section to park a motor vehicle in any area of the parking lot not properly striped for parking, including areas such as aisles, lanes, and entryways. Parking pursuant to either quarterly or daily fee permits shall be limited to those areas posted for quarterly permit parking and it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any spaces designated pursuant to section 14-216. 
(Ord. No. 1430, § 1, 10-1-73; Ord. No. 2351, § 1, 6-12-88; Ord. No. 2392, § 1, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 2440, §§ 1—4, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 2555, § 1, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 2729, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 2779, § 2, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 3429, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 3939 , § 1, 10-24-16)  
Sec. 14-216. - Daily parking, nonpermit. 
At least fifty (50) daily parking spaces will be provided in the lot designated in subsection 14-215(a)(l). Any number of parking spaces in the lot designated in subsection 14-215(a)(3) may be designated daily parking spaces by the village manager. The fee for such daily parking shall be two dollars ($2.00) per day from 12:01 a.m. Monday through 12:01 a.m. Saturday and shall be payable in a manner as determined by the village manager. The parking space user shall be responsible for identifying the parking space number when making payment. 
The village manager, or his designee, is authorized to adopt and post such instructions and regulations as may be necessary for the orderly collection of such fees. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any space designated for such daily parking without having paid for said space in the manner determined by the village manager. Parking permits issued pursuant to section 14-215, either quarterly or daily fee, shall not be valid for parking in daily parking spaces regulated by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1981, § 3, 6-15-81; Ord. No. 2351, § 2, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 2440, § 5, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 2779, § 3, 7-24-95; Ord. No. 3429, § 3, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 3939 , § 2, 10-24-16)  
Sec. 14-217. - Peddling from parked vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any business street in order to peddle merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XII, 7-11-61)  
Sec. 14-218. - Parking vehicles for sale. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street in the village for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which merchandise is peddled. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 2, 11-23-81)  
Sec. 14-219. - Parking of unregistered vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle which is not properly registered with the state, or which does not exhibit valid state registration plates, on any street within the village or on any village-owned properties. 
(Ord. No. 2822, § 4, 4-22-96)  
Sec. 14-220. - Violations. 
The police department is authorized to place violation notices on every vehicle stopped or parked in violation of this article and on any vehicle, the equipment for which is maintained in a manner that is not in compliance with this chapter. If such penalties are paid directly to the police department within ten (10) days from the date of violation, such penalties shall be in the amount set forth in this section. If such penalty is not paid within ten (10) days from the date of issuance, the prescribed fine amount shall be due and owing as set forth in the fine schedule. All violations shall be administratively adjudicated in accordance with the provisions of chapter 26 of the Municipal Code. The last column of the fine schedule contains the penalty amount for each class of violation, which amount shall be subject to reduction for early payment as follows: 
FINE SCHEDULE 
Fine 
Schedule 	If Paid 
Within 10 Days 	If Paid AFTER 10 
Days but BEFORE 
1st Hearing Date 	If Paid AFTER 
Nonappearance at 
1st Hearing Date 
but BEFORE 
2nd Hearing 	If Paid After 
Nonappearance at 
2nd Hearing Date 
A 	$ 35.00 	$ 75.00 	$125.00 	$250.00 
B 	  50.00 	  75.00 	 150.00 	 250.00 
C 	 350.00 	 350.00 	 350.00 	 350.00 
 
Explanation of fine schedule: 
"A" - Parking violations 
"B" - Equipment violations, including: 
•  Loud muffler 
•  No headlights 
•  Other vehicle equipment compliance violations 
"C" - Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 3, 6-12-89; Ord. No. 2595, § 1, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 3249, § 2, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 3342, § 2, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 3487, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 3532, § 3, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 3927 , § 1, 8-8-16)  
Sec. 14-221. - Parking spaces for handicapped. 
It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or handicap decals issued to a physically handicapped person, pursuant to Section 3-616 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Laws or such devices as local authorities deem proper as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place specifically reserved by the posting of an official sign, for motor vehicles bearing such registration plates or decals. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 3, 11-23-81)  
Sec. 14-222. - Parking at side of street. 
(a)  Where angle parking is not permitted, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway or street shall be so stopped or parked within the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. Except as may be provided in paragraph (b) below, no vehicle shall park with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb or shoulder of the roadway. 
(b)  Where angle parking is not permitted, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway or street shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
(c)  Where angle parking is permitted and the streets have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the proper angle to the curb and within the area indicated by the appropriate street markings. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 4, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 2474, § 1, 4-15-91)  
Sec. 14-223. - Designated parking spaces for the handicapped. 
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or handicapped decals issued to a physically handicapped person, pursuant to Section 3-616 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code or such devices as local authorities deem proper as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking space designated at any of the following locations: 
Ardmore Avenue , east side, from a point thirty-two (32) feet to seventy-four (74) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Vermont Street. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from a point twenty-two (22) feet to thirty-nine (39) west of the west right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from a point eighty-five (85) feet to one hundred nineteen (119) east of the east right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, north side, from a point seven (7) feet to forty-one (41) west of the west right-of-way line of Cornell Avenue. 
Central Boulevard, south side, from a point two hundred sixty-five (265) feet to two hundred eighty-two (282) west of the west right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue. 
Kenilworth Avenue , south side, from Myrtle Avenue to Cortesi Avenue. 
Park Boulevard, south side, from a point thirty-two and five-tenths (32.5) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue to a point forty-four and five-tenths (44.5) feet east of the east right-of-way line of Ardmore Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 2345, § 1, 5-15-89; Ord. No. 2668, § 2, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 2783, § 1, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 3189, §§ 6, 7, 7-14-03; Ord. No. 4020 , § 10, 3-26-18; Ord. No. 4021 , § 4, 3-26-18)  
Sec. 14-224. - Designated emergency access routes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, except authorized emergency vehicles, to use or enter upon any portion of any right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the village that has been designated by the village as an emergency access route. For purposes of this section, the following are designated as emergency access routes: 
(1)  An area commencing at the intersection of the existing right-of-way of Van Buren Street (fifty-eight (58) feet wide) with the western right-of-way line of the Robert Kingery Highway (State Route 83). Said emergency access route extends from the eastern terminus of the Van Buren Street cul-de-sac easterly to its intersection with the Frontage Road within the right-of-way of the Robert Kingery Highway. 
(2)  An area commencing near the intersection of the existing right-of-way of Madison Avenue (sixty-six (66) feet wide) with the western right-of-way line of the Robert Kingery Highway (State Route 83). Said emergency access route extends from the existing cul-de-sac south of the Madison Avenue right-of-way in a southerly direction to its intersection with the Frontage Road within the right-of-way of the Robert Kingery Highway. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall pay a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. A fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid for each subsequent violation. 
(Ord. No. 2587A, § 1, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 14-225. - Permit parking - north side of North Avenue frontage road. 
(a)  No person shall park a motor vehicle on the north side of the North Avenue frontage road from North Kramer Avenue west to the North Avenue - Illinois Route 64 right-of-way without a valid village permit issued and displayed in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Monthly fee permits. 
(1)  Permits for display on vehicles using the parking described in subsection (a) above, may be obtained by submitting a written application to the Village Police Department, 40 South Ardmore, Villa Park, Illinois 60181, accompanied by the monthly permit fee. Permits shall be sold on a monthly basis beginning thirty (30) days before the beginning of the next month, for one (1) space per address of an adjacent home with addresses from _____ North Avenue to _____ North Avenue on a first come first serve basis. The fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month irrespective of any fraction of a month remaining at the time of purchase. Each person requesting a permit shall provide all information as may be necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section, including vehicle license plate number for the vehicle that will be authorized to use the permit. The permit shall be issued only for the particular vehicle for which a vehicle license plate number is listed on the application and shall be valid only if affixed and displayed on such vehicle, unless transfer to a different vehicle is authorized by the police department. Such authorization to transfer shall be valid only if in writing. 
(2)  Parking permits are to be affixed to the top edge of the rear window, equal distance from each side (center). In the case of a vehicle with a rear window of material other than glass, or without a rear window (i.e., panel trucks, vans, etc.) the permit may be affixed to the lower right side of the front window (passenger side). Should instances arise that are not specifically addressed in this section regarding location of permits, the police chief may issue such regulations regarding display of permits as are consistent with the provisions and intent of this section, and shall notify purchasers of permits of such regulations. The permit shall at all times be clearly displayed. In the event the permit is affixed and displayed on a vehicle other than either a vehicle for which the permit was issued or on a vehicle for which a transfer was not authorized in writing, the permit shall be void, not valid for the remainder of the month and the fee paid for the permit shall be forfeited. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle without a permit, with an invalid or void permit or not in a properly designated parking stall. Such a violation shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 14-220, in addition to the fee forfeiture provided above. 
(Ord. No. 3892 , § 3, 12-14-15)  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE RELOCATORS' REPORTING SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 14-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Vehicle relocator: Any person, corporation or other entity engaged in the business of vehicle relocation pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 2836, § 2, 7-22-96)  
Sec. 14-302. - Reports required. 
The vehicle relocator shall appear in person at the police department and shall file a report with the department within one (1) hour after a trespassing vehicle has been removed by the vehicle relocator. The vehicle relocator's report shall contain the following information: a complete description of the vehicle, registration numbers, if possible, the locations from which and to which the vehicle was removed, the time of removal, and any other information required by the police department to identify the vehicle or its owner. The chief of police shall promulgate vehicle relocation reporting forms to be used by vehicle relocators for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2836, § 2, 7-22-96)  
Sec. 14-303. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 14-303, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2836, § 2, adopted July 22, 1996.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 14-401. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following words and terms shall be as defined in this section. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it in other ordinances of the village and, if not defined in any other village ordinances, it shall have the meaning ascribed in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. 
Abandoned vehicle: 
(1)  A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way and: 
a.  In such state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or 
b.  That has been unmoved for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours and, because of its condition or the period during which it has not been moved or some other circumstance, appears to have been, and will be presumed to have been, abandoned by its owner; or 
(2)  A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any other ordinances of the village (including article IV of chapter 15) and which does not fall into the categories of "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicles, and therefore is not subject to an immediate tow. 
Hazardous vehicle : 
(1)  A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle; or 
(2)  A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of the members of the public; or 
(3)  A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or 
(4)  A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper municipal snow removal from a public street, way or alley; or 
(5)  A vehicle which is parked in a fire lane on private property; provided that, the village has entered into a specific agreement with the owner of said property with respect to the enforcement of fire lane violations. 
Owner. A person who holds legal title to the vehicle or the right of possession of the vehicle. 
Unlawful vehicle : 
(1)  A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search and seizure by the police department; or 
(2)  A vehicle parked in violation of State of Illinois Statutes or village ordinances which prohibit parking at the location in question or which prohibit parking during specified hours or which prohibit parking for the period of time for which the vehicle has been parked. 
Unlawfully operated or unlawfully used vehicle: A vehicle when the operator of such vehicle has been charged with any of the following: 
(1)  Commission or attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq.; 
(2)  Driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs (as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a)); 
(3)  Commission or attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of the provisions of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1; 
(4)  Commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the provisions of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100; 
(5)  Unlawful use of a weapon in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1; aggravated discharge of a firearm in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5; unlawful possession of a firearm and firearm ammunition in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1; 
(6)  Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is revoked or suspended (as provided in 625 ILCS 5/6-303); 
(7)  Soliciting, possessing or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/2 or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.; 
(8)  Operating or using the motor vehicle with an expired driver's license in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-101 where the period of expiration is greater than one (1) year; 
(9)  Operating or using the motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or 
(10)  Operating or using the motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges that the driver violated the offenses of driving while license is revoked or suspended (625 ILCS 5/8-303), operating the motor vehicle without a valid driver's license (625 ILCS 5/6-101); and/or driving under the influence of alcohol, other drugs, intoxicating compound(s) or any combination thereof (625 ILCS 5/11-501). 
Vehicle : Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, except devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-402. - Abandonment prohibited. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the village, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-403. - Leaving wrecked, nonoperating, etc., vehicle on street. 
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street or highway in the village. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-404. - Inoperable motor vehicles declared nuisance. 
Inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-405. - Duty to comply with notice to dispose. 
As provided in article IV of chapter 15, all persons are required to dispose of any abandoned or inoperative motor vehicles under their control or on their property upon written notice received from the corporate authorities or from the chief of police or any member of his department designated by him commanding such disposition of such abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-406. - Administrative penalties/vehicle possession. 
(a)  An administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is hereby imposed on the owner of record of any vehicle towed or impounded in violation of this article. 
(b)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to this article shall remain impounded until: 
(1)  A bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is posted with the police department and all applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent. All bond money posted shall be held by the village until the hearing officer issues a decision or, if there is a judicial review, until the court issues its decision or it the owner fails to timely request a post-tow hearing; or 
(2)  The penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is paid to the village and all applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent. 
(c)  If a post-tow hearing is requested by the owner of record as provided in chapter 26 and if it is determined after the hearing that the vehicle was improperly towed, then the owner of record shall be refunded the administrative penalty and towing charges incurred. 
(d)  Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty-five (35) days after a final judgment is rendered in favor of the village or by the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law; provided, however, that where proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the subject vehicle may not be disposed of by the village except as consistent with those proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 2, 6-11-12) 
Editor's note— Section 14-406 was formerly entitled "Administrative penalties/vehicle possession" which was deleted by Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, and derived from: Ord. No. 3432, § 2, adopted July 16, 2007; Ord. No. 3487, § 3, adopted May 19, 2008; and Ord. No. 3622, § 2, adopted Nov. 8, 2010, and was further amended by Ord. No. 3701, § 2, adopted June 11, 2012, by adding new provision, as set out herein.  
Sec. 14-407. - Towing permitted. 
Any hazardous, abandoned, unlawful, unlawfully operated or unlawfully used vehicle may be towed by the village or its designee from any highway, street or other public location, provided that the procedures hereinafter set forth in this article are followed. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-408. - Authorization for towing. 
The towing of vehicles by the village, or by its approved towing service operators on behalf of the village, shall be authorized only by the police department and only under the circumstances herein provided. Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the police department until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. Within three (3) business days after towing a vehicle pursuant to this article, a notice shall be sent to or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle affording the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this article. 
(1)  Towing without notice; immediate tows. Hazardous or unlawful vehicles may be towed without prior notice, except that the police officer shall notify any person who identifies himself to the police officer as the owner of record of the vehicle of the fact of the vehicle's seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a post-tow administrative hearing to be conducted under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Unlawfully operated or unlawfully used vehicles. Unless otherwise provided by law (e.g., driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is revoked or suspended (as provided in 625 ILCS 5/6-303)) unlawfully operated or unlawfully used vehicles shall be subject to being towed immediately unless the operator of the vehicle can promptly arrange for another person, who may lawfully operate the vehicle, to assume immediate control of the vehicle. 
(3)  Stolen vehicles. When an unlawful vehicle is one that has been reported as stolen, the owner should be, when practicable, notified by telephone or other means and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle, if he so wishes, to avoid incurring the expenses of a police ordered tow. Provided, however, that the vehicle may be towed if the owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle was reported stolen or at any time thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 3622, § 3, 11-8-10)  
Sec. 14-409. - Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Towing with prior notice; abandoned vehicles. Abandoned vehicles may be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the affording of an opportunity for a hearing as provided in sections 14-409 and 14-410 and, to the extent required by law, after obtaining an appropriate court order allowing the tow from private property. 
(b)  Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the owner or shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the secretary of state. In the event that an out-of-state vehicle is proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the secretary of state of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished, though in no case will the village be required to delay towing more than seven (7) days after the date of the mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no request for a hearing has been received within that seven-day period. 
(c)  A "notice of intent to tow" sticker, with the earliest date upon which the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the police department, shall be placed on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-410. - Pre-tow hearing procedures. 
(a)  Opportunity for hearing. The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven (7) days after the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in writing, a pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle may be towed if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the seven-day period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this article will be deemed waived. 
(b)  Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow notice. The village shall not be required to delay towing longer than such fourteen-day period. 
(c)  Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests for a pre-tow hearing are to be made to the office of the village manager. Requests for hearing by persons who reside more than fifty (50) miles from the village may be made by mail. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the police department. At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date and time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require. 
(d)  Appointment of hearing officer. The village manager or his designee shall serve as the hearing officer. In no case shall that hearing officer be an individual who was involved in the initial decision to tow the vehicle. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow or any other village personnel. 
(e)  Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make a written decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the State of Illinois or the ordinances of the village, with a specific statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall be provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing decision. 
(f)  Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this article, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed or, to the extent required by law, than an appropriate court order for towing from private property be obtained, with any towing and storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The owner of said vehicle having had such a hearing may avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle. 
(g)  Decision not to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to support towing of the vehicle, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle shall not be towed. The village shall furnish a copy of such decision to the owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from the outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the village unless the circumstances under which the decision was rendered have changed. If at some subsequent time the village should wish to tow the vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures required for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle. 
(h)  Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. Originals or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the police department for a period of at least five (5) years after each hearing, or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The village or the owner may contest the decision of the hearing officer in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-411. - Post-tow notice for hazardous, unlawful, unlawfully operated and unlawfully used vehicles. 
(a)  Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the owner of the hazardous, unlawful, unlawfully operated or unlawfully used vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the secretary of state unless the notice is personally delivered to the owner, in which case the date and time of delivery and the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be noted in the police department records or reports. The notice shall be delivered within twenty-four (24) hours of the tow of the hazardous, unlawful, unlawfully operated or unlawfully used vehicle in the manner provided in section 14-408. In the event that the village has towed an out-of-state hazardous or unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the secretary of state of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished. 
(b)  Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing service operators shall prominently post at least one (1) sign, with dimensions of at least twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches indicating the opportunity and procedures for a hearing to contest the validity of the towing of the vehicle. The sign shall be placed in locations readily visible to the public transacting business at any towing facility. If a towing service operator performs services for more than one (1) municipality, the information for contacting the various appropriate village offices can be listed in one (1) such sign. 
(c)  Request for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings are to be made at the office indicated on the notice within fifteen (15) days of the mailing or personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be deemed waived. Requests for hearing by persons who reside more than fifty (50) miles from the village may be made in person or by mail received within the fifteen-day period. 
(d)  Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove same, the owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his identity, ownership of the vehicle, or his right to possession, sign a receipt for the vehicle, pay the administrative penalty to the village (or a bond therefor), and pay the amount currently owed for towing and storage fees to the towing service operator. The chief of police is authorized to promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to establish these facts. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 14-412. - Post-tow hearing procedures. 
(a)  Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the police department as set forth in section 14-411, shall be provided the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to determine the validity of such tow and any administrative penalty, towing or storage charges. The hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any towed vehicle. The owner shall be deemed to have waived any right to a post-tow hearing unless a hearing is requested within fourteen (14) days of the mailing or delivery of the post-tow notice, as provided in section 14-411. 
(b)  Hearing. The nature of the hearing and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be as provided in Article I of Chapter 26. 
(c)  Scheduling of post-tow hearings. The post-tow hearing shall be scheduled and held as provided in article I of chapter 26. 
(d)  Conduct of post-tow hearing. The hearing officer shall review all evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the police department or other municipal employees and shall make a finding, based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented, as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of the vehicle. The village must establish such authority by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  Post-tow hearing decision. For each hearing, the hearing officer shall complete a post-tow hearing decision, attach such decision to the police department's original vehicle towing report, and supply a copy of the decision to the owner by personal delivery, if the owner is present, or by mail. 
(f)  Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. All originals or copies of all notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the police department for a period of at least five (5) years after each hearing, or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The village or the owner may contest the decision of the hearing officer in any manner provided by law. 
(g)  Towing services subject to ordinance. Notwithstanding any other ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary, any towing service operator authorized to perform tows on behalf of the village must perform its services subject to the provisions of this article. However, the towing company shall have the right to recover the reasonable value of its services for police-ordered tows, which are not paid by the vehicle owner, from the village. Provided, however, that if a tow or the charge for a tow is found by a court to be illegal and the towing service operator is required to return the charge for the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the village shall not be liable to reimburse the operator for the towing charges. 
(Ord. No. 3432, § 2, 7-16-07; Ord. No. 3701, § 3, 6-11-12)  
Chapter 15 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, ch. 5; garbage and trash, ch. 10; offenses—miscellaneous, ch. 16; litter control, § 16-114; disorderly conduct, § 16-115. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-101. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the word "nuisance" is hereby defined as the doing of an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or 
(2)  Offends decency; or 
(3)  Is offensive to the senses; or 
(4)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
(5)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6)  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
State Law reference— Power of corporate authorities to define, prevent and abate nuisances, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-60-2.  
Sec. 15-102. - Illustrative enumeration. 
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Noxious weeds or other rank vegetation. 
(2)  Accumulation of inoperable motor vehicles, rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things. 
(3)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(4)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinary fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(5)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises. 
(6)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(7)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(8)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(9)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(10)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(11)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(12)  The keeping or confinement of livestock or fowl so situated that foul odors are emitted onto the property of others. 
(13)  Placing materials on parkways; leaves and grass clippings on streets and sidewalks. 
a.  The placement or causing or permitting any tangible thing to be placed upon or permitted to remain upon any parkway within the village, except for the purpose of being picked up by a regularly scheduled scavenger service; or upon any parkway sooner than one (1) day before the regularly scheduled day for pickup; or allowing or permitting containers or other tangible things to remain upon any parkway beyond the day following the regularly scheduled day for pickup. 
b.  The placement or causing to be placed upon any public street or sidewalk either leaves or grass clippings, except that leaves or grass clippings contained in plastic bags or other containers suitable for disposal of garbage may be placed in the parkway for pickup by a regularly scheduled scavenger service in accordance with subsection (13)a. of this section. 
(14)  Using or occupying any part of a street, parkway, alley or sidewalk of the village for the purpose of carrying on, soliciting or promoting any trade, business or other enterprise which impedes, interferes with, or makes dangerous, travel thereon; or causing or permitting the storage of any product, supplies for or equipment incidental to the operations of such business or enterprises, upon any street, parkway, alley or sidewalk within the village. 
(15)  Creating or permitting to be created or remain upon any premises within the village for a period of more than thirty (30) days the storing, piling, scattering, accumulating, heaping, amassing or collecting of bricks, concrete block, straw, lumber, structural iron, pipe, roofing materials or any building materials where the same is in public view and where the same may or does constitute a safety hazard to children playing in the area or that the same may or does become an attraction to or haven for vermin or rodents. Building material stored outdoors on any site for construction authorized by a building permit shall be used or incorporated into proposed building within thirty (30) days of arrival upon the site. 
(16)  Allowing, causing or permitting garbage, rubbish, or waste materials to be set out in containers which are not covered or which permit or allow the contents of such containers to be accessible to rodents or animals or that permit the contents thereof to be scattered or blown about. 
(17)  The dumping, depositing, storing or placing by any person of any garbage, rubbish, trash or refuse upon property within the village, except in covered containers. 
(18)  Causing or permitting any premises within the village to become or remain littered with tin cans, glass jars, bottles, scrap glass, paper cartons, scraps of paper, boxes, ashes, iron, old hot water tanks, oil storage tanks, tin or other metal materials, refuse, rubbish, junk, waste, manure, straw, piles of grass clippings, lumber, old bricks, concrete blocks, chunks of broken concrete, plaster board, discarded furniture, household appliances, mattresses, bed springs, portable swimming pools in disrepair, or other like matter or things. 
(19)  Placing or spreading poisons upon any real estate for the purpose of killing vermin except in accordance with the provisions of a written permit to be issued by the village building commissioner. 
(20)  Allowing or permitting the grazing or riding of animals upon the village parkways, or on private property without the permission of the owner thereof, or in such a manner as to interfere with anyone walking upon the public sidewalks, or that they may cause damage to ornamental plantings; or causing, allowing or permitting dogs or other animals to excrete bodily wastes upon the premises of others within the village. 
(21)  Open burning of refuse. The burning of leaves or other refuse at an outdoor location within the village is prohibited, except fires set and supervised or authorized by the chief of the fire department of the village for public safety, training or recreational purposes. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this subsection shall not prohibit the use of outdoor fireplaces, charcoal burners, and the like for cooking food. 
(22)  By allowing or permitting any property owner, agent or manager to rent any residential unit, or a single-family dwelling or residential building or a dwelling unit in an apartment complex, or a multifamily residence whether or not governed by a homeowners' association, to a tenant who allows any of the following offenses to occur relating to the tenant, member of the tenant's household, guest, invitee or any party under control of the tenant: Murder, kidnapping, aggravated kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, pandering, obscenity, child pornography, sale of obscene publication, possession of explosives, unlawful use of weapons, unlawful possession of weapons, sale of firearms, gambling, keeping a gambling place, concealing a fugitive, violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, violation of the Cannabis Control Act, or commission of any felony or class A misdemeanor under the State of Illinois or under federal laws, rules or regulations not specifically listed above. 
(23)  By allowing or permitting by any property owner, agent or manager, to rent any residential unit, or a single-family dwelling or residential building or a dwelling unit in an apartment complex, or a multifamily residence whether or not governed by a homeowners' association, to a tenant who allows a member of the tenant's household, guest, invitee or any party under control of the tenant, any of the following to occur: commission of two (2) or more village ordinance violations within a six-month period; or, more than two (2) calls for police service in a six-month period including, but not limited to calls that may fall within the descriptions listed above. 
(Ord. No. 1119, § 1, 5-19-69; Ord. No. 1187, § 2, 8-3-70; Ord. No. 1192, § 1, 8-31-71; Ord. No. 2055, § 1, 12-20-82; Ord. No. 2312, § 1, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3703, § 1, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 15-103. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance.  
Sec. 15-104. - Notice to abate. 
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the village or within the village's extraterritorial jurisdiction, a duly designated officer or employee of the village shall give forty-eight (48) hours written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, only one (1) notice shall be required to be provided during any calendar year for a particular category of nuisance violation, and additional notice beyond the initial notice shall not be required if the same type of nuisance recurs on the property during that calendar year (a "recurring nuisance violation"). Recurring nuisance violations shall be subject to immediate abatement and/or fines without additional notice to the violator, the owner of the property or the occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 2, 4-9-01)  
Sec. 15-105. - Contents of notice. 
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary. 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the village will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(6)  A statement that if the nuisance recurs the village may immediately and without further notice abate the recurring nuisance and/or fine the violator, the owner of the property, or the occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 2, 4-9-01)  
Sec. 15-106. - Service of notice. 
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by any manner in which legal process may be served pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 3084, § 2, 4-9-01)  
Sec. 15-107. - Abatement by village. 
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this article to abate the same, a duly designated officer or employee of the village shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.  
Sec. 15-108. - Village's costs declared lien. 
Any and all costs incurred by the village in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Notice of such lien shall be to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied.  
Sec. 15-109. - Refrigerated transport vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and/or maintain in operation or to allow the operation and/or maintenance in operation of refrigerated transport vehicles, refrigerator trucks, or reefers between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any place within the village within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from any building or buildings used exclusively for residential purposes. The notice and abatement provisions of sections 15-103 through 15-108 shall apply to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2956, § 2, 8-24-98)  
Sec. 15-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 15-110, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2956, § 2, adopted Aug. 24, 1998.  
ARTICLE II. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Trees on public property, ch. 21, art. III. 
State Law reference— Power of corporate authorities to control Dutch Elm Disease, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-12. 
 
Sec. 15-201. - Infected trees and beetles; prohibited, nuisance declared. 
(a)  Trees or parts thereof in a dead or dying condition that serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle ( Scolytus multistristus ) are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful for the person owning property where the same is situated to possess or keep them. 
(b)  All trees which are infected with the Dutch Elm Disease ( Ceratocystis ulmi ) are hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for a person owning property to possess or keep such trees. 
(Ord. No. 757, §§ 1, 1a, 9-6-60; Ord. No. 1252, 7-19-71)  
Sec. 15-202. - Inspections. 
All employees of the village are hereby authorized to inspect and examine any tree in the village to determine whether or not it is infected by the Dutch Elm Disease. Upon discovering that any such tree is so infected the owner of the premises shall be notified of this fact. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 2, 9-6-60)  
Sec. 15-203. - Removal by landowner required. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any land upon which there is located any tree which is infected with Dutch Elm Disease, or which serves as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle ( Scolytys multistristus ), to remove such tree and properly dispose of it within ten (10) days after notice to do so from the village. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 3, 9-6-60)  
Sec. 15-204. - Removal by village. 
When the owner of such property refuses or neglects to remove any tree as required herein, the village manager is authorized to provide for its removal and destruction and to cause to be filed a lien on such property for the reasonable cost thereof in the manner and form provided by Ill. Rev. Stat. § 11-20-12. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 5, 9-6-60; Ord. No. 1156, § 1, 11-17-69) 
State Law reference— Lien for removal of trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-12.  
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of corporate authorities to provide for weed removal at expense of property owner, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-7. 
 
Sec. 15-301. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "noxious weeds" shall mean jimson, burdock, ragweed, cocklebur, Canada thistles ( Cirsium arvense ) and all of its varieties, perennial sow thistles ( Sonchus arvensis ), European bindweed ( Convolvulus arvensis ), European Barberry ( Barberis vulgaris ), leafy spurge ( Tithyalus esula, Russian Knapweed (Centura repens), hoary cress (Lepidium draba), tropical milkweed ( Asclepias curassavica ), dandelion and the like weeds. 
(Ord. No. 866, § II, 7-15-63; Ord. No. 3922 , § 2, 7-11-16)  
Sec. 15-302. - Prohibited; nuisance declared. 
All noxious weeds, and any other weeds, grass or plants, other than ornamental shrubbery, growing to a height exceeding six (6) inches, which are found growing on any lot or tract of land in the village are hereby declared a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit such weeds to grow or remain on any such place. 
(Ord. No. 866, § I, 7-15-63)  
Sec. 15-303. - Notice to abate. 
The village manager may serve or cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this article, a notice demanding the abatement thereof within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 866, § IV, 7-15-63)  
Sec. 15-304. - Cutting by village. 
If the owner of real estate served with a notice pursuant hereto refuses or neglects to cut the weeds within ten (10) days of the service of such notice, the village manager may order that they be cut using for that purpose employees of the village, or the board of trustees may enter into a contract with any responsible person for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 866, § III, 7-15-63)  
Sec. 15-305. - Lien for removal. 
(a)  The cost and expense of cutting the weeds upon real estate upon order of the village shall be kept separately for each parcel and, within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred, the village clerk, in the name of the village, or the person performing the service, in his own name, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds which shall be a lien upon the real estate superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens. Such lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in the real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed cutting and prior to the filing of the notice, or as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights to the real estate have arisen prior to the filing of the notice. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and the date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the village. 
(b)  Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner, or person interested in the real estate, after notice of lien has been filed, the village clerk, on behalf of the village, or the person in whose name the lien has been filed, shall execute a release of such lien which may be filed of record. 
(Ord. No. 866, §§ V, VI, 7-15-63) 
State Law reference— Lien for weed removal, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-20-7.  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2034, enacted July 19, 1982, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—10 as herein set out in §§ 15-401—15-410 was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 14; offenses, ch. 16; inoperable vehicles on residential property, § 16-116. 
 
Sec. 15-401. - Abandoned, wrecked, junked, etc. vehicles declared nuisance; applicability of article. 
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle or motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition whether attended or not upon any property within the village for a period of time in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of the article. This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise actively operated within an office on the subject premises and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the village, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-402. - Notice to remove. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the building commissioner of the village that any nuisance as defined in section 15-401 of this article exists in the village, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 2, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-403. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the village, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 3, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-404. - Notice procedure. 
The building commissioner of the village shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located at least seven (7) days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located, and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his last known address. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 4, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-405. - Contents of notice. 
The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article, and the notice shall advise that, upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the village or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 5, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-406. - Request for hearing. 
The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the village manager of the village within the seven-day period of compliance prescribed in section 15-404 for the purpose of defending the charges of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 6, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-407. - Procedures for hearing. 
The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least three (3) days in advance thereof. At such hearing, the village and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 7, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-408. - Removal of motor vehicle from property by chief of police. 
If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the seven-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is held, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the village manager, the chief of police, or his designee, shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 8, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-409. - Notice of removal and impoundment. 
Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the chief of police of the village, or his designee, shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle, or vehicles, has been impounded and stored for violation of this article. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle, or vehicles, is stored and the costs incurred by the village for removal. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 9, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 15-410. - Disposition of vehicles. 
Removed vehicles shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with Chapter 95½, Sections 4-200 and 4-214, of the Illinois Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2034, § 10, 7-19-82)  
ARTICLE V. - COMPOSTING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Community development department and director thereof, § 7-101. 
 
Sec. 15-501. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to promote the recycling of landscape waste through composting and to establish minimum standards for composting. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-502. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
Compost: The humus-like product of the process of composting landscape waste, which may be used as a soil conditioner. 
Compost bin: A freestanding enclosure, made of concrete blocks, brick, wood, woven wire or durable plastic, which surrounds a compost pile. 
Compost pile: An area in which composting takes place. 
Composting: The biological treatment process by which microorganisms decompose the organic fraction of landscape waste and produce compost. 
Garbage waste: Waste resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Landscape waste: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. 
Lot: For the purposes of this article, any two (2) or more contiguous lots of record, containing only one (1) principal structure, which are owned by the same entity or individual shall be viewed as a single lot; and all interior lot lines shall be disregarded; and the lot lines shall be those lot lines on the exterior of the lots. 
Refuse: Paper, cartons, boxes, cardboard, wood (excluding landscape waste), wood furniture, bedding, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish, lumber, lumber scraps, shavings and food processing wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-503. - Standards and conditions. 
All composting shall be done in compliance with the following standards and conditions: 
(1)  All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost bin. 
(2)  Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than one hundred twenty-five (125) cubic feet and shall be no taller than five (5) feet. 
(3)  No more than two (2) compost bins may be located on any lot. 
(4)  No compost bin may be located on any vacant lot or lot not containing a principal structure. 
(5)  All compost bins/piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the attraction or harborage of rodents. 
(6)  All compost bins/piles shall be maintained so as to prevent unpleasant odors. 
(7)  Compost piles shall only be made up of landscape waste, and it shall be a violation of this article to deposit garbage or refuse in compost piles. 
(8)  All composting shall be done in accordance with any process that has been determined to be an acceptable composting process by either the DuPage County Environmental Concerns Department or the DuPage County Cooperative Extension Service. 
(9)  Compost piles shall be set back from any public street or thoroughfare (but excluding alleys) a distance not less than the setback of the existing principal structure from said street or thoroughfare. 
(10)  Compost piles/bins may be located in an interior side yard provided, however, that it shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from any abutting side yard of any adjacent property. 
(11)  Compost piles/bins may be located in any rear yard provided that it shall be located not less than three (3) feet from any lot line and provided, further, that it shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from a rear or side lot line where either such line abuts the side yard of an adjacent lot. 
(12)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no compost pile/bin shall be located on any recorded drainage easement, nor shall any compost bin be located in such a manner as to interfere with or impede the natural flow of drainage off of or across any existing lot. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-504. - Nonconforming compost bins. 
Any compost bin existing on the date this article is adopted that does not comply with either the size limitation contained in subsection 15-503(2) or the minimum setback requirements in subsections 15-503(9), (10) or (11) or with the prohibition against placement of a compost bin in a recorded drainage easement contained in subsection 15-503(12) or any combination thereof shall be a nonconforming bin(s). Such nonconforming bins existing on the date of the adoption of this article shall be permitted to exist until December 1, 1990; provided, however, that the bin(s) is not altered or changed in any way to increase any nonconformity. On or before December 1, 1990, all such nonconforming bins shall be relocated and/or modified as necessary so that such bins are in total compliance with this article. As to such nonconforming bins, all other provisions of this article shall be complied with as of the effective date of this article. 
The provisions of this section allowing nonconforming bins to remain until December 1, 1990, shall apply only to compost bins and shall not apply to any compost pile that is not contained within a bin on the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-505. - Dumping on another's land. 
It shall be unlawful to dump or place any landscape waste on any premises or property in the village without the consent of the owner of such premises or property and, then, only in accordance with the provisions of this article; and it shall be unlawful to dump or place any yard waste on any parkway, street, alley or property owned by the village except for the purpose of being picked up by a regularly scheduled scavenger service and, then, only in accordance with established ordinances. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-506. - Responsibility for compliance. 
It shall be the duty of both the owner(s) and occupant(s) of any property on which composting is taking place or on which a compost pile/bin is located to make sure that said composting is being done and said compost pile/bin is being maintained in full compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-507. - Nuisance declared. 
It is hereby declared a nuisance to engage in composting or to maintain a compost pile/bin other than in full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-508. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the director of community development or his/her designee to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
Sec. 15-509. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 15-509, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2420, § 1, adopted May 29, 1990.  
Sec. 15-510. - Exclusive provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be the exclusive provisions concerning composting; and so long as composting is in compliance with the provisions of this article, composting shall not constitute a violation of any other provision of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2420, § 1, 5-29-90)  
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-601. - Findings. 
It is recognized that excessive noise endangers physical and emotional health and well-being, interferes with legitimate business and recreational activities, depresses property values, offends the senses, creates public nuisances, and in other respects reduces the quality of our environment. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-602. - Adoption of state provisions. 
The provisions of 35 III. Admin. Code 901.101 et seq., being rules of the pollution control board pertaining to sound emission standards and limitations for property line noise sources are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-603. - Vehicular noise. 
(a)  No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor vehicle of any kind while not in motion, nor shall such horn or signal be sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, nor shall it be sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(b)  No person shall operate, sell, or offer for sale any motor vehicle subject to registration that will, at any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration, operate in such a manner as to exceed the noise limits in 35 III. Admin. Code 902.120—902.125. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-604. - Radios, phonographs, etc., on the public way. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated any device used to receive broadcast sound, or reproduce any recorded sound if the device is located: 
(1)  On the public way; or 
(2)  In any motor vehicle on the public way; and the sound can be heard from seventy-five (75) feet or more from the device. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. This section does not apply when the device is being operated solely to request assistance or warn of a hazardous condition. 
(b)  The term "public way" means all streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, public parking lots and other public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-605. - Unregistered recreational or off-highway vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven vehicle of a type not subject to registration for road use at any time or under any condition of load, acceleration, or deceleration in such manner as to exceed the following noise limit at any point on property zoned for business or residential use at a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet from the path of travel. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-606. - Construction noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any hammer or power-operated tool for repair or construction purposes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within six hundred (600) feet of any building used for residential or hospital purposes if such noise is audible from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes. Repairs to public service utilities shall be exempted from this section. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-607. - Grounds maintenance equipment. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any power-driven lawn or garden maintenance equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within six hundred (600) feet of any building used for residential or hospital purposes if such noise is audible from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-608. - Miscellaneous noise sources. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate the following equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. outdoors within six hundred (600) feet of any building used for residential or hospital purposes or indoors if such equipment is audible from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes: 
(1)  Power-operated models including automobiles, boats and aircraft; 
(2)  Sound trucks and public address systems; 
(3)  Musical instruments; 
(4)  Radios, television sets and phonographs; 
(5)  Factory time whistles; and 
(6)  Church bells and carillons. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful to conduct garbage, yard waste or recycling collection between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. anywhere within the limits of the village. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to play music outside at any time using an intercom system on any property abutting or across the street from property zoned and used for residential purposes, if such music is audible more than ten (10) feet from the property from which the music is operating and it shall be unlawful between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any property which is abutting or across the street from property zoned and used for residential purposes to: 
(1)  Play music outside; or 
(2)  Play music inside that is audible from any property which is abutting or across the street. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-609. - Nuisance noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to cause or create any unnecessary or unusual noise at any time which annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others unless such noise is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, or life of some person. 
(b)  No person owning or in possession or control of any building or premises shall use the same, permit the use of the same, or rent the same to be used for any business or employment or residential use, or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, by its boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such building or premises is situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to engage in yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within six hundred (600) feet of any building used for residential or hospital purposes or indoors if such noise is audible from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-610. - Exceptions to regulations. 
The following are exempt from the regulations in section 15-612: 
(1)  Sirens and bells on emergency vehicles; 
(2)  Fire and burglar alarms; 
(3)  Emergency management warning systems; 
(4)  Train whistles and horns; 
(5)  Authorized fireworks displays; and 
(6)  Concerts and parades authorized or permitted by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
Sec. 15-611. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 15-611, entitled "Penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 3656, § 3, adopted June 13, 2011.  
Sec. 15-612. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the village police department. 
(Ord. No. 3656, § 3, 6-13-11)  
ARTICLE VII. - NUISANCE PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 15-701. - Crime-free rental housing. 
It has been determined to be in the best interests of the residents of the village to implement a program in order to work with all landlords to eliminate nuisances in order to safeguard their properties and create a peaceful and safe environment in the village. It is the responsibility of the landlord to take any and all actions permitted by law to eliminate nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 15-702. - Crime-free lease addendum. 
Any owner, agent, management company or operator of any residential rental property is required to utilize a crime-free lease addendum in the form provided by the Villa Park Police Chief as a part of every lease executed by an owner, agent, management company or operator. Said addendum shall state that any nuisance (including criminal activity) facilitated by or permitted by the renter, member of the renter's household, guest, invitee or any party under the control of the renter shall constitute a lease violation. The owner, agent or operator shall have the authority pursuant to said addendum to initiate eviction proceedings in accordance with the laws of this state regarding forcible entry and detainer. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 15-703. - Chronic nuisance rental residential property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any rental residential property within the village to become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, management company, or operator of any rental residential property to: 
(1)  Permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property; or 
(2)  Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property. 
(c)  Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12; Ord. No. 4006 , § 2, 12-4-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4006, § 2, adopted Dec. 4, 2017, changed the title of § 15-703 from "Chronic nuisance property" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 15-704. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the Village of Villa Park or his or her designee. 
Chronic nuisance property means rental residential property upon which two (2) or more events of nuisance activities have occurred within a six-month period that have been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency. 
Control means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on that property. 
Nuisance activity means any one (1) of the following activities, behaviors or conduct, as defined by federal, state or village ordinance: 
(1)  Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1. 
(2)  Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
(3)  Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1. 
(4)  Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 1.5. 
(5)  Gambling as defined by 720 ILCS 5/28-1. 
(6)  Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as defined by 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq. 
(7)  Public indecency as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-9. 
(8)  Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq. 
(9)  Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et seq. 
(10)  Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq. 
(11)  Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq. 
(12)  Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. 
(13)  Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
(14)  Criminal housing management defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1. 
(15)  Structure unfit for human occupancy as defined in the Villa Parks Property Maintenance Code. 
(16)  Unsafe structure as defined in the Villa Parks Property Maintenance Code. 
(17)  Unlawful structure as defined in the Villa Parks Property Maintenance Code. 
(18)  Multiple violations of the Villa Parks Property Maintenance Code continuing after disposition of a complaint for those violations. 
(19)  Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or class A misdemeanor pursuant to a federal or Illinois Statute. 
(20)  A violation of chapter 15, article VI, Noise Violation. 
(21)  A violation of a chapter of this Code, adopting class A misdemeanors under Illinois State Statutes. 
Owner means any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in or control of property. Owner includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  A mortgagee in possession in who is vested with all or part of the legal title to the property or, all or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises. 
(2)  An occupant who can control what occurs on the property. 
(3)  Any person acting as an agent of an owner. 
Permit means to suffer, allow, consent to, and acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act. 
Person means any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or other entity capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the village. 
Person in charge means any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under his or her ownership or control. 
Property means any real property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including but not limited to, any premises, room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12; Ord. No. 4006 , § 3, 12-4-17)  
Sec. 15-705. - Procedures. 
When the chief of police of the village, or the chief's designee, receives one (1) or more police reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within a single-family property or a dwelling unit, the chief of police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe nuisance activities. Upon such findings the chief, or the chief's designee, may either request a meeting with the person in charge of the property or issue a notice of ordinance violation, to the taxpayer of record of such property, which notice shall include the following: 
(1)  The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
(2)  A statement that Villa Park Police Department has information that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a list of the nuisance activities that may exist or that have occurred and a copy of any code violations which have been adjudicated. 
(3)  Date, time and place of the hearing on the alleged ordinance violation of chapter 15 as permitting or allowing a chronic nuisance property. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 15-706. - Service. 
(a)  Service shall be made either personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property believed to be chronic nuisance property, or such a place which is likely to give notice to the person in charge. 
(b)  A copy of the notice shall be either personally served or by first-class mail to the taxpayer of record at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county and the occupant, at the address of the property. 
(c)  The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this section. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 15-707. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  A hearing before the village administrative hearing officer shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 26, article IV of the Village Code and shall show, by a preponderance of evidence, that the subject property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  The village's representative shall present evidence in support of its claim that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The person in charge or the person in charge's local representative shall be permitted to rebut such evidence. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing, whether or not a violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the findings, decisions and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a violation exists based upon the finding of fact, and sanctioning the person in charge or owner as specified in subsection (d) below, or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved. 
(d)  If the hearing officer makes a finding that a property was, or is, a nuisance property, he or she may fine the person in charge or the owner of the property if the owner is different than the person in charge, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation of this article. Each day a nuisance activity occurs or continues shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. The hearing officer may, at his or her discretion, impose such a fine for each day the nuisance activity goes unabated. 
(Ord. No. 3703, § 2, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 15-708. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It shall be an affirmative defense to nuisance activities available to owners or tenants based solely on: 
(1)  Contact made to the police or other emergency services, if (1) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual violence; (2) the intervention of emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (3) the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's disability, 
(2)  An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises; or 
(3)  Criminal activity or a violation of the Code of the village occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other party, 
(b)  Nothing with respect to this section: (1) limits enforcement of Section 15.2 of the Emergency Telephone System Act, Article 26 of the Criminal Code of 2012, or Article IX of the Code of Civil Procedure; 
(2)  Prohibits the village from enforcing ordinances to impose penalties on the basis of the underlying criminal activity to the extent otherwise permitted by existing state and federal law; or (3) limits or prohibits the eviction of or imposition of penalties against the perpetrator of the domestic violence, sexual violence, or other criminal activity. 
( Ord. No. 4006 , § 1, 12-4-17)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC PARKING AREAS 
 
Sec. 15-801. - Intent and purpose. 
It is hereby declared that the intention and purpose of this article is to provide for the maintenance of quiet and good order within public parking areas and the neighborhood surrounding public parking areas, and to ensure that persons at or near public parking areas are protected from harm and from unreasonable disturbances and if there is any conflict between this article and any other provisions and regulations applicable to such public parking areas, the language of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3912 , § 1, 5-23-16)  
Sec. 15-802. - Definition. 
A "public parking area" is defined as the off-street parking and loading area of a commercial or industrial use available for use by its customers, employees, invitees and any other member of the public; and the means of ingress thereto and egress from that area. 
(Ord. No. 3912 , § 1, 5-23-16)  
Sec. 15-803. - Owner's responsibilities. 
The owner, lessee or operator of any public parking area shall maintain the public parking area in compliance with this Code and this article and shall not permit disorderly conduct or any unlawful noise, nuisance or hazardous condition in the public parking area. 
(Ord. No. 3912 , § 1, 5-23-16)  
Sec. 15-804. - Prohibitions in parking areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful in a public parking area for any person to race the motor of a motor vehicle or motorcycle by a sudden acceleration or deceleration of the motor. 
(b)  It is unlawful in a public parking area for any person to bring a motor vehicle or motorcycle to a sudden stop or start such that the tires on such a vehicle shall squeal or cause a loud or unusual noise. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person in a public parking area to blow or cause to be blown any motor vehicle horn or motorcycle horn while the vehicle is parked. 
(d)  It is unlawful in a public parking area for any person to race, needlessly weave or suddenly change course of a motor vehicle or motorcycle or endanger any person or vehicle in the public parking area. 
(e)  It is unlawful for a person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle or motorcycle that is unattended or without a person in the vehicle, without first stopping the engine and removing the key. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person in a public parking area, whether in or out of a motor vehicle or motorcycle to drink any alcoholic beverage or have in his or her possession any open container containing an alcoholic beverage. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle or motorcycle onto a public parking area and then from that public parking area, unless there is no unoccupied parking space available in the public parking area. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any person to leave an unoccupied motor vehicle or motorcycle in any public parking area and then leave the premises thereof except with the knowledge and consent of the owner, lessee or operator of any public parking area. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic in any public parking area. 
(Ord. No. 3912 , § 1, 5-23-16)  
Sec. 15-805. - Defenses. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent an action that is legitimately necessary to avoid a collision with another vehicle or person or for the safe operation of that vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 3912 , § 1, 5-23-16)  
Sec. 15-806. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the operator of any municipal, fire, emergency, utility or governmental vehicle, when same is being operated in its official capacity. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the operator of any licensed public transportation vehicle or any vehicle being utilized for business and/or commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3912 , § 1, 5-23-16)  
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-101. - Retail theft. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section the words and phrases defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them below unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context. 
(1)  To conceal merchandise means, that, although thereby may be some notice of its presence, that merchandised is not visible through ordinary observation. 
(2)  Full retail value means the merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise. 
(3)  Merchandise means any item of tangible personal property. 
(4)  Merchant means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator. 
(5)  Premises of a retail mercantile establishment includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant. 
(6)  Retail mercantile establishment means any place where merchandise is displayed, held or stored or offered for sale to the public. 
(7)  Shopping cart means those push carts of the type of types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, for the stores to a place outside the store. 
(8)  Under-ring means to cause the cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise. 
(b)  No person shall commit retail theft of property the full retail value of which does not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(c)  A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly: 
(1)  Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retailing such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
(2)  Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
(3)  Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
(4)  Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or 
(5)  Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart. 
(d)  If any person conceals upon his person or among his belongs, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment, and removes the merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1792, §§ 1—3, 5-15-78) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 16A-1 et seq.  
Sec. 16-102. - Damaging property of another. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context: 
(1)  Property means any and all real estate, including improvements thereon, and any and all personalty, tangible or intangible. 
(2)  Legal guardian shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this state or a court of foreign jurisdiction, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor solely under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act. 
(3)  Minor shall mean an unemancipated person who is at least eleven (11) years of age, but not yet eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Parent shall include the lawful mother or father of a minor, whether by birth or adoption. 
(b)  No person shall: 
(1)  Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without his consent; or 
(2)  Recklessly by means of fire or explosive, damage any property of another person; or 
(3)  Knowingly start a fire on the land of another person without his consent; or 
(4)  Knowingly deposit on the land or in a building of another person without his consent any stink bomb or other offensive smelling compound and thereby intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties set forth in chapter 1, article 1, section 1-108, any person found guilty of a violation of this section may be subject to a period of conditional discharge. 
The period of conditional discharge shall not exceed one year subject to the rules and conditions set forth or as may be set forth by the circuit court. The conditions of conditional discharge shall include that the defendant make restitution in an amount not to exceed the actual loss or damage to the property and pecuniary loss. 
When a court orders restitution as a condition for a conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional period. 
An offender shall not be discharged at the expiration of the conditional discharge if conditions of the conditional discharge have not been satisfied. The period of conditional discharge can be extended or such other action taken as may be consistent with law to sentence the offender as he might have been in the first instance or such other penalty as might have been imposed. 
(d)  The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine imposed or restitution ordered by a court upon a minor for violation of this section provided: 
(1)  That said minor has not paid said fine or made restitution within the time ordered by the court, and 
(2)  That said parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law, and 
(3)  That the parent or legal guardian had knowledge or should have known that the offending minor on some prior occasion caused damage to the property of another person. 
(e)  The parent or legal guardian of a minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have knowledge that the offending minor on some prior occasion caused damage to the property of another person in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the events described below: 
(1)  A minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to property of another person, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilty of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and/or malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; and 
(2)  Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the police department of the village following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction. 
(f)  The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be a necessary party to any proceeding under this section. 
(g)  In all court proceedings herein, the Illinois Civil Practice Act shall apply, and all actions shall be brought on behalf of the village by and through its village attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1790, §§ 1—4, 5-15-78; Ord. No. 3644, § 3, 2-28-11) 
State Law reference— Juvenile Court Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 56½, § 701-1 et seq.; Civil Practice Act, Ch. 110, § 1 et seq.; damage to property, Ch. 38, § 21-1.  
Sec. 16-103. - Possession of cannabis. 
(a)  As used in this section the term "cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seed, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any substance less than thirty (30) grams in weight and containing cannabis. 
(c)  The department of mental health and developmental disabilities, with the approval of the department of law enforcement, may authorize the possession of substances containing cannabis by persons engaged in research, upon such terms and conditions as may be consistent with the public health and safety. To the extent of the applicable authorization, persons are exempt from prosecution under this section for possession of cannabis. 
(d)  Persons registered under federal law to conduct research with cannabis may conduct research with cannabis within the village upon furnishing evidence to the department of law enforcement of that federal registration. 
(e)  Persons authorized to engage in research may be authorized by the department of mental health and developmental disabilities to protect the privacy of individuals who are the subjects of such research by withholding from all persons not connected with the conduct of the research, the names and other identifying characteristics of such individuals. Persons who are given this authorization shall not be compelled in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative or other proceeding to identify the individuals who are the subjects of research for which the authorization was granted, except to the extent necessary to permit the department of mental health and developmental disabilities to determine whether the research is being conducted in accordance with the authorization. 
(Ord. No. 1791, §§ 1—3, 5-15-78) 
State Law reference— Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.  
Sec. 16-104. - Interference with police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with any police officer who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 1, 8-1-27)  
Sec. 16-105. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17) years to be upon any public road, street, alley or parks or other lands used for public purposes, or in any public place of business or amusement in the village, between the hours of 11:30 p.m. Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday, and between 11:30 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday, and between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any other day of the week. 
(b)  It is a defense to a violation under this section that the minor engaged in the prohibited conduct while: 
(1)  Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian, sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by the child's parent, guardian or custodian; 
(3)  Participating or returning from: 
a.  Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than eighteen (18) years of age to perform; 
b.  A school recreational activity; 
c.  A religious event; 
d.  An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; 
e.  An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both; 
f.  An activity conducted by a not-for-profit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training or other care under the supervision of one (1) or more adults. 
(c)  Before issuing a citation or making an arrest for violating the curfew ordinance, a police officer shall inquire into a minor's reasons for being in a public place during curfew hours, and the officer may issue a citation or make an arrest only if the officer reasonably believes that the person has violated this section and that no defenses apply. 
(Ord. No. 1864, 9-10-79; Ord. No. 3244, § 2, 5-24-04)  
Sec. 16-105.1. - School curfew. 
(a)  Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings: 
Legal guardian: Any foster parent, or any person appointed guardian, or otherwise awarded custody, of a minor by a court of law in this state, or any person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq., but shall not include any person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor. 
Minor: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years old. 
Parent: The father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption. The word "parent," as used in this section shall also be deemed to mean "legal guardian." In the event that the minor's parents are divorced or separated within the meaning of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act, 750 ILCS 5/101 et seq., the parent having lawful physical custody of the minor shall be deemed to be the parent authorized to give consent as required by this section. 
Valid cause for absence: Illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency and other situations beyond the control of the minor as determined by the board of education in each district or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent or legal guardian for the health or safety of the minor. 
(b)  School curfew established: It shall be unlawful for any minor enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the corporate limits of the village to absent himself or herself from attendance at school, during such period when school is in session without valid cause for the absence and the permission of his or her parent or legal guardian, or the school in which the minor is enrolled. Any minor who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of violation of school curfew and shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth in this section. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the minor so absenting himself or herself from school without permission of his or her parent or legal guardian shall not constitute a violation of school curfew if permission for such absence has substantially been obtained from the parent or legal guardian, provided that such permission is submitted in writing to the proper authorities within twenty-four (24) hours of the next regularly scheduled school day after such absence. 
(c)  Parental responsibility: The first incident of violation of school curfew shall be handled by the school authorities according to the policy and procedure of the school in which the minor is enrolled. The incident shall be documented and retained by the school district and the village to be supplied to the court at any subsequent hearings for further violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2888, § 2, 6-23-97; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 3874 , § 1, 7-27-15)  
Sec. 16-106. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  No person shall discharge a firearm in the village. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  The discharge of firearms by law enforcement officers or members of the armed forces of the United States or members of the National Guard who are engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(2)  The discharge of firearms by persons exercising their right of defense of person or property. 
(Ord. No. 231, § 1, 11-21-27)  
Sec. 16-107. - Trespass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass. 
(b)  Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection (a), any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this section: 
(1)  Any entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
(2)  The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of any entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
(3)  A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
(4)  An entry into or upon an vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.  
Sec. 16-108. - Alcoholic liquor in public places. 
(a)  No person shall consume alcoholic liquor on public property. 
(b)  No person shall possess any alcoholic liquor in a container whose seal has been broken, or which is partially or fully opened and not in its original package form on public property. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall limit or prohibit the local Liquor Control commissioner and the board of trustees from providing for and issuing Class G, liquor licenses. 
(d)  The term alcoholic liquor shall have the meaning assigned to it by Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1182, 7-6-70; Ord. No. 1502, §§ 1—4, 10-14-74)  
Sec. 16-109. - Detergents containing phosphates. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  The terms "dairy equipment," "beverage equipment" and "food-processing equipment" mean that equipment used in the production of milk and dairy products, foods and beverages, including the processing, preparation or packaging thereof for consumption. 
(2)  The term "industrial cleaning equipment" means machinery and other tools used in cleaning processes during the course of industrial manufacturing, production and assembly. 
(3)  The term "machine dishwasher" means equipment manufactured for the purpose of cleaning dishes, glassware and other utensils involved in food preparation, consumption or use, using a combination of water agitation and high temperatures. 
(4)  The term "polyphosphate builder" or "phosphorus" means a water softening and soil suspending agent made from condensed phosphates, including pyrophosphates, triphosphates, tripolyphosphates, metaphosphates and glassy phosphates, used as a detergent ingredient, but shall not include "polyphosphate builders" or "phosphorus" which is essential for medical, scientific or special engineering use under such conditions and regulations as may be prescribed after hearing, by the state pollution control agency. 
(5)  The term "recommended use level" means the amount of synthetic detergent or detergent which the manufacturer thereof recommends for use per wash load, at which level said synthetic detergent or detergent will effectively perform its intended function. 
(6)  The term "synthetic detergent" or "detergent" means any cleaning compound which is available for household use, laundry use, other personal uses or industrial use, which is composed of organic or inorganic compounds, including soaps, water softeners, surface active agents, dispersing agents, foaming agents, buffering agents, builders, fillers, dyes, enzymes and fabric softeners, whether in the form of crystals, powders, flakes, bars, liquids, sprays or any other form. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale, give or furnish any synthetic detergent or detergent, whether in the form of crystals, powders, flakes, bars, liquids, sprays or any other form unless the container, wrapper or other packaging thereof shall be clearly labeled with respect to its polyphosphate builder or phosphorus ingredient content clearly and legibly set forth thereon in terms of percentage of phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental phosphorus per container, wrapper or other packaging thereof, as well as grams of phosphorus, expressed as elemental phosphorus, per recommended use level. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale, give or furnish any synthetic detergent or detergent containing any phosphorus, expressed as elemental phosphorus, including synthetic detergent or detergent manufactured for dairy equipment, beverage equipment, food processing equipment and industrial cleaning equipment when said synthetic detergent or detergent contains more than eight and seven-tenths (8.7) per cent of phosphorus by weight expressed as elemental phosphorus, except for dishwashing detergent or detergent, which synthetic detergent or detergent shall contain no more than twelve (12) per cent of phosphorus by weight expressed as elemental phosphorus. 
(d)  The concentration of phosphorus by weight, expressed as elemental phosphorus in any synthetic detergent or detergent shall be determined by the current applicable method prescribed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (A.S.T.M.). 
(Ord. No. 1284, §§ 1—3, 1-24-72; Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 6-2-75) 
Cross reference— Environmental control, Ch. 2, Art. XIII.  
Sec. 16-110. - Obscenity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, deliver, offer for sale, distribute, publish, print, exhibit or possess with intent to distribute, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, any obscene writing, picture, moving picture, record or other representation or embodiment of the obscene, or to present or to direct an obscene play or other performance or to perform an obscene act of otherwise present an obscene exhibition or to advertise or otherwise promote obscene material. 
(b)  A thing shall be deemed to be obscene if the average person applying contemporary community standards, finds that the work taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest, and the work depicts or describes patently offensive representation or descriptions of nude persons, ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted sexual conduct, whether actual or simulated, or patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, and lewd exhibition of the human genitals. The work, taken as a whole, must lack serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination: 
(1)  was not for gain, and was made to personal associates other than children under eighteen years of age; 
(2)  was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special jurisdiction for possession of such material. 
(Ord. No. 1913, §§ 1—3, 6-16-80) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 11-20.  
Sec. 16-110.1. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Definitions: As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings hereafter ascribed to them: 
(1)  "Unclothed state" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic hair or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering on any part of the nipple and areola; the exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola. 
(2)  "Public place" includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, and banquet halls, and also party rooms or halls limited to specific members or restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 
(1)  Engage in sexual intercourse. 
(2)  Engage in deviate sexual intercourse as defined by the Illinois Criminal Code. 
(3)  Appear in an unclothed state. 
(4)  Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person. 
(c)  The prohibition set forth in section 16-110.1(b) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under ten (10) years of age. 
(2)  Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 5-22-06)  
Sec. 16-111. - Material harmful to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person with knowledge that a person is seventeen (17) years of age or younger, or who fails to exercise reasonable care in determining the age of such person, to sell, deliver, offer for sale, distribute, publish, print or exhibit to any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger any harmful material with reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, whether writing, picture, moving picture, record or other representation or embodiment of harmful material, or to present or to direct a harmful play or other performance, or to perform a harmful act, or otherwise promote the sale of harmful material to any person seventeen (17) years of age or younger. 
(b)  A thing shall be deemed to be harmful which in whole or in part depicts or describes nude persons, sexual acts, normal or perverted sexual conduct, whether actual or simulated, representations of masturbation, excretory functions, or the human genitals. A thing shall also be deemed harmful which, when taken as a whole, appeals to an interest in violence and lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, and which depicts or describes the shooting, stabbing, mutilating, maiming, torturing, burning, strangling or striking of a human being. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or accredited educational institution from circulating harmful material to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, provided such circulation was with parental consent and was for a legitimate scientific or educational purpose. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a parent from distributing to his child any harmful material. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may be incarcerated in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1915, §§ 1—4, 6-16-80) 
State Law reference— Material harmful to minors, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 38, § 11-211.  
Sec. 16-112. - Restrictions and regulations regarding tobacco and drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  The president and board of trustees of the village expressly declare and find as follows: 
(1)  Substantial scientific evidence exists that the use of tobacco products as hereinafter defined, can cause a variety of medical disorders and conditions; 
(2)  The Director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse concluded that the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents before the age of legal consent; 
(3)  The National Institute on Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illegal drug use; 
(4)  The open display of items designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs is inconsistent with the policies of the Village of Villa Park and should be prohibited, and further, that the sale of such items be regulated by the village. 
(b)  For purposes of this section 16-112, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  The term "tobacco product" means any product containing or made from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powered, or leaf and intended to be placed in the oral cavity. "Tobacco product" includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. "Tobacco product" does not include: an electronic cigarette and alternative nicotine product as defined in this Section; or any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
(2)  The term "electronic cigarette" means: 
a.  Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation; 
b.  Any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or 
c.  Any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the device. "Electronic cigarette" includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device. "Electronic cigarette" does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products; as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative nicotine product as defined in this Section; any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approve for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act. 
(3)  The terms "items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories or things designed or marked for use with illegal cannabis or drugs" shall include, but not limited to: (1) carburetion tubes or devices; (2) smoking and carburetion mask; (3) roach clips; (4) separation gins designed for use or intended for use in cleaning marijuana; (5) cocaine spoons and vials; (6) chamber pipes; (7) carburetor pipes; (8) electric pipes; (9) air driven pipes; (10) chillums; (11) bongs; (12) ice pipes or chillers. 
(4)  The term "person" shall mean a natural person, or any firm, partnership, company, corporation or other entity. 
(5)  The term "illegal cannabis or drugs" shall mean cannabis and/or drugs whose manufacture, sale, or use constitute criminal activity as declared by the criminal statutes of the state. 
(6)  The term "alternative nicotine product" means a product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product" does not include; cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in this Section; or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons as principal, clerk, agent, or servant to keep for sale, offers for sale, sells or delivers for any commercial consideration any items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories, or things which are designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, buy for, distribute samples of or furnish to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age: (1) any tobacco product; (2) items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories or things designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs; (3) electronic cigarette; or (4) alternative nicotine product. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age that misrepresents their identity or age, or to use any false or forged identification in the purchase of: (1) tobacco product; (2) items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories or things designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs; (3) electronic cigarette; or (4) alternative nicotine product. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to possess any tobacco product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine product; however, the possession by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age under the direct supervision of a parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home or pursuant to a Village Police Department enforcement action shall not be prohibited. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories, or things which are designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing it into the human body or in preparing it for that use. 
(h)  Penalty. If a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is convicted of a violation of Section 16-112(e) or (f) involving a tobacco product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine product the violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and may include the imposition of community service. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 2615, §§ 1—4, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 3644, § 4, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 3736, §§ 1—5, 3-18-13; Ord. No. 4059 , §§ 1—3, 12-0-18; Ord. No. 4083 , §§ 1—3, 6-10-19) 
State Law reference— Drug paraphernalia, 720 ILCS 635/1 et seq.  
Sec. 16-113. - Control, sale, possession and discharge of air rifles and B-B guns within the village. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Air rifle" means and includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm. 
(2)  "Dealer" means any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included in the definition of "air rifle." 
(b)  Selling, renting or transferring to children prohibited 
(1)  It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of thirteen (13) years where the dealer knows or has cause to believe the person to be under thirteen (13) years of age or where such dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of such person and such person is under thirteen (13) years of age. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise transfer any air rifle to any person under thirteen (13) years of age except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil, exists between such person and the person under thirteen (13) years of age, or where such person stands in loco parentis to the person under thirteen (13) years of age. 
(c)  Possessing or discharging on public streets. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to possess any air rifle, whether carried by the person or transported in a vehicle, on the public streets, roads, highway or public lands within this village, unless such person has in his/her possession a receipt for purchase of the air rifle that demonstrates that the air rifle was purchased that day and the air rifle is not loaded. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or public land or any public place except on a safely constructed target range. 
(d)  Permissive possession. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, it is lawful for any person under thirteen (13) years of age to have in his possession any air rifle if it is: 
(1)  Kept within his house of residence or other private enclosure. 
(2)  Used by the person under thirteen (13) years of age and he/she is a duly enrolled member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a responsible adult and then only if said air rifle is actually being used in connection with the activities of said club, team or society under the supervision of a responsible adult. 
(3)  Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances when such air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the limits of such grounds or residence. 
(e)  Permissive sales. The provisions of this section do not prohibit sales of air rifles: 
(1)  By wholesale dealers or jobbers. 
(2)  To be shipped out of the village. 
(3)  To be used at a target range operated in accordance with subsection (d) of this section or by members of the Armed Services of the United States or veterans organizations. 
(f)  Seizure and removal. A police officer shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004, § 1, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 3436, § 2, 8-13-07) 
Cross reference— Discharge of firearms, § 16-106.  
Sec. 16-114. - Litter control. 
(a)  Purpose. The ever increasing mobility of the population and improper and abusive discard habits cause the existence, proliferation and accumulation of litter upon public and private property within the village. Litter is detrimental to the welfare of the people of the village. There is a need to educate the public with respect to the problem of litter and to provide for strict enforcement of litter control measures. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Litter" means any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste. Litter may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal cans, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging material, abandoned vehicle, (as defined in Section 4-100 of the Illinois Code), motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, and any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard. 
(2)  "Persons" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or their legal representative, agent or assignee. 
(c)  Littering prohibited; exceptions. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any public or private property in the village unless: 
(1)  The property has been designated by the village for the disposal of litter and the litter is disposed of on that property in accordance with applicable rules and regulations. 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by the village, owner or tenant for the disposition of litter. 
(3)  The person is lawfully acting or reacting to an emergency situation where health and safety is threatened and removes and properly disposes of such litter when the emergency no longer exists. 
(d)  Littering from motor vehicles; transportation from private property. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway or any public or private property within the village. Nor shall any person transport by any means garbage or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business or their site to and dispose such material in, around, or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed along the public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2004, § 2, 11-23-81) 
Cross reference— Garbage and trash, ch. 10.  
Sec. 16-115. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be a nuisance and, therefore, unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quiet of the village or any portion thereof by disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Disorderly conduct shall be committed by any person when he knowingly: 
(1)  Does any action in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; 
(2)  Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture, or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; 
(3)  Refuses to or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of violence and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect an otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that said conduct and activity be stopped and explain the request if there be time; 
(4)  Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm; 
(5)  Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force of violence to disturb the public peace; 
(6)  Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics, or other drugs, not therapeutically administered to the degree, that they may endanger himself or other person or property, or annoy persons in his vicinity; 
(7)  Carries in a threatening or meaning manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles, sling shot, any object containing noxious or deleterious liquor or gas or substance, other dangerous weapon, or conceal said weapon on or about the person or vehicles; 
(8)  Engages in fighting, threatening or tumultuous behavior; 
(9)  Hinders, annoys or molests persons passing along any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, or other place which is open to pedestrian traffic or where the public is invited to enter; 
(10)  Loiters or stands around the entrance of any church, theater, public building, store, restaurant or other place of public assemblage in any manner as to so unreasonably obstruct such entrance; or 
(11)  Disturbs, threatens or in an insolent manner, intentionally damages any personal property of another. 
(Ord. No. 2004, § 3, 11-23-81) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 15.  
Sec. 16-116. - Inoperable vehicles on residential property. 
No automobile, station wagon or truck that is in an inoperative condition, or not licensed shall be permitted on any residential property for more than one hundred twenty (120) hours unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be within an enclosed garage in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2004, § 4, 11-23-81) 
Cross reference— Abandoned vehicles, § 15-401 et seq.  
Sec. 16-117. - Parental responsibility for vandalism by minors. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the terms shall have such meanings as are herein ascribed to them. 
(1)  Acts of vandalism include any of the following acts: 
a.  Recklessly or knowingly damaging or destroying any property of another person without his consent; 
b.  Recklessly or knowingly, by means of fire or explosive device, damaging, debasing or destroying any property of another person without his consent; 
c.  Recklessly or knowingly starting a fire on land of another person without his consent; 
d.  Recklessly or knowingly depositing on the land or in the building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb, any offensive smelling compound or any other offensive or dangerous compound or item and thereby interfering with the use and occupancy by another, of the land or building; or 
e.  Recklessly or knowingly, and without authority, entering into or obtaining control over any building, house trailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof, of another person without his consent. 
(2)  Conviction , for the purpose of subsection (e) herein, shall include the court's entering a judgment upon a finding of guilty or the defendant's being placed upon court supervision, however, the term "conviction" shall not include: dismissal; voluntary nonsuit; involuntary nonsuit; or entering of a not guilty finding, except at the termination of a term of court supervision. 
(3)  Intentionally shall mean conduct engaged in by a person with the conscious objective to accomplish that result or engage in that conduct. 
(4)  Knowingly shall mean conduct engaged in by a person when he is consciously aware of the nature of attendant circumstances of his conduct which constitutes an offense under this section. 
(5)  Legal guardian includes a person appointed guardian of a person or given custody of a minor by a court of competent jurisdiction, but does not include a person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor; or appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act. 
(6)  Minor includes a person who is above the age of seven (7) years, but not yet seventeen (17) years of age. 
(7)  Parents include the father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption, and shall include the parent having legal custody of the minor in the event the parents are divorced or separated. 
(8)  Person includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(9)  Property includes any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty. 
(10)  Recklessly shall mean conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard of a substantial and justifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and where such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(b)  Injuring or destroying property or acts of vandalism. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously break, deface, injure or destroy any property within the Village of Villa Park, whether such property is owned by the state, county, village or any other governmental body, or owned by any private person. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to commit an act of vandalism. 
(c)  Presumption of failure to exercise parental responsibility. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to and shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that they have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections (c)(1), (2) and (3) below: 
(1)  An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; and 
(2)  Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the police department of the Village of Villa Park following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and 
(3)  If at any time following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection (2) above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (1) above, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (1) above. 
The parents or legal guardians shall be made defendants to the hearing at which a determination is made by the court as to whether any act of vandalism has taken place. 
(Ord. No. 2160, § 1, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 3644, § 5, 2-28-11)  
Sec. 16-118. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3718, adopted Oct. 22, 2012, deleted § 16-118, entitled "Video gaming prohibited", which derived from Ord. No. 3578, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 2009.  
Sec. 16-119. - Theft. 
(a)  Theft. A person commits theft when he or she knowingly: 
(1)  Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value of the owner; or 
(2)  Obtains by deception control over property not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value of the owner; or 
(3)  Obtains by threat control over property not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value of the owner; or 
(4)  Obtains control over stolen property not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value knowing the property to have been stolen by another; and: (1) intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or (2) knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or (3) uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit. 
(b)  Theft of lost or mislaid property. A person shall commit theft of lost or mislaid property when that person obtains control over lost or mislaid property when he knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner, and intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property. 
(c)  Theft of labor or services or use of property. A person shall commit theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services. 
(d)  Offender's interest in the property. It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the offender is not entitled. 
Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no prosecution for theft may be maintained unless the parties were not living together as man and wife and were living in separate abodes at the time of the alleged theft. 
(Ord. No. 3735, § 1, 3-18-13)  
Sec. 16-120. - Bullying, harassment. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  Bullying means any severe or pervasive physical or verbal act or conduct, including communications made in writing or electronically, directed toward a person that has or can be reasonably predicted to have the effect of one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Placing the person in reasonable fear of physical harm or harm to his or her property; 
b.  Causing a substantially detrimental effect on the person's physical or mental health; 
c.  Substantially interfering with a student's or students' academic performance; or 
d.  Substantially interfering with a student's or students' ability to participate in or benefit from the services, activities or privileges provided by a school. 
Bullying, as defined in this subsection, may take various forms, including without limitation one (1) or more of the following: harassment, threats, intimidation, stalking, physical violence, sexual harassment, sexual violence, theft, public humiliation, destruction of property, or retaliation for asserting or alleging an act of bullying. This list is meant to be illustrative and non-exhaustive. 
(2)  Course of conduct is defined as a pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
(3)  Harassment is defined as any conduct, whether verbal, physical, written or by means of any mode of communication which is not necessary to accomplish a purpose that is reasonable under the circumstances, that would cause a reasonable person emotional distress and does cause emotional distress to another. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any bullying or harassment of a person or induce another person to engage in such bullying or harassment. 
(c)  Retaliation prohibited. No person shall retaliate against any person who reports any conduct which is prohibited by this section. 
(d)  Constitutionally protected activity. This section shall not be construed to apply to any constitutionally protected activity or speech. 
(e)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any custodial parent or guardian of any unemancipated person under eighteen (18) years of age to allow or permit such person to violate the provisions of subsection (b) above. The fact that prior to the present offense a parent, guardian or custodian was informed in writing by a law enforcement officer of a separate violation of subsection (b) by the same minor occurring within ninety (90) days prior to the present offense shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that such parent, guardian or custodian allowed or permitted the present violation. 
(Ord. No. 3761, § 1, 9-9-13)  
ARTICLE II. - GRAFFITI[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2545, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, amended Ch. 16 by adding Art. II, §§ 16-601—16-605. In order to keep the manner of numbering consistent, such sections were codified as §§ 16-201—16-205. 
 
Sec. 16-201. - Definitions. 
[The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:] 
Graffiti, in addition to its usual and customary meaning, shall mean any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation, announcement, word, phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch, inscription, representation, or letters wherein the contents thereof are visible to any member of the general public and which either contains references to sexual activity, diagrams relating to sexual activity or sexual organs, references to criminal activities or groups which promote or are involved in criminal activity, swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials about any person, references to relationships, or results in damage to, defacing of, marring of, or discoloring of, the normal exterior surface condition of a structure; lawful signs are specifically excluded. 
Owner shall mean that person or persons or trust in whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid. 
(Ord. No. 2545, § 1, 1-6-92)  
Sec. 16-202. - Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw, or otherwise place upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly or privately owned any graffiti. It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing provisions if such activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content and method of the inscription to be placed on the structure or wall. 
(Ord. No. 2545, § 1, 1-6-92)  
Sec. 16-203. - Removal. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of the structure or wall upon which any graffiti is made to remove, eradicate, or eliminate such inscription or representation within three (3) business days after notice from the village requiring such removal. The owner shall be notified either via certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the owner's address as shown on the most recent property tax records, or by personal service. Should the owner fail to remove the graffiti within the time period specified in the notice, the owner shall be subject to the penalty, as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2545, § 1, 1-6-92, Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 16-204. - Restitution. 
The owner of the property shall be entitled to restitution and compensation for the direct costs incurred in the repair and restoration of his property from any person convicted of the offense listed in section 16-202 of this Code. Said property owner shall submit receipts evidencing payment for costs regarding the removal or repair of the graffiti to the court and providing further that the court enter an order of restitution. All payments shall be made through the clerk of the circuit court of the county, or otherwise in accordance with the court's order of restitution. 
(Ord. No. 2545, § 1, 1-6-92}  
Sec. 16-205. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 16-205, entitled "Penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 2545, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 1992; and Ord. No. 3415, § 3, adopted Mar. 19, 2007.  
Chapter 17 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Park and recreation advisory commission, Ch. 2, Art. XX; golf course administration board, Ch. 2, Art. XXI. 
 
Sec. 17-101. - Director of parks and recreation. 
There is hereby established by the position of director of parks and recreation. The director shall be appointed by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 8-20-73; Ord. No. 1979, § 1, 6-8-81)  
Sec. 17-102. - Tennis courts. 
The fees, rules and regulations for the use of municipal tennis courts shall be as established by resolution.  
Sec. 17-103. - Swimming pools. 
The fees, rules and regulations for the use of municipal swimming pools shall be as established by resolution.  
Sec. 17-104. - Operating hours of public parks. 
(a)  Hours restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be present in any public park within the limits of the village between the hours of sunset (as determined by the U.S. Naval Observatory's Rise and Set for the Sun table for Villa Park, Illinois) and 6:00 a.m. except at Jefferson Pool, Lufkin Pool and the Willowbrook Tennis Courts, where it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be present between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and except the Iowa Community Center, Community Recreation Building, North Terrace Park building and the Lions Park Baseball fields, where it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to be present between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This prohibition shall not include village employees present in the parks for the purpose of village business. 
(b)  Permits. 
(1)  The director of parks and recreation, upon proper application on forms to be prescribed by the director, may issue permits for special events and for village-related or village-sponsored meetings, allowing persons attending such special events or such meetings to use park facilities for times extending later than the times prescribed in subsections (e) and (f) below. In such event, the persons attending such special events or such meetings shall be permitted to use the park until the time designated in the permit but shall not remain in the park after such designated hour. 
(2)  The village manager many issue parking permits for use by village employees present at park facilities on bona fide employment-related business during hours when parking is generally prohibited. These permits are intended to be used only for village business and not to permit parking by employees for personal reasons. The permit shall be a card-type permit, approximately twelve (12) inches by five (5) inches, numbered and with an expiration date and shall bear the signature of the village manager. Permits are to be displayed in the front window of the vehicle. 
(c)  Closing. The chief of police or director of parks and recreation may temporarily close any public park within the limits of the village. 
(d)  Public park as used herein is defined as all property either owned or leased by the village. 
(e)  Parking at certain parks. It shall be unlawful to park or leave parked any motor vehicle, trailer or other similar vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any parking area in the following parks: 
Lions Park. 
Rotary Park. 
Jefferson Park. 
North Terrace Park. 
Lufkin Park. 
Franklin Park. 
(f)  Parking at Iowa Community Center. It shall be unlawful to park or leave parked any motor vehicle, trailer or other similar vehicle between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any parking area of the Iowa Community Center. 
(Ord. No. 1875, §§ 1—5, 11-12-79; Ord. No. 1962, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 2383, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-89; Ord. No. 3620, § 2, 8-9-10)  
Sec. 17-105. - Speed limits. 
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour through park or recreation areas. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 4, 6-19-67) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; speed limits, § 14-104.  
Chapter 18 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Board of local improvements, § 2-1502; zoning and planning commission, Ch. 2, Art. XVI, historical preservation commission, Ch. 2, Art XXVII; building and building regulations, Ch. 7; official plan an subdivision regulations, App. B; basic zoning ordinance, App. C; flood plan zoning, App. D. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Sale of unsubdivided lots. 
(a)  As to the sale of any part or portion of any one unsubdivided lot within the village, the seller thereof shall, prior to the execution of any agreement, contract or other documents (unless said agreement, contract or other document specifically renders the same void or voidable at the purchaser's option in the event a subdivision or variation is not granted allowing the construction of a subsequent principal structure on said lot) first cause written notification to be served upon the purchaser, showing: 
(1)  A recital that a subdivision or zoning amendment may be necessary prior to the construction of any improvements on said property sought to be sold. 
(2)  That the granting of said subdivision and/or zoning amendment to permits said construction are not routine or an automatic matter but are matters decided upon in the sole and exclusive discretion and judgment of the village and that the same may or may not granted by the village authority. 
(b)  Such notice shall be personally delivered to the purchaser and a receipt signed by him, or sent registered mail, return receipt requested with the delivery address shown on the receipt. 
(c)  A copy of said notice and personal receipt if personally delivered or mail receipt if mailed shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds prior to the transfer of any title to the purchaser or purchasers or prior to the consummation of the intended transaction. 
(Ord. No. 1597, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-75)  
Sec. 18-102. - Conditional zoning, subdivision approval, etc. 
(a)  The village through the corporate authorities may provide for certain stipulations and conditions related to applications for changes in zoning classifications, variations, conditional uses, special uses, subdivisions, planned unit development and preannexation agreements and for any other applications or matters which may come before them where they deem it appropriate and proper. Such applications and the granting of the benefits requested shall be subject to and conditioned upon such stipulations and conditions as the corporate authorities deem appropriate and proper; provided that such stipulations and conditions reasonably relate to the application and are a reasonable exercise of the village's police power as related to the health, safety and welfare of its citizenry. 
(b)  Such stipulations and conditions may provide that the requested benefits sought in the application will not be granted until the condition is first satisfied or may provide that the application and request is granted conditioned upon and subject to the subsequent fulfillment of the stipulations and conditions. If the latter applies and the stipulations and conditions are not fulfilled as provided for in said stipulations and conditions, the prior legislative action of the corporate authorities conditionally granting the application shall be rescinded and the property shall be restored to its legal status and condition which existed immediately prior to the filing of the original application. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as the delegation of the legislative duties of the corporate authorities, however the zoning and planning commission and other appropriate boards and commissions of the village may provide in their recommendations to the corporate authorities appropriate conditions and stipulations. 
(d)  The stipulations and conditions which the commission may impose, pursuant to this section, shall include but not necessarily be limited to those subject matters set forth in Ordinance No. 1195, otherwise known as the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 1598, §§ 1—4, 11-10-75; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 18-103. - House numbers. 
(a)  All buildings and lots in the village shall be numbered in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  All lots or houses located on streets running in an easterly or westerly direction shall be numbered from Ardmore Avenue, beginning with the number one at the east line of Ardmore Avenue and increasing towards the east, and beginning with the number one at the west line of Ardmore Avenue and increasing towards the west. 
(2)  All lots or houses located on streets running in a northerly or southerly direction shall be numbered from St. Charles Road as a base line, beginning with the number one at the north line of St. Charles Road and increasing towards the north, and beginning with the number one at the south line of St. Charles Road and increasing towards the south. 
(3)  There shall be assigned a number to every twenty-five (25) feet of property, such number shall be changed from one hundred (100) to the succeeding one hundred (100) at each intersecting street. The even numbers on streets running in a northerly or southerly direction shall be on the west side of the streets; the even numbers on streets running in an easterly or westerly direction shall be on the north side of the streets. 
(4)  All streets running in a northerly or southerly direction, shall bear the prefix "North" or "South" according to their location with reference to St. Charles Road; all streets running in a easterly or westerly direction shall bear the prefix "East" or "West," according to their location with reference to Ardmore Avenue. 
The village clerk shall assign or cause to be assigned to each lot or house its proper number and shall inform the owner, agent or person in possession of such premises as to the number thereof upon demand. 
(b)  The house numbering map prepared by authority of the village is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 156, §§ 1—4, 6, 8-4-24)  
Sec. 18-104. - Changing lot elevations or grades; obstructing drainage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or change the elevation or grade of any lot or parcel of land within the village by excavating or filling without first having obtained a permit for such alteration or change; however, grade or elevation changes of less than three (3) inches for the purposes of landscaping shall not require a permit provided said grade or elevation changes do not alter the direction of or obstruct in any manner, stormwater runoff. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owners or occupants, or their agents servants or employees, of any subdivision or parcel of land to obstruct any storm water drainage course. 
(c)  A permit shall be issued upon application, which application shall include the submission of a topographic survey of the area to be filled or excavated. Said survey shall be prepared by a qualified surveyor or engineer, licensed or registered with the state, and shall clearly show that such filling or excavation will not result in a material change in the flow of storm or surface water. Additionally, said survey shall specify the limits and depths of the proposed filling or excavation. If the filling or excavation is of a minor nature and the engineering department of the village determines through field investigation that the proposed alteration of elevation will not adversely affect the storm water runoff on adjacent or nearby properties, the requirement of submitting a survey may be waived. The permit fee for such application shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each such permit. However, if the application is for alteration to be confined within the boundary lines of one single family residential lot, then the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) or if the application is for a driveway the fee shall be as stated in section 7-202. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use garbage or refuse, broken concrete or any other material of nuisance character, or which material may decompose, or cannot be properly compacted. Any material used to alter or change the elevation of any lot or real property within the village must be approved by the engineering department of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1895, §§ 1—4, 3-17-80; Ord. No. 3209, § 2, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 3257, §§ 2, 4, 7-12-04; Ord. No. 3974 , § 3, 5-22-17)  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING GUIDELINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2240, §§ 1—4, adopted May 18, 1987, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 18-201—18-204, was at the discretion of the editor. Sections 5 through 8, providing for conflict, saving clause, separability and validity, have been omitted from codification. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; zoning and planning commission, § 2-1601 et seq.; building and building regulations, Ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; subdivision regulations, App. B; zoning, App. C. 
 
Sec. 18-201. - General provisions. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or state law, governing applications or requests for zoning amendments, subdivisions, variations, conditional uses, special uses, annexations, or any other amendments of the Villa Park Municipal Code, including Appendix C, as may be germane to the jurisdiction and functions of the planning and zoning commission. It shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of each and every applicant to comply with the rules and regulations of the planning and zoning commission as well as all provisions of zoning ordinances, subdivision ordinances and other ordinances of the village and nothing herein contained shall be construed as relieving an applicant of such responsibility. 
(b)  All proceedings before the planning and zoning commission governing special uses, rezoning, subdivision, variation, conditional uses or other amendment of Appendix C - Basic Zoning Ordinance of the Villa Park Municipal Code shall take place before a certified shorthand reporter who shall prepare a transcript of all proceedings before the commission to accompany the chairman's report to the corporate authorities; provided however that the commission may suspend this rule by a majority vote and proceed to hearing without a court reporter. In such case, the commission shall designate one of its members to take minutes of the proceedings. The cost of the attendance of the reporter and preparation of any transcripts shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(c)  Exhibits offered and received as part of the official record of proceedings shall become a part of the application and remain therewith. Custody of the official exhibits shall be with the director of community development or his or her designee. 
(d)  At the conclusion of any public hearing, the planning and zoning commission will deliberate and reach a decision as to a disposition to be reported to the corporate authorities. A motion recommending approval, denial, or approval with special consideration, restriction, or modification will be entertained. 
(e)  In cases where the planning and zoning commission finds that the anticipated increased activity in the village due to the proposed development requires the provisions of additional public service, facilities or the like, the planning and zoning commission may require a dedication or reservation of land, monetary payments or the construction of improvements as a legal condition of approval for subdivision or development. Such developer contributions shall not be required unless the anticipated increased activity necessitating the contribution is specifically and uniquely attributable to activities of the developer which generate cost which would otherwise be cast upon the public. 
(f)  The chairman will forward the report of the planning and zoning commission together with a copy of the transcript to the corporate authorities for their consideration. The applicant, applicant's representative(s) and a member of the planning and zoning commission, when necessary, shall attend the first meeting of the corporate authorities wherein the report of the planning and zoning commission is considered, and answer any questions which the corporate authorities may have. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 1, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 2568, § 2, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 2725, § 5, 8-22-94)  
Sec. 18-202. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article II, and any rules and regulations duly adopted by the planning and zoning commission shall be enforced by the planning and zoning commission of the village and by the community development department, its director, and his or her designated representatives, where applicable. All inspections of public improvements or structures required by Ordinance No. 2551, as initially adopted or subsequently amended, shall be done by the director of public work or his or her designee, or as set forth in Ordinance No. 2551 or any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 2568, § 3, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 2725, § 6, 8-22-94)  
Sec. 18-203. - Fees, costs, deposit accounts. 
(a)  Fees for applications, maps, plans, etc.; deposit accounts. The following fees shall be required of all applicants: 
(b)  Fees for plan review of engineering plans that accompany storm water permit applications, fill permit applications, subdivision applications, or any other permit applications that include construction plans for public improvements shall be ten (10) percent of the stormwater permit fees set forth in Section 8 of Appendix D - Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance or one hundred dollars ($100.00), whichever is greater. In addition to other fees set forth in this article, in the event that the village retains the services of an outside consultant, the applicant shall reimburse the village the actual amount of the consultant fees. No construction permits shall be issued by the village until all engineering plan review fees have been paid. No occupancy permits shall be issued by the village until all outstanding engineering fees, including outside consultant fees, have been paid. 
(c)  Application fees: 
Variation only: 	Residential 
  First variation 
  Each additional 	  
 $150.00 
  100.00 
	Multifamily 
  First variation 
  Each additional 	  
 $300.00 
  200.00 
	Commercial 
  First variation 
  Each additional 	  
 $300.00 
  200.00 
	Industrial 
  First variation 
  Each additional 	  
 $300.00 
  200.00 
Rezoning to: 	  Residential 
  Multifamily 
  Commercial 
  Industrial 	 $200.00 
  300.00 
  300.00 
  300.00 
Rezoning with variation: 	Additional fee of 	$100.00 per variation 
requested 
Subdivision: 	  Residential 
  Multifamily 
  Commercial 
  Industrial 	$100.00 per subdivided lot 
 150.00 per subdivided lot 
 150.00 per subdivided lot 
 150.00 per subdivided lot 
Subdivision 
with variation: 	Additional fee of 	$100.00 per variation 
requested 
Amendment; special use; conditional use; appeal; or other request requiring planning and zoning commission public hearing: 
	  Residential 
  Multifamily 
  Commercial 
  Industrial 	$150.00 
 300.00 
 300.00 
 300.00 
 
(d)  Deposit account. Any and all expenses incurred by the village on behalf of any applicant, including but not limited to photo copying, reporter fees, transcript fees, publication fees, recording fees, consultant fees notification fees or any other out-of-pocket expenses incurred on behalf of applicant shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of the applicant. The amounts set forth hereinafter shall be deposited with the village to cover direct expenses incurred relating to presentation of applications to the planning and zoning commission. The deposited funds shall be held in a separate account by the village to be used either as security for the payment of such expenses or for the actual payment of such expenses as may be provided hereinafter. 
Residential: 
  Upon initial application: 
  Upon each continuance: 	  
$  500.00 
   250.00 
Property which is or is requested to be nonresidential: 
  Upon initial application: 
  Upon each continuance: 	  
$  1,000.00 
   250.00 
 
As invoices are received by the village in conjunction with any application, applicant shall promptly forward to the village a check payable to the Village of Villa Park, directed to the attention of the director of community development, in an amount equal to the amount of the invoice(s). These monies shall be deposited to the applicant's account and used by the village to pay the invoice(s). A portion of the deposit may be applied toward expenses incurred when in the judgment of the director of community development such deposit is adequate to cover all outstanding and anticipated expenses. Any balance remaining in the applicant's account at the conclusion of all proceedings will be returned to the applicant within thirty (30) days of final action by the corporate authorities, provided that all outstanding or anticipated expenses have been paid. 
In the event that the deposit account is not sufficient for payment of expenses, the applicant shall submit additional funds to the village to cover the outstanding expenses. All outstanding invoices shall be paid prior to the matter being submitted to the corporate authorities for consideration. The village reserves the right to suspend all proceedings upon applicant's failure to reimburse the village for outstanding expenses when requested. 
(e)  Fees for zoning documents. The following fees shall be paid for each copy of the following documents: 
Zoning map 	$ 5.00 
Zoning ordinance 	 15.00 
Comprehensive plan 	 30.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 3, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 2568, § 4, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 2725, § 7, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 3209, §§ 3, 4, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 3257, §§ 3, 4, 7-12-04)  
Sec. 18-204. - Violations, penalties. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity which disobeys, violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this article or the five-point program adopted hereby or the provisions thereof, shall be subject to the halting of all proceedings pursuant to their application and the loss of refundable fees and or subject to payment of reasonable costs incurred by the village due to the noncompliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 4, 5-15-87)  
Chapter 19 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3516, adopted Oct. 27, 2008, amended ch. 19 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 19 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Date 
220 	 8- 1-27 	2040 	 8-23-82 
247 	 7-30-28 	2077 	 5- 2-83 
325 	 2-19-34 	2242 	 6- 1-87 
1093 	12-16-68 	2264 	11-16-87 
1101 	 2- 7-69 	2462 	 1-21-91 
1482 	 7-22-74 	2632 	 3- 3-93 
1618 	 1-26-76 	2769 	 4-24-95 
1648 	 5- 3-76 	2829 	 6-10-96 
1748 	10-24-77 	2856 	11-11-96 
1881 	12- 3-79 	2975 	 2-15-99 
1939 	10-20-80 	2989 	 5-10-99 
1984 	 6-15-81 	3274 	12-13-04 
2015 	 1- 4-82 	3438 	 8-27-07 
2036 	 7-26-82 		
 
Cross reference— Fire and police commission, ch. 2, art. XVIII; police pension board, ch. 2, art. XXIII. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-101. - Established. 
There is hereby established a police department. The police department shall consist of the police chief and deputy chiefs and other members of the department as may be authorized from time to time by the president and board of trustees. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08; Ord. No. 3734, § 1, 3-18-13)  
Sec. 19-102. - Size and organization. 
(a)  In order of rank, from highest to lowest, the police department shall consist of the following classifications: 
Police chief; 
Deputy chiefs; 
Sergeants; 
Patrol officers; 
Part-time patrol officers. 
(b)  The total number of sworn full-time police personnel as stated in subsection (a) above shall be established by the annual village budget. The total number of part-time patrol officers as stated above in subsection (a) shall not exceed thirty (30). 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to prescribe and define the duties and responsibilities relative to the aforesaid classifications. 
(d)  Any police department employee who holds the position of deputy chief shall retain such position for the duration of said employee's tenure with the police department unless removed by the chief of police with the approval of the village manager and, thereafter, shall return to the rank held prior to the appointment as deputy chief; provided, however, that any deputy chief shall not be disciplined, suspended or discharged from the department for cause unless afforded a hearing in accordance with the applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, the rules and regulations of the Villa Park Board of Police and Fire Commissioners and the departmental rules of the Villa Park Police Department. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08; Ord. No. 3734, § 2, 3-18-13; Ord. No. 3819, § 1, 9-8-14)  
Sec. 19-103. - Probationary promotional period. 
(a)  A two-year probationary period for all police department recruits is hereby required. 
(b)  A one-year probationary period for all police department promotions is hereby required. 
(c)  The review and determination of successful completion of the probationary period shall be determined by the board of fire and police commissioners pursuant to its rules and regulations. 
(d)  If the board of fire and police commissioners determines that the police department recruit has not successfully performed his/her probationary period, the recruit's period of employment shall be terminated. 
(e)  If the board of fire and police commissioners determines that the member promoted has not successfully performed his/her probationary period, or at the written request of the member during the probationary period, the member shall return to his/her prior position if such position is available. 
(f)  The board of fire and police commissions should also have the authority to extend the probationary period. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 19-104. - Office of police chief and duties. 
There is hereby created the office of chief of police, which shall be appointed by the village manager. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. He shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or ordinance and shall submit the reports to the village manager. He shall perform such other duties as may be directed by the village manager or by the village board. The chief of police may make or prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the guidance of the members of the department. Such policies, rules and regulations shall be binding on all members of the department. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08; Ord. No. 3663, § 2, 7-25-11)  
Sec. 19-105. - Deputy chief(s) of police. 
(a)  There is hereby established two (2) appointed positions of deputy chief within the police department of the village. The positions shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of chief and shall not be subject to promotional processes used only for ranking positions. 
(b)  To be eligible for appointment to the position of deputy chief, an individual must be a sworn, full-time officer in the Village of Villa Park Police Department with at least five (5) years of full-time service as a police officer for the village. 
(c)  The deputy chief(s) shall be appointed by the chief of police, with the approval of the village manager, and shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and the village manager acting jointly. 
(d)  The deputy chief(s) shall report directly to the chief of police and shall take orders from the chief of police as directed. The nature of the duties, work assignments, projects and other responsibilities for the deputy chief(s) shall be determined by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08; Ord. No. 3664, § 2, 7-25-11; Ord. No. 3734, § 3, 3-18-13)  
Sec. 19-106. - Furnishing bail prohibited. 
No member of the police department shall furnish bail for any person arrested for violation of any ordinances of the village, or criminal law of the state. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 19-107. - Pension fund. 
There shall be a police pension fund as required by state law. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 19-108. - Annual report on pension fund by treasurer. 
On the second Tuesday in May annually, the treasurer and all other officials of the village, who had the custody of any pension funds herein provided, shall make a sworn statement to the board of trustees of the police pension fund, and to the president and board of trustees of the village, of all moneys received and paid out by them on account of the pension fund during the year, and of the amount of such funds then on hand and owing to the pension fund. All surplus then remaining with any official other than the treasurer shall be paid to such treasurer. Upon demand of the pension board, any official shall furnish a statement relative to the official method of collection or handling of such pension funds. All books and records of such official shall be produced at any time by such official for examination and inspection by the board of trustees of the police pension fund. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 19-109. - Residency requirement of sworn police officers. 
(a)  Any person, regardless of their place of residence at the time of making application, may apply for the position of sworn police personnel with the police department of the village. 
(b)  All sworn police department personnel hired by the police department shall reside a maximum of thirty (30) miles from the territorial limits of the village within one (1) year after the two-year probationary period of employment is completed and shall thereafter continue to reside in said territory during employment by the police department. 
(c)  In the event that any sworn police officer fails to reside within the [maximum of thirty (30) miles from the territorial limits of the village] within one (1) year after the two-year probationary period of employment, same shall be cause for discharge or dismissal.  
Sec. 19-110. - Part-time police. 
(a)  The police chief is hereby authorized to appoint not more than thirty (30) part-time police officers. The police chief shall have full authority to discipline or discharge part-time police officers. Part-time police officers shall be at-will employees and may be discharged with or without cause by the police chief at any time. Part-time police officers shall be subject to the direction and control of the police chief at all times during the performance of their duties. Part-time police officers shall further abide by all rules, regulations, policies and general orders of the Villa Park Police Department, as promulgated from time to time. 
(b)  Hiring standards for part-time police officers shall be as follows: 
(1)  An applicant for the position of part-time police officer must have reached twenty-one (21) years of age and possess a high school diploma or its equivalent and pass a physical exam, a psychological exam, and other exams as directed by the police chief to determine fitness for duty. The applicant must also submit to a pre-employment background check, which includes a fingerprint check through the Illinois State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(2)  A person hired to serve as a part-time police officer must obtain from the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board a certificate: (i) attesting to his or her successful completion of the part-time police training course; (ii) attesting to his or her satisfactory completion of a training program of similar content and number of hours that has been found acceptable by the board; or (iii) attesting to the board's determination that the part-time police training course is unnecessary because of the person's extensive prior law enforcement experience. A person hired on or after January 1, 1996, must obtain this certificate within eighteen (18) months after the date of hire. 
(c)  Part-time police officers shall be members of the regular police department, except for pension purposes. Part-time police officers shall not be assigned under any circumstances to supervise or direct full-time police officers of the police department. Part-time police officers shall not be used as permanent replacements for permanent full-time police officers. 
(d)  Part-time police officers shall be trained under the Intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officer's In-Service Training Act (50 ILCS 720/1 et seq., as now existing or hereafter amended), in accordance with the procedures for part-time police officers established by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board. A part-time police officer hired after January 1, 1996, who has not yet received certification under Section 8.2 of the Illinois Police Training Act shall be directly supervised. 
(Ord. 3516, § 2, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 19-111. - Cost recovery program. 
In addition to any other fine or penalty required by law, an individual convicted of a violation of section 11-501 entitled, "Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof" of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501) or a similar provision of a village ordinance, who proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response by the village's police or fire departments including ambulance service, shall be required to make restitution to the village for the actual costs of the village's personnel, equipment and incidental costs attributable to the emergency response. The restitution shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each emergency response which shall be in addition to the fees provided for in section 9-313. 
(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 6-25-12)  
Sec. 19-112. - Administrative booking fee. 
(a)  Fee charged. The police department shall charge a fifty dollar ($50.00) administrative processing fee for the posting bail or bond in any legal process, civil or criminal, or on any bookable arrest, including a warrant, of an adult to be levied and paid at the time of posting said bail or bond. The processing fee shall not be charged as an additional fee to the administrative vehicle impoundment penalty. 
(b)  Conditions. In order for the fee to be assessed, the person must be processed in the police department's booking area and bond posted at the police department. 
(c)  Debt due. If the administrative processing fee is imposed pursuant to this section, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village and the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment as provided by law. Failure to pay the administrative processing fee shall not, by itself, constitute grounds for holding the subject. 
(d)  Request for hearing. 
(1)  A person may request a hearing in writing within thirty (30) days of the imposition of the administrative fee. 
(2)  The chief of police or his designee shall conduct the hearing. 
(3)  The hearing shall be informal, not subject to the formal rules of evidence, and may be conducted over the phone. 
(4)  If, after the hearing, the chief of police of his designee determine that the imposition of the administrative fee was proper then he shall direct the collection of the administrative fee. 
(5)  If there is a determination that imposition of the administrative fee was improper, then the arrestee shall not be required to pay the administrative fee. If the administrative fee has already been paid then the same will be refunded. 
(6)  The person may appeal the decision of the chief of police, or his designee, by requesting, in writing, within fourteen (14) days of the decision, an administrative hearing as set forth herein. 
(e)  Administrative hearing. 
(1)  Upon the timely written request by a person who has been charged the administrative fee, a hearing on the imposition of the administrative fee shall be conducted in conjunction with chapter 26, article I "Administrative Adjudication" of this Code. 
(2)  Any sworn or affirmed report that is prepared in the performance of law enforcement officer's duties and sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the person's arrest and processing shall be admissible prima facie evidence of probable cause and the person's liability, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence. 
(3)  If after the hearing, the hearing officer finds that the imposition of the administrative fee was proper under the terms of this chapter, the hearing officer may enter a written order finding the person liable to the Village of Villa Park. 
(4)  If the person requests a hearing but fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer may enter a default order for the amount of the administrative fee against the person. 
(5)  If after the hearing, the hearing officer finds that the imposition of the administrative fee was improper, then the person will not be charged the administrative fee. 
(6)  If the person is acquitted by a court of competent jurisdiction of the criminal charges on which the arrest and administrative fee were based, and if the acquittal was not part of a negotiated plea agreement, the administrative fee shall be refunded if the person requests the refund in writing within thirty (30) days of the acquittal. 
(Ord. No. 3755, § 1, 8-12-13)  
Secs. 19-113—19-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, adopted May 5, 2018, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 19-201—19-210, 19-221—19-224, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to burglar and holdup alarms and derived from Ord. 3516, § 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2008. 
 
Sec. 19-201. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is the regulating and permitting alarm systems to which the police department is expected to respond.  
Sec. 19-202. - Definitions. 
Alarm administrator means the person designated by the police chief to handle and deal with enforcement of police alarm systems and false alarms. 
Alarm agent means any person employed by, working for, representing, or subcontracted by an alarm company. 
Alarm company means the business by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed in or on any building, structure or facility. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted burglary, robbery, or other police alarm to which the police department is expected to respond. 
Alarm User means a person(s), firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity in control of premises where an alarm system is located. 
Audible alarm means an alarm system or device that generates an audible sound. 
Automatic dialing digital alarm communicator system means a system in which signals are transmitted from a digital alarm communicator transmitter located at a protected premises through the public switched telephone network to a digital alarm communicator receiver at a central alarm station or the village's alarm monitoring system. 
Automatic dialing telephone alarm means a device that automatically dials any of the village's emergency communications center telephone lines, without human activation of the device by the alarm user or employee of the alarm user, upon detection of an illegal entry or other illegal activity at protected premises. 
Calendar year means a twelve (12) month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 every year. 
Central alarm station means a system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded at, or maintained and serviced from a place of business having trained alarm operators in attendance at all times. 
Chief of police means the village of Villa Park Chief of Police or his designee. 
False alarm means activation or transmission of any alarm signal caused by human error, mechanical or electronic malfunction, negligence of the alarm user or alarm user's employee, whether or not the exact cause of the alarm activation is determined, or any other activation or transmission of any alarm signal where no actual or attempted burglary, robbery, or other police alarm need exists. Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, acts of God, malicious acts of persons not under the control of the alarm user, or any other cause clearly beyond the control of the alarm user will be considered in determining if an alarm activation was false and whether or not any occurrence, fine, warning or other punitive action will be taken against the alarm user as provided for by this article. 
Notice means written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or, given by the United States Postal Office, postage paid, to the addressee's last known mailing address or to the email address given by the addressee. 
Permittee means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity issued an alarm permit by the village. 
Person means a natural person, or a firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, company, or other entity. 
Police alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted burglary or robbery to which the police department is expected to respond. 
Prerecorded telephone message means any prerecorded voice message transmitted or received over a telephone line. 
Protected premises means any building, structure, or facility where an alarm system is installed to signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted burglary, robbery, or other police emergency to which the police department is expected to respond. 
Supervising station means a facility that receives signals from protected premises alarm systems and at which personnel are in attendance at all times to respond to these signals. These facilities include listed central stations and remote supervising stations. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-203. - Permit required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to use, own or lease a police alarm system or to be in control of a premises wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained without having first obtained a permit as provided in this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of a premises wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained when a permit therefore has been revoked or the permittee is no longer an occupant of the premises. 
(c)  A permit must be obtained for each separately addressed operating location. 
(d)  No fee shall be charged to obtain an alarm user permit. 
(e)  All permits issued are valid indefinitely unless revoked. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-204. - Permit application. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit to maintain an alarm system shall file a written application with the village police department stating: 
(1)  The full legal name, address, telephone number and email address of the applicant. 
(2)  The address of the premises where the alarm system is located and if the police alarm system includes multiple tenants the name and telephone emergency contact number for each tenant. 
(3)  The type of alarm system at the protected premises. 
(4)  A list of three (3) persons, including their addresses and telephone numbers, who can be contacted and will respond to the premises in the event of an emergency or to reset or deactivate the alarm system, or who could contact the alarm user if the alarm user is not at the protected premises. 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or company that installed the alarm system. 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or company that is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm system, if applicable. 
(7)  The name, address and telephone number of the central alarm station or the supervising station for the alarm system. 
(b)  Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. A permit will not be issued until the completed application is received and approval for the permit has been granted by the alarm administrator. 
(c)  An application for an alarm user permit shall be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to pay false alarm fees required by this article for a different protected premises under the applicant's ownership or control. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to comply with any provisions of this article or other ordinances of the village. 
(d)  The village's police department shall be responsible for processing and issuing alarm user permits. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-205. - Alarm activation at a premises where an alarm user permit has not been issued. 
Any alarm user who does not have a valid alarm user permit will be assessed a fine in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each notice to the village's emergency communications center of an activation of a police alarm system at the protected premises. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-206. - Updating alarm user application. 
It is unlawful for any alarm user to fail or refuse to amend its alarm user permit application within fourteen (14) days after any of the information required and contained therein becomes outdated or inaccurate. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-207. - Transfer of alarm user permit prohibited. 
An alarm user permit cannot be transferred to another premises or to another person. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-208. - Audible alarm system requirements. 
An alarm system that emits an audible signal that may be heard by persons outside the protected building, structure or facility shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  No audible alarm system shall create a sound similar to that of the village's civil defense warning system. 
(2)  Audible alarm systems shall automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within thirty (30) minutes after it is activated. 
(3)  With respect to systems in existence prior to the adoption of this article, the owner or operator thereof shall have thirty (30) days from the effective date hereof to effect the necessary modifications to comply with the foregoing requirements. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-209. - Automatic dialing telephone alarm requirements. 
(a)  Any automatic dialing telephone alarm or device installed and operated that dials any village telephone line other than the village's emergency communications center designated alarm line is prohibited. No person will install, or cause to be installed, or maintain or cause to be maintained, any automatic dialing telephone alarm that dials any village telephone line other than the village's emergency communications center designated alarm line. Any such automatic dialing telephone alarm or device that dials any village telephone line other than the village's emergency communications center designated alarm line must be reprogrammed to dial the village's emergency communications center designated alarm line, removed or deactivated by the owner thereof at the owner's expense, within thirty (30) days following the effective date hereof. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to allow any automatic alarm, automatic dialing device or automatic alerting device which causes any village telephone line to be dialed, and whose sole purpose is to establish an open telephone line with the specific intent that a conversation between parties not actively speaking into the telephone instrument be heard in order to directly access emergency services based on this overheard conversation, or lack of conversation. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-210. - False alarms prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police department except if such person knows or suspects that there is an actual or attempted burglary, robbery, or other police emergency on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-211. - False alarms; fines; notifications. 
(a)  Any alarm user permittee who has more than four (4) false alarms within a calendar year at a single protected location will be assessed fines according to the following fine schedule: 
Fifth (5th)—Eighth (8th) false alarms: One hundred dollars ($100.00) fine per false alarm; 
Ninth (9th)—Tenth (10th) false alarms: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) fine per false alarm; 
Eleventh (11th)—Twentieth (20th) false alarms: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) fine per false alarm; 
More than twenty (20) false alarms: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) fine per false alarm. 
(b)  All fines must be paid to the village finance department within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice requesting payment of the fine(s). 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user, in writing or by email, of each instance wherein the village's emergency communications center has recorded a false alarm. The alarm user shall have the opportunity within fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing, email or personal delivery to submit a report or meet with the alarm administrator for the purpose of showing cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false alarm recordation. The alarm administrator shall review the alarm user's report and/or meet with the alarm user and issue a written finding to the alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm record will be voided. The finding of the alarm administrator shall be final. 
(d)  A false alarm shall not include an alarm system malfunction within thirty (30) days of a new installation or modification of an existing system; provided that the alarm administrator has received prior written notice of the work performed, appropriate permits have been issued and all reasonable efforts are being made to prevent further false alarms. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-212. - Permit revocation for police alarm system. 
(a)  Any alarmed premises which has ten (10) or more false alarms from a police alarm system within a calendar year shall subject the alarm user to permit revocation as provided herein. For the purposes of this section and alarm permit revocations, a combined security system which contains both police and fire components in and serving a single residence shall also be deemed to be a police alarm system and subject to permit revocation as provided in this section. 
(b)  If Village records show ten (10) or more false alarms within a calendar year for any alarmed premises: 
(1)  The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail or personal delivery, that their alarm permit shall be revoked thirty (30) days from date of mailing or personal delivery. The alarm user shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing or personal delivery to submit a written report to the alarm administrator describing actions taken or to be taken to identify and eliminate the cause of the false alarms, and to request that their alarm user's permit be reinstated. 
(2)  If the alarm user submits a report requesting reinstatement of their alarm user's permit, the alarm administrator shall determine if the action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms; if he determines that the action will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, he shall notify the alarm user, via certified mail or personal delivery, that the request to reinstate the alarm users permit has been approved. 
(3)  If the alarm user's permit is reinstated, and the police department responds to a subsequent false alarm activation in the same calendar year at the protected premises, the alarm administrator shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this subsection (b). The alarm user shall also be assessed a fine in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent false alarm through the remainder of the calendar year. 
(4)  If the alarm administrator determines that the action taken, or to be taken, will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the request for reinstatement shall be denied. The alarm administrator shall give notice by certified mail or personal delivery, to the user that the permit will be revoked without further notice. 
(5)  An alarm user whose permit has been revoked by the alarm administrator may, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of revocation, appeal this decision by filing a written request for a review meeting with the chief of police. 
(6)  If a review meeting with the chief of police is requested, written notice of the time and place of the review meeting will be served on the alarm user by the chief of police by certified mail or personal delivery within fourteen (14) days of the request by the alarm user. 
(7)  The alarm administrator and the alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross-examination by both parties. 
(8)  If the chief of police determines that the user has not taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the chief of police shall issue written findings to that effect and an order denying reinstatement of the alarm user's permit. 
(9)  If the chief of police determines that the alarm user has taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the chief of police shall issue written findings to that effect and an order approving reinstatement of the alarm user's permit. 
(10)  If the alarm user's permit is reinstated, pursuant to subsection (b)(9) of this section, and the police department responds to a subsequent false alarm activation in the same calendar year at the protected premises, the alarm administrator shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this subsection (b). The alarm user shall also be assessed a fine in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent false alarm activation through the remainder of the calendar year. 
(11)  If the alarm user's request for reinstatement of their alarm permit has been denied by the chief of police, the alarm user may, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice of revocation, appeal this decision by filing a written request for a review meeting with the village manager. 
(12)  If the village manager determines that the user has not taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the village manager shall issue written findings to that effect and an order denying reinstatement of the alarm user's permit. The decision of the village manager shall be final. 
(13)  If the village manager determines that the alarm user has taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the village manager shall issue written findings to that effect and an order approving reinstatement of the alarm user's permit. 
(14)  If the alarm user's permit is reinstated pursuant to subsection (b)(13) of this section and the police department responds to a subsequent false alarm activation in the same calendar year at the protected premises, the alarm administrator shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this subsection (b). The alarm user shall also be assessed a fine in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent false alarm activation through the remainder of the calendar year. 
(c)  Any alarm user permittee who fails to pay any fines or charges provided for under this article within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice requesting payment of same shall have the subject alarm user permit revoked. Any such alarm user permit shall not be reinstated until all the unpaid fines and fees are paid in full. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-213. - Testing equipment. 
No person shall conduct or cause to be conducted, any test or demonstration of any alarm system or signaling device that is directly connected with the village's emergency communications center without first obtaining permission from the village's emergency communications center personnel. Permission to test shall not be required when the alarm system or signaling device is connected to an intermediary receiver and is not relayed to the village's emergency communications center. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-214. - Maintenance of equipment. 
The alarm user shall be responsible for maintaining the alarm system to assure reliability of operation, including, but not limited to, so as to prevent continued false alarms. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-215. - No liability of village. 
The village assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any alarm system or signal line system, for any failure or neglect of any person associated with the installation, operation or maintenance of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect of any alarm user, for the transmission or receipt of alarm signals or any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm from any source. 
In the event that the village finds it necessary to revoke an alarm user permit or to otherwise provide for the disconnection of any alarm system, the village shall have no liability for such action. No special duty other than that owed to the general public shall be created by virtue of this article or by virtue of the issuance of an alarm system permit, the direct connection of an alarm system with the police department or as a result of the transmission to or receipt of alarm signals by the police department. Police department response to police alarm systems which have a history of false alarms or which have been revoked may consist of a lower priority (or may cease entirely for those revoked). The village assumes no responsibility for not responding upon the receipt of an alarm under such situations. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-216. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, said judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this article in the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person or circumstance involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the village board that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof not been included. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Sec. 19-217. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article, in addition to the fees and specific fines established herein, shall be fined as provided in section 1-108 of this Code. Each day during which a violation of this article continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
( Ord. No. 4030 , § 1, 5-8-18)  
Secs. 19-218—19-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOTOR VEHICLE TOWS 
 
Sec. 19-300. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Extended service: Any tow which required the operator to perform services beyond those required in a "normal tow". For the purpose of this definition a "normal tow" is a tow where the vehicle's wheels are on the ground and the vehicle may be readily towed. 
Heavy duty: Involving vehicles forty thousand (40,000) GVWR or heavier. 
Illinois Vehicle Code: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Light duty: Involving vehicles up to, but not including, twelve thousand (12,000) GVWR. 
Medium duty: Involving vehicles from twelve thousand (12,000) up to, but not including, forty thousand (40,000) GVWR. 
Police department: The Village of Villa Park Police Department (VPPD). 
Tow list: The most current list maintained by the Villa Park Police Department containing the names of those tow operators approved by the chief of police to respond to requests by the Villa Park Police Department Dispatcher for the towing of vehicles which are disabled where the person in charge of the vehicle has no preference for any particular tow service or is unable to make such a decision. The list shall also be utilized: a) to tow village owned vehicles in need of service to a location designated by the police department; and b) to tow vehicles impounded by the police department. 
Tow operator: A person or firm engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, vehicle towing whereby motor vehicles are, or may be, towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by use of a tow truck, and which person or firm is listed on the tow list. 
Uprighting: Bringing a vehicle that is either overturned or on its side to the upright position in tow. 
Winching: Bringing a vehicle that is completely off of the road surface onto the road surface for the purpose of towing. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-301. - Application for tow list, license required. 
Any person desiring to perform towing work for the village must submit a completed and correct "tow list application" to the police department. After the list is established, an operator must submit a current certificate of insurance each calendar year. A village issued license is required for any person performing towing work for the village; the annual fee for this license shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-302. - Investigation and approval. 
(a)  After receiving an application for towing the police department will conduct an investigation to determine the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. Additionally, towing equipment will be inspected by the police department. 
(b)  Any person applying to perform towing work for the village will supply to the police department the results of a criminal fingerprint inquiry for the owners and tow operators as prescribed in the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 ILCS 5/4-203.5(b). 
(c)  Upon completion of its investigation, the tow operator will either be placed on the tow list or notified in writing that the application has not been approved. 
(d)  No application will be considered or license issued to any person, business, corporation or partnership that owes delinquent fines, fees or taxes to the village. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-303. - Insurance. 
(a)  The tow operator must maintain, at its sole cost and expense, general liability insurance with umbrella liability coverage as required in 625 ILCS 5/4-230.5: 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability: Must include the following industry standard forms of insurance: 
a.  Premises/operation coverage; 
b.  Products and completed operations coverage; 
c.  Blanket contractual liability; 
d.  An amount as established by the annual fee ordinance for combined single limit or bodily injury and property damage. 
(2)  Comprehensive auto liability: Must include the following endorsements: 
a.  All owned autos, hired car coverage, and employers non-owned auto coverage; 
b.  The policy shall not contain a radius restriction of less than fifty (50) miles; 
c.  Hook liability in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(3)  Garage keepers' legal liability or motor truck cargo: The vendor shall provide coverage for the vehicles in their custody. Either a motor truck cargo policy, listing all storage lots as terminal locations, or garage keepers' legal liability shall be required. The minimum amount of coverage shall be as established by police department directive. 
(4)  Workers' compensation and employers' liability: Statutory limits for workers' compensation and an amount as established by police department directive for employers' liability limit. 
(b)  The village must be named as an additional insured under all such policies and the policies must contain a provision that the insurance shall not be canceled without giving the village at least thirty (30) days' notice of cancellation or material change. All insurance policies must cover the operator, its carriers, agents and subcontractors and be maintained in full force, at all times while on the tow list. 
(c)  No tow operator will be placed on the tow list unless and until it provides a certificate of insurance conforming to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-304. - Duties and requirements of tow operators on tow list. 
(a)  The tow operator is responsible for providing a secured lot where towed vehicles are stored, with an office at that location and staffed during reasonable business hours. The storage lot shall be located within five (5) miles of the village limits. The storage lot shall be in compliance with all local ordinances and zoning regulations. 
(b)  All tow trucks must be equipped with warning lights and all other equipment required by state law including, without limitation, one (1) or more brooms and shovels, oil-dry chemical, one (1) or more trash cans at least eighteen (18) inches in height, and one (1) fire extinguisher of a dry chemical or carbon dioxide type with an aggregate rating of at least 4B.C units and bearing the approval of a laboratory qualified by the division of fire prevention for this purpose; and have working two-way communication equipment on the same commercial frequency as the base station located at the point where calls are received. All tow trucks must carry dollies at all times and must be equipped to safely transport motorcycles. 
(c)  The tow operator must possess a valid certification from the Illinois Commerce Commission. Every person operating a towing or recovery vehicle on behalf of the towing operator service must have completed a traffic incident management training program approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
(d)  Each tow operator will provide twenty-four (24) hour per day service each day of the year. There must be an attendant or answering service on duty at all times for the purpose of receiving calls, and there must be a person on call at all times for the purpose of releasing stored vehicles or for receiving vehicles. 
(e)  The tow operator will be required to sign an indemnification agreement, acceptable in form and substance to the village attorney, to indemnify, save and hold the village harmless from any liability for injuries or damages to any person or property by vehicles being towed or stored. No tow operator will be added to the tow list unless and until a signed original of the indemnity agreement is delivered to the police department. 
(f)  Tow operators will permit vehicle owners to remove personal property from vehicles stored at their facility during business hours at no charge. 
(g)  Tow operators will tow any village owned vehicle under ten thousand (10,000) pounds GVWR for no charge within fifty (50) miles of the village limits, but will retain call position on the tow rotation list if a village vehicle is towed. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-305. - Collection of costs; village payments; inspection of records. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, collection of towing and storage charges from the owner or driver of the towed vehicle will be the sole responsibility of the tow operator or his employee. The village will not be responsible for paying towing fees or for any storage costs. 
(b)  All tow operators on the tow list must maintain complete records and a system of releasing vehicles that assures vehicles are released only to the proper owner, or authorized person. All records involving towing from the tow list will be open to the police department for inspection during normal business hours or at such time as there is existing dispute concerning the amount or validity of any towing or storage charges. In addition, all tow operators must use receipt forms of a type and manner specified by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-306. - Operation of tow list. 
The police department will contact tow operators for service in the order of the tow list, with the position on the tow list being determined by the order of approval of each tow operator in accordance with this chapter. In no event will the police department call any towing service not on the tow list unless all tow operators are unavailable. It is specifically permitted for the police department to call a tow operator out of sequence in a life threatening emergency where there is an urgent need for services of a tow operator located in the near proximity of the event requiring service or where the estimated response time makes it more practical to do so. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-307. - Tow trucks for semi-tractor trailer vehicles. 
A separate tow list of tow operators capable of towing semi-tractor trailer vehicles will be maintained and will operate in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-308. - Suspension or removal from tow list. 
(a)  Power of chief of police: The chief of police may suspend or remove any tow operator from the tow list when he finds one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Placement on the list was secured by fraud or concealment of a material fact, that if known would have caused disapproval of the application; or 
(2)  The tow operator has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or state statute related to towing services or operation of its business; or 
(3)  The service provided by the tow operator has been substantially inadequate, because of one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
a.  Failing to be available for or not accepting calls; 
b.  Slow response time; 
c.  Excessive damage claims; 
d.  Repeated complaints from citizens; or 
e.  Inadequate or substandard towing equipment. 
The chief of police will provide written notice to the tow operator of a suspension or removal from the tow list. The notice will specify the reason for the suspension or removal and, in the event of a suspension, the actions required by the tow operator for reinstatement on the tow list. 
(b)  Immediate suspension or removal: If the chief of police determines that a tow operator presents an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the village, or if the tow operator has not provided proof of valid and current insurance in the amounts required by this chapter, the chief of police may, in his sole and absolute discretion, and without prior notice, suspend or remove the tow operator from the tow list. 
(c)  Appeals: Any suspended or removed tow operator may appeal the chief of police's decision in writing to the village manager. Any such appeal must specify the factual bases that warrant reconsideration of the chief of police's decision or other facts showing that the chief of police's decision was made in error. All decisions of the village manager will be final. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-309. - Services. 
The following services must be provided by every tow operator: 
(1)  General towing (hook or flatbed): 
a.  Light duty vehicle tow ..... $175.00 
b.  Medium duty vehicle tow ..... $200.00 
c.  Heavy duty vehicle tow ..... $330.00 
(2)  Service call (lockout, vehicle starting, tire changing, out of gas) ..... $90.00 
(3)  Winching/up-righting vehicle: 
a.  First half hour (in addition to towing charges) ..... $90.00 
b.  Each additional quarter hour ..... $45.00 
(4)  Standby: 
a.  Light/medium duty tow per half hour after first quarter hour on scene ..... $25.00 
b.  Each additional half hour ..... $25.00 
(5)  Storage: 
a.  For first 24 hours ..... No Charge 
b.  After 24 hours: 
1.  Light duty (per day) ..... $40.00 
2.  Light duty after hours release ..... $50.00 
3.  Light duty inside storage ..... $50.00 
(6)  Mileage: 
a.  Within village limits or to storage facility designated on application ..... No Charge 
b.  To storage facility other than as designated on application (per mile): ..... $4.00 
Every tow operator on the tow list will have a placard posted in the cab of the tow vehicle at all times that completely corresponds to the list set forth in this section and the fees for such services. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, if, in the sole and absolute opinion of a police officer at the scene, special or unusual circumstances require an exceptional amount of extra work or equipment, the tow operator may charge an additional reasonable fee; provided, however, that the owner or operator of the vehicle to be serviced, if available, is first informed of any such additional reasonable fee. In the event that the owner or operator is not available, the fees for services shall be as established in a police department directive. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-310. - Solicitation of business. 
(a)  No tow operator may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the purpose of towing vehicles unless called there by the police department or persons involved in the accident or emergency. Tow operators responding to an accident or emergency at the request of a person other than a police officer, must record the name and address of the person and make such information available to the police department upon request. 
(b)  This section is intended only to prohibit the soliciting of business at the scene of accidents and emergencies, and will not be construed to prohibit any tow operator from contracting with any person. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-311. - Tow truck operation. 
(a)  Every tow operator or driver of a tow truck will remove or cause to be removed all glass and debris deposited on any street or highway by the disabled vehicle being serviced, and will, in addition, spread oil-dry upon that portion of any street or highway where oil or grease has been deposited by the disabled vehicle being serviced. No fees for this service will be charged unless the spill requires special handling for removal. 
(b)  No tow operator or driver of a tow truck will respond to a call for service while under the influence of intoxicants. 
(c)  Towed vehicles will be taken to the location designated by the vehicle owner, driver or agent, should the person not wish to store the vehicle at the tow operator's facility; provided, however, that vehicles towed upon the direction of the police department will be towed to such a place as designated by the police officer in charge at the scene. 
(d)  When a tow operator tows a vehicle pursuant to a DUI arrest, the tow operator will hold that vehicle in storage for six (6) hours and may only then release the vehicle to the owner. 
(e)  When a tow operator tows a vehicle pursuant to a driving while license suspended (DWLS) or driving while licensed revoked (DWLR) arrest, the vehicle cannot be released until the registered owner shows proof of insurance for the vehicle towed and in such cases may only be released to the owner's agent who must submit proof of a valid and current State of Illinois driver's license. 
(f)  Once notified of a tow, the tow operator will provide the police department an approximate time it will take to arrive at the scene of a tow. If a tow operator is unable to respond to a tow request within twenty (20) minutes, the tow operator or his employee will advise the police department that he is not available. The tow operator will be marked unavailable. The police dispatcher will then call the next tow operator on the list. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-312. - Storage facility. 
Each tow operator will maintain a secure storage facility within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the village where all towed vehicles can be safely stored. A storage lot must be enclosed by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height and have a locked gate and a storage building must be fully enclosed and secured. All storage facilities must meet all zoning and fire ordinances and restrictions. When instructed by the police department that a vehicle in storage must be secured from tampering, the operator must store the vehicle so that it is not accessible to any person except upon specific approval of the tow operator or his agent. A clearance of twenty-four (24) inches must be maintained around all vehicles from the tow list calls. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-313. - Tow operator personnel qualifications. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state of an offense which under the laws of the State of Illinois would be a felony theft of a vehicle or a felony offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code, or of any offenses listed in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/4-203.5, will not be approved as a tow operator, nor will any tow operator knowingly permit such a person to operate a tow truck on the tow list calls. 
(b)  Each tow operator must furnish to the police department a complete and current list of all drivers who may respond to tow list calls. No driver will be permitted to respond to any tow list call unless his name, date of birth and driver's license number have been furnished to the police department at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance by the tow operator on forms provided by the police department. All persons operating a vehicle on behalf of the towing service must have the drivers' license classification for the vehicle or vehicles operated (625 ILCS 5/4-203.5). 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 19-314. - Amendment or termination of tow procedure and tow list. 
The village reserves the right to amend or terminate this chapter unilaterally at any time without any notice and without recourse. Any amendment to this chapter will apply to all current tow operators. The termination of this chapter will automatically terminate the most current tow list. 
(Ord. No. 3895 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Chapter 19.5 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1948, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1980, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, codification as herein set out in Ch. 19.5, §§ 19.5-101—19.5-104 has been at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 21; flood control, App. D. 
 
Sec. 19.5-101. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to control land modifications and excavation activities to prevent: 
(a)  Soil erosion, sedimentation and earth, soil, or rock removal that will result in damage to or loss of topsoil. 
(b)  Sedimentation that will affect the quality of runoff, or the capacity of storm sewers, drainage channels, streams and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1(A), 12-1-80)  
Sec. 19.5-102. - Definitions. 
[The following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated below:] 
Grading plan shall mean topographical plan that shows the existing land conditions including elevations, drainage, structures and natural objects, and proposed elevations, drainage, structures and natural objects. 
Land modification shall mean any modification to the existing land surface, including fills of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet (70.79 cubic meters), excavations of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet (70.79 cubic meters), drainage changes that will affect drainage onto or off of adjacent property, or surface disturbances of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet (232.69 square meters). 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1(B), 12-1-80)  
Sec. 19.5-103. - Permits. 
Before any land modification is made, a permit for the proposed work shall be obtained from the superintendent of building construction. The application for permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the superintendent, and at a minimum shall include the following information: 
(a)  All information required on the application form, including the location of the proposed work, a grading plan showing existing and proposed conditions and purpose for which the work is proposed. 
(b)  The area of land that will be stripped of vegetation, the location of any proposed soil stock piles, the limits of any excavation, the measures taken to keep soil erosion and sedimentation to a minimum, the effects on drainage, and a schedule of land modification activities including revegetation. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1(C), 12-1-80) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 19.5-104. - Land modifications. 
No permit for a land modification either separately or as part of a building permit shall be issued unless a sediment and erosion control plan is submitted that provides for the following: 
(a)  The smallest practical area of land is exposed at any given time in the development. 
(b)  The area exposed shall be kept to as short a duration of time as is practical. 
(c)  Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or soil traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(d)  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil surface conditions during and after development. 
(e)  Permanent, final plant covering of structures shall be installed as soon as possible. 
(f)  The erosion control plan shall relate to the topography and soil at the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created. 
The intent of these provisions is to obtain compliance with the standards and specifications for soil erosion and sediment control in northeastern Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1(D), 12-1-80)  
Chapter 20 - SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of village to license and regulate hawkers, transient vendors and peddlers, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-42-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-101. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter they shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions hereinafter set forth, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Canvasser: Any person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: (1) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue, or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money or anything of value for or against such cause; or (2) distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a noncommercial event or service. 
Registered solicitor: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as herein provided, which is clearly displayed on his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Solicitor: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the village, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying goods, merchandise, or other personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale, or for the purpose taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed then or in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without invitation, goes upon private property, whose primary purpose is to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 1, 6-7-70; Ord. No. 3839, § 1, 10-27-14; Ord. No. 3858 , § 1, 3-23-15; Ord. No. 3926 , § 1, 8-8-16)  
Sec. 20-102. - Entry upon premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a canvasser or solicitor, to enter upon any residential premises in the village where the owner, occupant, or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors or Canvassers" or similar words. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 6, 6-7-70; Ord. No. 3926 , § 2, 8-8-16)  
Sec. 20-103. - Leaving premises on request. 
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence by invitation shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.  
Sec. 20-104. - Hours of operation. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m. of any day other than Sunday, or at any time on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 9, 6-7-70; Ord. No. 3858 , § 2, 3-23-15)  
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 20-201. - Required. 
No solicitor shall enter into or go upon any residence in the village for the purpose of soliciting without having first been granted a certificate of registration as provided in this article, and clearly displaying such certificate on his or her person. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 2, 6-7-70; Ord. No. 3858 , § 3, 3-23-15)  
Sec. 20-202. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring a solicitor's certificate of registration shall apply in writing to the village manager upon a form provided by the manager. 
(b)  The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  The name and address of his present place of residence and length of residence at such address, also business address if other than residence address, and his Social Security number; 
(2)  His address or place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than his present address; 
(3)  The age of the applicant and marital status; and if married, the name of his spouse; 
(4)  A physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  The name and address of the person whom the applicant is employed by or represents and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  The name and address of his employer during the past three (3) years if other than his present employer; 
(7)  A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in; 
(8)  The period of time for which the certificate is applied for; 
(9)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a certificate under this chapter; 
(10)  A statement as to whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked; 
(11)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of a violation of any of the provisions of any ordinance of any other Illinois municipality or county regulating soliciting; 
(12)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States; 
(13)  Such additional information as the village manager may deem necessary to determine whether or not the applicant is of good moral character, good faith and integrity to be trusted to engage in soliciting in the village. 
(c)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. Any person who makes a false statement upon an application for certificate of registration shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(d)  At the time the application for a solicitor's certificate of registration is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if the applicant is an Illinois not-for-profit corporation that is tax-exempt pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, to cover the cost of the village processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 3, 6-7-70; Ord. No. 1186, 8-3-70; Ord. No. 3731, § 1, 1-28-13; Ord. No. 3858 , § 4, 3-23-15)  
Sec. 20-203. - Person ineligible for. 
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person: 
(1)  Who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of the application; 
(2)  Who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked; 
(4)  Who, in the opinion of the village manager, is not of good moral character and lacks the good faith and integrity desirable for engaging in soliciting in the village. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 3, 6-7-70)  
Sec. 20-204. - Issuance or denial. 
If the village manager, after considering the application and all information he has obtained pertaining to the applicant, is of the opinion that the applicant is of good moral character and will in good faith and in a law-abiding manner engage in soliciting in the village, he shall issue a certificate of registration to the applicant. The manager, after such consideration, shall deny the application if he is of the opinion that the applicant does not possess the required qualifications for such certificate and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Endorsement shall be made by the manager upon the application of the denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 4, 6-7-70)  
Sec. 20-205. - Expiration. 
A certificate of registration shall state the expiration date, thereof. The expiration date shall be thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2811, § 1, 2-12-96)  
Sec. 20-206. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the village manager if the applicant shall be guilty of any act of commission or omission thereafter, which act, in the opinion of the manager will militate against the qualifications of the applicant upon which the certificate was issued, or if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a false statement in the application of a material thing. 
(b)  Immediately upon such revocation written notice thereof shall be given by the manager to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified U.S. Mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of registration shall become and be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 4, 6-7-70)  
Sec. 20-207. - Records. 
The village manager shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application for a solicitor's certificate of registration received and acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and of all certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. The applications shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1181, § 3, 6-7-70)  
Sec. 20-208. - Appeal from denial or revocation. 
Any person to whom the village manager has refused to issue a solicitor's certificate of registration or whose certificate has been revoked by the clerk may, within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of such action, appeal such decision to the board of trustees by filing a statement requesting such appeal with the manager. Upon receipt of such a notice the clerk shall forward it to the village board and the council shall set a date for a hearing, which hearing shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing of the notice. At the hearing the board shall review the manager's actions. The appellant shall be given adequate notice of the hearing and shall be afforded due process at it.  
Chapter 21 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bicycles, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 14; vehicles causing litter, § 16-114(d); house numbers, § 18-104; table of franchises, app. A; official map and subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference— Power of village to regulate use of streets, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-80-1; power to regulate the construction and use of sidewalks, Ch. 24, § 11-80-13. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-101. - Obstructions from abutting properties. 
The owners or occupants of all premises in the village shall keep the sidewalks abutting such premises free from obstructions and shall prune and cut back all vegetation upon such premises or in the parkway so as to prevent obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 166, 2-2-25)  
Sec. 21-102. - Protection of curbs and sidewalks from vehicles. 
No person shall drive a vehicle over a curb or sidewalk without protecting it by putting down solid planks or other suitable protection to prevent cracking or breaking off of edges or corners. 
(Ord. No. 791, Art. XV, § 9, 7-11-67)  
Sec. 21-103. - Street specifications. 
All street pavement in residential areas shall be a minimum thickness of six (6) inches of Portland cement concrete or its equivalent and installed in conformity with the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the Illinois Division of Highways, adopted July 1970. Such requirements may be increased by the board of trustees in accordance with accepted engineering standards for pavement on arterial, industrial and other heavily traveled rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 5-19-58)  
Sec. 21-104. - Permit to construct, repair, etc., streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, replace or repair any pavement on any street, alley or other public place without a permit or in violation of any conditions imposed upon such permit. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 2, 5-19-68)  
Sec. 21-105. - Removal of street or sidewalk barricades. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, any street or sidewalk barricade erected under authority of the village unless authorized to do so by the village manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 9-15-24)  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, ETC., EXCAVATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate the construction of sidewalks, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-80-13. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-201. - Supervision. 
All street or parkway openings, driveway approaches, sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired under the supervision of the village manager or his authorized deputy. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 1, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-202. - Placing materials in streets. 
Material may be deposited within the street during work pursuant to this article with permission of the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 5, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-203. - Driving on newly constructed or repaired sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized to do so to walk or drive a vehicle upon any newly constructed or repaired street or sidewalk which has been barricaded by authority of the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 3, 9-15-24)  
Sec. 21-204. - Street and parkway opening. 
(a)  Street openings shall be restored to their original condition. 
(b)  Parkway openings shall be restored to their original condition, graded and grass seed planted. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 1a, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-205. - Sidewalk construction generally. 
The following provisions shall govern sidewalk construction: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all sidewalks shall be installed in conformity with the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the Illinois Divisions of Highways, adopted July 1970. 
(2)  The foundation and subgrade shall be a minimum of four (4) inches of crushed stone or a material approved by the manager; all soft and spongy places shall be removed and filled with grade B stone. 
(3)  Concrete shall be four (4) inches thick on sidewalks, and six (6) inches thick across driveways. No less than six (6) bags of cement per cubic yard shall be used and the amount of water used shall not exceed six (6) gallons per bag of cement, with four (4) percent air entrainment. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be four and one-half (4½) feet wide unless connecting to existing sidewalks which are wider in which case the width shall be the same as the existing sidewalk. 
(5)  The slope shall be one-quarter-inch to the foot, sloped to the street. 
(6)  The inside or edge of the sidewalk nearest the lot line, when completed, shall be a distance of one foot from the lot line, except where the village manager shall establish a different line. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 7, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-206. - Sidewalk grade. 
The grade of any sidewalk constructed under provisions of this article shall be established by the village. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 6, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-207. - Curb and gutters. 
The following provisions shall govern the repair or installation of curbs and gutters: 
(1)  If curbs and gutters are replaced the entire curb and gutter shall be removed and new concrete placed. 
(2)  If a new curb or gutter is installed its placement and location must be approved by the manager. 
(3)  All concrete used shall be the depth of the existing pavement thickness with a minimum thickness of eight (8) inches. The foundation and subgrade shall be a minimum of four (4) inches of crushed stone or a material approved by the manager; all soft spongy places shall be removed and filled with stone. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 9, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-208. - Driveways and driveway approaches. 
(a)  The following provisions shall govern the construction of driveways and approaches to driveways: 
(1)  All concrete used shall be six (6) inches thick with expansion joints at the curb and a foundation which conforms to the requirements for sidewalks. A minimum of four (4) inches of crushed stone of a material approved by the manager shall be used in the foundation and subgrade; all soft and spongy places shall be removed and filled with stone. 
(2)  If bituminous blacktop is used it shall have a minimum thickness of two and one-half (2 ½) inches. The foundation shall be a minimum of six (6) inches of compacted crushed stone or a material approved by the manager; all soft and spongy places shall be removed and filled with stone. 
(3)  No driveway across public property or curbs shall exceed a width of twenty-five (25) feet. Driveways shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet. 
(4)  A driveway approach shall slope toward the street. 
(b)  Optional alternative surface. 
(1)  An owner of property adjacent to a village right-of-way that has a lawful driveway extension across the right-of-way (the "driveway approach") to the roadway may request approval from the director of public works for installation on the driveway approach of a surface that does not comply with the requirements in subsection (a) above. 
(2)  The director of public works shall establish a list of approved surfaces and installation and maintenance requirements for those surfaces. 
(3)  The owner shall apply for a building permit for the driveway approach, comply with the director of public works' installation and maintenance requirements. 
(4)  The village shall not be responsible for the maintenance or repair of the alternative surface. 
(5)  As a condition for the issuance of a building permit, the owner of the adjoining property agrees to not allow any mechanic's lien or other encumbrance to be filed against the village's adjoining right-of-way. 
(6)  As a condition for the issuance of a building permit the owner of the adjoining property agrees that as long as the alternate surface is in the village's right-of-way, to the fullest extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officials, agents and employees, against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may in any way accrue against the village, its officials, agents and employees, arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the alternate surface in the village's right-of-way. 
(7)  The village may remove all or any portion of the alternative surface for any reason, including utility access, and unless replaced solely at the cost of the owner will after reasonable notice to the owner replace the alternative surface with the standard surface in compliance with subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 8, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 3816, § 1, 8-25-14)  
Sec. 21-209. - Sidewalk construction and replacement when building permit issued. 
(a)  Any person shall, at the time of making application for a building permit for construction of a new building (additions, alterations, or other miscellaneous improvements are not included), agree, as a part of the improvement to be erected, and for and in consideration of the issuance of such permit by the village, to construct sidewalks along the front and (in cases of corner lots) along the side of the subject premises, as do not then have good, usable sidewalks, and to replace such broken or out of proper grade sections of existing sidewalks as the village shall designate; further, to replace any sections of sidewalk which are broken or cracked, whether or not such breaks and cracks occur before or after construction of the building. Such sidewalks shall be built to comply with the standards prescribed by the village relating to the construction of sidewalks, and shall be constructed under the supervision and subject to the approval of the village. The proper grade at which such sidewalk or sidewalks shall be constructed shall be furnished by the village engineer, and all costs incurred by the village, in connection therewith, shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation applying for and receiving said permit. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those premises abutting State of Illinois Highways Roosevelt Road (Rt. 38), North Avenue (Rt. 64), and Kingery Highway (Rt. 83). 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall also apply to all planned unit developments approved and passed by the village. In the event a site plan for a planned unit development is submitted to and approved by the village which specifically includes the location of nonexistent, but proposed, sidewalks, the approved site plan relative to proposed sidewalk locations shall prevail over this section; further, the other provisions of this section shall prevail over all planned unit development ordinances unless specifically exempted by said planned unit development ordinance from the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The president and board of trustees, by a vote of at least three-fourths of the members elected to office, may waive the provisions of all or any part of this article. In enacting such waiver, the president and board of trustees may at its option, require the permittee to deposit with the village treasurer an amount of money estimated to cover the cost of the installation of such sidewalks in the future, and which sum may be used by the village only for the installation of such sidewalks. If the sum of money so deposited shall not be used for the construction of such sidewalks, at the expiration of ten (10) full years from the date of such deposit, the deposit shall be returned in full to the then record owner of the subject premises without further referral to the corporate authority. The village treasurer shall be authorized to make such refund upon the presentation of an owner's guaranty policy issued by a title company authorized to do business in the state covering the date upon which said deposit shall be required to be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1934, §§ 1—4, 9-8-80)  
Secs. 21-210—21-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 21-221. - Required. 
No person shall construct, place or repair a driveway approach, sidewalk, curb or gutter or dig in a street or parkway without a permit from the manager. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 2, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-222. - Application. 
A person desiring the permit required by the provisions of this division shall apply in writing to the manager upon a form furnished by the manager giving the information required on the form. The application shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the location of proposed driveway approach, sidewalk, curb and gutter, or where the street or parkway opening will be made. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 2, 8-14-72)  
Sec. 21-223. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3974 , § 4, adopted May 22, 2017, repealed § 21-223 which pertained to fees and derived from Ord. No. 1323, § 3, adopted Aug. 14, 1972.  
Sec. 21-224. - Bond. 
A person applying for the permit required by this division shall supply to the village the appropriate guarantee as required by appendix B of the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 1323, § 4, 8-14-72; Ord. No. 3053, § 4, 8-28-00)  
Secs. 21-225—21-229. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2199, §§ 1—5, enacted Aug. 11, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as div. 3, §§ 21-230—21-234 was at the discretion of the editor. Sections 6—8 of said ordinance, pertaining to conflict, severability and validity have not been codified. 
 
Sec. 21-230. - Definitions. 
(a)  Appurtenant stairs or steps. Exterior changes in elevation made by risers and treads which constitute stairs or steps located upon public property and which touch upon, abut, face upon, or are contiguous with, any public sidewalk, pavement or curbing in such a manner as to link with and constitute a continuation or termination of such sidewalk. 
(b)  Defective sidewalk. One which is so imperfect, incomplete, flawed or faulty so as to require repair or replacement. 
(c)  Deficient sidewalk. One inadequate in construction, quality or any essential requisite necessary to be safe and adequate for its intended function. 
(d)  Designated sidewalk. One identified, selected and noted to be in need of repair, reconstruction or replacement, as determined by the village director of public works, or his or her appointed representative, in the reasonable exercise of that person's discretion. 
(e)  Hazardous sidewalk. One having an abrupt, vertical difference in grade of one (1) inch or more, caused by cracking, settlement or upheaval of the concrete sidewalk slab. 
(f)  Substantially deteriorated sidewalk. One which is materially substandard, unsound or degenerated to a degree that such sidewalk constitutes a threat to public health and safety and is in need of repair, reconstruction or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 1, 8-11-86)  
Sec. 21-231. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established a "sidewalk replacement program" in the Village of Villa Park, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 8-11-86)  
Sec. 21-232. - Intent and purpose. 
The sidewalk replacement program established hereby, is for the purpose of repair, replacement and reconstruction of defective, substantially deteriorated, deficient and hazardous public sidewalks; and appurtenant stairs and steps within the boundaries of said village. By means of such program the village intends to protect and preserve the built environment, enhance the public health, safety and welfare and promote community development. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 3, 8-11-86)  
Sec. 21-233. - Implementation. 
(a)  Inspection. The village department of public works shall establish a program of sidewalk inspection and shall inspect designated village sidewalks and appurtenant stairs and steps at the request of an abutting landowner, citizen, resident or village employee, and shall determine such sidewalks as safe and sufficient or as hereinafter set forth in subsection (b) below. Upon notification of the existence of a deficient, defective or hazardous sidewalk or appurtenant stair or step by an owner, citizen, resident or employee of the village, the department of public works shall inspect such sidewalk and appurtenant stairs and steps in a reasonable time thereafter. Such notification and citizen participation shall be encouraged. In conducting such inspection, the department of public works will ascertain whether or not the damage has been caused by trees planted on public property and shall so note on any report whether or not the complained of condition, or any part thereof, has been caused by a tree growing on public property. The determination by the department of public works as to whether or not the condition of the sidewalk has been caused in whole or in part by a tree growing on public property shall be final. 
(b)  Sidewalk and appurtenant stairs and steps designation. Sidewalks and appurtenant stairs and steps shall be designated as in need of repair, replacement or reconstruction after inspection and determination thereof by the village public works director, or his or her designated representative, in the reasonable exercise of their discretion. 
(c)  Property owner notification. Upon designation of a sidewalk as in need of repair or replacement, the village department of public works shall cause written notice thereof, describing the exact location of such sidewalk, its deficiencies and the extent of repair or reconstruction required to bring such sidewalk into conformance herewith, to be mailed to the last owner of record of the lot, tract or parcel of real property touching upon, abutting, contiguous to, or which fronts upon, said sidewalk. 
(d)  Sidewalk repair or replacement. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the property owner shall: 
(1)  Repair, replace or reconstruct such designated sidewalk to specifications as set forth in this division at his or her own expense and forego construction and financial participation by the village. 
(2)  Elect to participate in the sidewalk replacement program in the manner hereinafter specified. 
(3)  Failure to either repair or to elect to participate pursuant to the aforestated options shall result in the Village of Villa Park undertaking and completing needed repairs or replacement, and upon the completion thereof, a bill of costs shall be prepared by the Village of Villa Park Department of Public Works and tendered to the owner of the relevant lot, tract or parcel. Such bill of costs shall contain, although not be limited to, the use and cost of materials, labor, excavation, paving and supervision. 
(e)  Owner participation. 
(1)  Notice: A property owner who chooses to participate in the sidewalk replacement program shall, upon receipt of written notice that his or her sidewalk has been designated as in need of repair or replacement, notify the Village of Villa Park Department of Public Works within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice. The village shall then contract out for the repair or replacement upon competitive, qualified bid, at the lowest cost for good and sufficient construction. 
(2)  Completion: Upon completion of needed repairs of the fronting, abutting, touching and contiguous sidewalk and appurtenant stairs and steps, the property owner shall pay fifty (50) percent of the cost per square foot of repaired or replaced sidewalk surface (based upon the unit prices contained in any contract entered into by the village for the repair or replacement) and/or the total of one hundred (100) percent of the cost of repairing or replacing any appurtenant stairs and steps, or sidewalk connecting the property to the edge of the adjacent street. There shall be no charge to the resident for the replacement of any sidewalk or portion thereof which has been determined by the department of public works to have been damaged by a tree growing on public property. The determination of the department of public works shall be final. Any and all charges for the repair or replacement of sidewalks damaged by trees growing on public property and other charges, expenses or fees shall be paid or assumed by the village. 
(3)  Payment: Such cost or repair or replacement charged to the property owner shall be fully paid within ninety (90) days of receipt of the bill of costs therefore. 
(4)  Nonpayment: If the property owner shall fail to pay the costs of repair as herein set forth for owner participation in the manner described, such failure will be deemed nonparticipation on behalf of such owner and the total unpaid cost of repair of designated sidewalks shall be levied and specially taxed against such lot, tract or parcel as provided by statute. 
(f)  Special taxation of adjoining property. If a property owner fails or refuses to repair or replace designated sidewalks or to elect to participate in the sidewalk replacement program, in addition to any other manner provided by law, the village shall repair or replace such sidewalks to specification and specially tax the whole cost thereof upon the lots, tracts or parcels touching upon, contiguous to or abutting the designated sidewalk, in proportion to the frontage of such property. The Village of Villa Park Department of Public Works shall prepare a bill of costs as set forth in subsection (d)(3) herein and prepare a list of such lots, blocks, tracts and parcels of land, containing the names of the parties who last paid the general taxes thereon. Upon failure to repair or to elect to participate, the village department of public works will cause to be prepared a special tax list against those lots, blocks, tracts or parcels on account of the repair or replacement of designated sidewalks. Such special tax shall then be levied against the property in the method and manner as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 24, Paragraph 11-84-3 to 11-84-8. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 4, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 2466, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 21-234. - Construction; repair standards. 
(a)  Repair; reconstruction. Designated sidewalks and appurtenant stairs and steps shall be repaired or replaced, if done by the village, by contract construction awarded on the basis of competitive bidding and let to the lowest, qualified bidder. 
(b)  Supervision. All sidewalk and appurtenant stairs and steps repair, replacement or reconstruction, whether undertaken by a property owner, the village or any other person or entity, shall be under the supervision of the village department of public works. 
(c)  Inspection. Completed sidewalk repair, replacement or reconstruction shall be inspected by the village public works director, or his or her designated representative for compliance with this division. 
(d)  Approval. All completed sidewalk repair, replacement or reconstruction must be approved by the public works director, or his or her designated representative. Such approval shall be mandatory. 
(e)  Nonapproved; nonconforming sidewalks. Sidewalks which fail to comply with the specification herein or which fail to meet the approval of the village as aforestated, shall be re-repaired or re-replaced as necessary within thirty (30) days of written notification that such sidewalk is nonapproved or nonconforming. Failure to do so will result in necessary repairs or replacement by the village and special taxation procedures, where required. 
(f)  Standards. 
(1)  Defective, substantially deteriorated, deficient and/or hazardous sidewalks shall be repaired or replaced to match the width of the existing, adjacent sidewalk or pavement, provided that the minimum width thereof shall be no less than four (4) feet, six (6) inches. 
(2)  Sidewalk shall be constructed of a concrete having a minimum of six (6) bags of cement per cubic yard and an air content of not less than five (5) per cent or more than eight (8) per cent, by volume. Samples shall meet testing requirements of not less than two (2) or more than four (4) inches of slump and have a compressive strength of not less than three thousand, five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch at the age of fourteen (14) days. 
(3)  Concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of six (6) inches at driveway crossings and four (4) inches elsewhere. 
(4)  Sidewalk concrete shall be placed upon a compacted, grade No. 8, crushed stone subbase having a thickness of six (6) inches at driveway crossings and four (4) inches elsewhere. 
(5)  Outside stairs or steps upon public property touching upon or abutting contiguous sidewalks shall be considered a part thereof and shall be constructed of approved concrete and so as to be safe and able to support anticipated loads. Such steps shall meet minimum standards as to dimensions of treads and risers as specified in the relevant building or structures code as adopted by the village. Every such set of steps or stairs more than three (risers) high, shall have a good and sufficient handrail not less than thirty (30) inches or more than thirty-four (34) inches high, measured vertically above the nosing of the treads. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 5, 8-11-86)  
ARTICLE III. - TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3345, § 1, adopted April 10, 2006, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. III pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 1267, adopted Oct. 25, 1971; and as subsequently amended by Ord. No. 2158, adopted Sept. 3, 1985. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
Sec. 21-301. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees on public property. This article establishes policies, regulations and standards necessary to ensure the Village of Villa Park will realize the benefits provided by its community forest. The article is enacted to: 
Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees on village property in the village. 
Protect trees on streets and other publicly owned property of the Village of Villa Park. Trees, as defined, regulated and protected herein, are declared to be a natural public resource and the Village of Villa Park encourages planting, replacement and protection of trees. 
To regulate the cutting down, damaging, poisoning or in any other manner destroying of any trees under the protection of the department of public works as covered by the terms of this article. 
The Villa Park Public Works Department shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. Only village employees shall be involved with the planting, removal, trimming, insect and disease control, and tree surgery of village trees. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-302. - Permits. 
No person, other than authorized village public works employees, shall plant, cut, trim, destroy, or remove any tree, bush, hedge, or shrubs on or from any village property, including, but not limited to, street rights-of-way and parkways. 
Provided, however, that utility company maintenance crews or licensed contractors may trim trees on the public right-of-way after receiving a permit from the village. Utility companies are specified as, but not limited to, the following: Commonwealth Edison, Comcast Cable Company; American Telephone & Telegraph Company; and Northern Illinois Gas Company. Trimming done by or for the utility companies shall be subject to inspection by authorized village employees. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-303. - Authorized trees. 
Trees which are to be planted in village parkways shall be selected from the following list of trees and/or other species as approved by the village manager. 
Sugar maple 	Norway maple 	Scarlet (red) maple 
Crimson King maple 	American linden 	European linden 
Busiman elm 	Liberty elm 	Accolade elm 
Triumph elm 	Gingko 	Kentucky Coffee 
Pin oak 	Red oak 	Swamp white oak 
Hackberry tree 	Tulip tree 	Beech tree 
Sweet Gum tree 	Crab tree 	River birch 
Skyline locust 		
 
Trees that have been planted on village rights-of-way, which are not on the authorized list and are under two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter, at a distance of twelve (12) inches above ground, shall be removed. 
Likewise, all crippled, deformed, hazardous, or noncurable diseased trees, regardless of species, if professional opinion indicates recovery cannot be expected, shall be removed and gradually replaced. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 3657, § 3, 6-27-11; Ord. No. 3889 , § 1, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 21-304. - Specifications. 
(a)  Trees, when planted, shall have a minimum diameter of one and one-half (1½) to two and one-half (2½) inches at a distance of twelve (12) inches above the ground, shall have a continuous single six- to eight-foot trunk for large trees and four- to five-foot trunk for small trees before pruning, and shall be free from deformity and indication of undesirable growth characteristics. 
(b)  Trees, when planted, shall be free of infectious disease or insect infestation. 
(c)  Trees shall be planted on the center line of the parkways. No trees may be planted on parkways less than four (4) feet wide, unless in the opinion of the village manager or his authorized representative the planting and the species of the tree approved will not endanger sidewalk, curb, or other physical property. 
(d)  The planting of trees is prohibited if such planting will interfere with existing sewer connections. 
(e)  Species of trees which by reason of size, spread of crown, or other characteristics could interfere with overhead utility lines, are prohibited in all locations where such lines exist. 
(f)  Parkway trees shall be planted at least four (4) feet from any sidewalk or curb wherever possible, and shall be spread not less than fifty (50) feet apart. No tree shall be planted within thirty (30) feet of the closed point of any actual or plotted corner sidewalk intersection. No planting ever shall be allowed within intersection corner crosswalks. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-305. - Subdivisions. 
In subdivisions and in all new residential and nonresidential development, not less than one (1) parkway tree per lot, centered, shall be required to be installed at the expense of the subdivider. The minimum diameter of trees planted shall be two and one-half (2½) inches at a distance of twelve (12) inches above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-306. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Spraying by the village for the prevention and elimination of tree disease and insect infestation shall be performed to meet the specific requirements of the species of tree and the particular disease or insect infestation which exists or threatens. It shall be the village manager's or his authorized representative's responsibility to determine the need and extent of spraying requirements, and make recommendations to the village board. 
(b)  Systematic trimming and pruning should be carried out to: 
(1)  Restore physiological balance between the root system and leaf surface at the time of planting. 
(2)  Remove dead branches, seriously damaged branches, and unbalanced branches and limbs. 
(3)  Gradually remove lower branches to provide a minimum overhead clearance of fifteen (15) feet above street and sidewalk. 
(4)  Shape young trees so that they will develop a single tall straight trunk, a strong central framework or branch structure, and a symmetrical balanced crown. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on village property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this article at the determination of the village public works department. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-307. - Removal of infected trees. 
(a)  All trees on private property infected with Dutch Elm Disease (Ceratosystis ulmi) or ash trees infected with the emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis fairmaire) are declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to permit any such tree or part thereof so infected to remain within the village corporate limits whether on private or public property. 
(b)  The village manager or his authorized representative shall inspect and examine any tree within the village corporate limits to determine whether or not it is infected by either disease. Upon discovering that any such tree is so infected, the owner of the property shall be notified of this fact by mail. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any land upon which such diseased tree or part thereof exists to have the same removed from the village corporate limits within thirty (30) days of notice by the village that such tree or part thereof is so infected. 
(d)  The tree removal contract shall include tree felling, clean up, and hauling from the village corporate limits. 
(e)  When the owner of such property refuses or neglects to remove any such tree, the village manager shall provide for its removal and cause a lien to be filed on such property for the reasonable cost thereof in the manner and form provided by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 3657, § 2, 6-27-11)  
Sec. 21-308. - Guards during construction. 
(a)  Prior to erection, alteration, repair or removal of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall place, or cause to be placed, such guards around all nearby trees on the parkway as will effectively prevent injury to such trees. 
(b)  Where in authorized excavations, it becomes necessary to expose or cut roots that are greater than one (1) inch in diameter or are within the drip line of any tree, it shall be the duty of the contractor to protect the roots from damage. 
(c)  Excavation/grading equipment and all other implements, machines and tools shall be used or operated in such a manner as not to damage or destroy any tree, shrub or plant in any village parkway, property or park. (No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove top soil except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto. Grade level in the immediate vicinity of existing trees, shrubs, or plants in any right-of-way shall not be altered unless said planting is replanted to new grade level.) 
(d)  In the erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure, or the construction, installation, alteration or repair of any street, sidewalk or utility, trees in the right-of-way or on any village owned or maintained property shall be protected from damage or removal unless otherwise authorized by the public works department. Tree crowns and trunks shall not suffer any branch or bark loss. Roots shall be protected from compaction, storage of materials, and severing within a circle around the tree with the tree trunk as the focal point. The tree protection fencing detail and post and fence detail is as follows: 
 
(e)  Roots located within the determined circle shall be protected by such practices as temporary bridges for vehicles or auguring for utility installation. Any factors that would cause any deviations from this section shall be noted on the permit issued for such work. In addition to any fines that may be assessed for violation of this section, the person shall pay to the village a sum equal to the value or partial value of the tree lost as a result of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 3889 , §§ 2, 3, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 21-309. - Attachments to trees. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to post any bills, advertisements, cards or notices of any kind, upon village owned trees, placed in any street or square, within the limits of the village, without permission of the public works department. In addition, no person shall be allowed to fasten any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other devices to a tree or to any guard about such tree, including temporary holiday or temporary ornamental lighting. 
(b)  No person shall whitewash, paint or in any way discolor the stem base, bole or root of any tree or shrub upon any public property in the village. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-310. - Paving and snow plowing near parkway trees. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any parkway tree growing therein, without leaving an open space of not less than two (2) feet in width all around the tree. 
(b)  Snow will not be plowed, blown, shoveled from roof tops, or piled in a manner that damages parkway trees. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-311. - Prohibited growth. 
Bushes, hedges and other low growth obscuring vehicular vision are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-312. - Protection from fire and toxins. 
(a)  No person shall allow fire or heat to come in contact with any tree on land owned or maintained by the village or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree owned or maintained on village property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or public utility to place salt, brine, petroleum products, herbicides, or any other substances in such amounts as to be toxic or injurious to the health, growth or vitality of any street tree, park tree or shrub in any public area or public way. 
(c)  In addition to any fines that may be assessed for violation of this section, the resident or person determined to be at fault shall pay to the village a sum equal to the value or partial value of the tree lost as a result of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
Sec. 21-313. - Protection from utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or public utility to cut, carve, scrape or girdle, burn, char, or otherwise deface any street tree, park tree or other shrub or tree in any public area or public way. A public utility, with easement rights, removing branches interfering with overhead lines is held to the same standards for tree pruning and tree care as required in this article. 
(b)  No person, firm, or corporation owning, maintaining or operating any natural gas pipes or mains laid beneath the surface of any parkway in the village, shall permit any leak to occur in such pipes. In the event that a leak exists or occurs in any pipe or main, the person owning or operating such defective pipe or main shall repair the same immediately and stop such leak in a manner so as to prevent a recurrence of the same after receiving notice from the village manager, calling the attention of such person to the fact that such leak exists or has occurred. Such person shall, promptly and in any event within five (5) days after the receipt of such notice, stop such leak in a manner so as to prevent a recurrence thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 3889 , § 4, 12-14-15)  
Sec. 21-314. - Violations. 
(a)  In addition to the penalty imposed for violations of the Code, violators of the article shall be subject to payment of labor and material costs to the village for replanting or removal of noncomplying plantings. 
(b)  No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the village public works department or its authorized agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, the public works department may order the work stopped by serving written notice on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the public works department to proceed with the work. 
(d)  The appraised tree value or the partial loss in tree value shall be determined by the Villa Park Public Works Department using the most current edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal, prepared by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, and edited, published and copyrighted by the International Society of Arboriculture. Various factors used in the tree value calculations for northern Illinois shall be obtained from the most current edition of the Species Ratings and Appraisal Factors for Illinois, prepared by the Illinois Arborist Association. 
(e)  Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the purposes of this article result from its literal interpretation or enforcement, the village public works department may waive, modify or delay the enforcement of these provisions, upon written request from the developer or the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 21-315. - Severability clause. 
If any section of this article is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, it does not affect the validity of remaining sections. 
(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 4-10-06)  
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-401. - Definition. 
(a)  The term "open air meeting" as used in this article shall be defined as any congregation of people held outdoors and upon any public property for the purpose of hearing speakers or discussing some matter of common interest where the number of participants expected may reasonably be assumed to exceed fifty (50). 
(b)  The term "parade" as used herein shall mean a parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the village. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 2, 2-17-69)  
Sec. 21-402. - Hours. 
All parades shall be held during the daylight hours at times other than peak traffic periods (7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.) and (4:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.) Monday through Saturday and not before noon on Sundays unless otherwise approved by the corporate authorities. All open air meetings shall conclude by 12:00 midnight and shall not be held before 12:00 noon on Sunday, unless otherwise approved by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 1393, § 1, 4-30-73)  
Sec. 21-403. - Maximum size. 
Parades and open air meetings shall be limited to such numbers as will not obstruct traffic either vehicular or pedestrian, in an unreasonable manner, and in any event, no such parade or open air meeting shall consist of more than five hundred (500) persons. For purposes of this section, children under the age of twelve (12) years shall not be counted. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 5, 2-17-69)  
Secs. 21-404—21-415. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 21-416. - Required. 
No person shall participate in a parade or open air meeting held on any public way or on any public property unless a written permit therefor shall first be obtained from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 2-17-69)  
Sec. 21-417. - Application. 
An application to conduct a parade or open air meeting shall be made in writing to the chief of police at least five (5) days prior to the event, by a representative of the group seeking the permit, and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade or open air meeting; 
(2)  If the parade or open air meeting is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman or chairman of the open air meeting; 
(4)  The date when the parade or open air meeting is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point and the location of speakers' platforms; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade or open air meeting; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade or open air meeting will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or open air meeting; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 3, 2-17-69)  
Sec. 21-418. - Issuance or denials. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue or deny a permit for a parade or open air meeting within thirty-six (36) hours after receipt of the permit application. 
(b)  The chief of police shall issue a parade or open air meeting permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade or open air meeting will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade or open air meeting will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of this municipality to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to this village; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade or open air meeting will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of this village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march or assembly and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade or open air meeting will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade or open air meeting will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade or open air meeting is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade or open air meeting is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  The parade or open air meeting is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods or events and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(b)  Permits may also be denied on the basis of the filing of an improper or incomplete application. The reasons for denial shall be made known to the applicant, in writing, at the time of denial. The applicant shall be allowed to correct or complete an improper or incomplete application and resubmit to the chief of police the original seventy-two-hour required advance notification time still being valid if a corrected application is resubmitted within twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the event. If a corrected application is not received by the chief of police twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the event, a new period of forty-eight (48) hours will be imposed prior to which the event may not be held. Such forty-eight-hour period shall commence upon receipt of the corrected application. 
(Ord. No. 1099, §§ 6, 8, 2-17-69)  
Sec. 21-419. - Conflicting applications. 
If the chief of police receives more than one (1) application for a parade or open air meeting permit for the same time and the same place, or on the same day, the application filed first in time shall take precedence. The parade or meeting shall be considered to be "at the same time" if the event is scheduled to commence within two (2) hours of the holding of another event. The parade or meeting shall be considered to be "at the same place" if the requested parade route comes at any point within six (6) blocks of or any equivalent distance from the route of another parade or if the open air meeting is conducted within one-half mile of another open air meeting. If the chief of police receives an application for more than one (1) parade or open air meeting in a single day, he may set a time for the duration of each parade or open air meeting which time shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than three (3) hours. 
(Ord. No. 1099, § 8, 2-17-69)  
ARTICLE V. - ENCROACHMENTS 
 
Sec. 21-501. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions will apply: 
Construction easement area is defined as the area lying between the project right-of-way limits and the platted street limits within which the village by concurrence in the establishment of the project right-of-way lines, will permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction operations. 
Encroachment is defined as any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of any kind (with exception of utilities and public road signs), which is placed, located or maintained in, or, under or over any portion of the project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way line has been established. 
Permissible encroachment is defined as any existing awnings, marquees, signs, advertising activity on the property and similar overhanging structures supported from buildings immediately adjacent to the highway right-of-way at locations where there is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which do not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on the highway. 
The permissive retention of overhanging signs does not apply to those signs supported from poles located outside the right-of-way line and not hidden by adjacent buildings. However, if a building is set back from the right-of-way line and the adjacent buildings are on the right-of-way line flush with the back of the sidewalk, signs supported from a pole advertising the enterprise conducted in the set back building may be permitted to overhang the project right-of-way line to the same degree as if supported from a building if they do not impede the free and safe flow of traffic. 
Project right-of-way is defined as those areas within the project right-of-way lines established jointly by the village and state, which will be free of encroachments except as hereinafter defined. 
Roadway right-of-way is defined as those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 21-502. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, an encroachment (hereinabove defined), except as provided in section 21-504, within the limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way lines have been established. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 21-503. - Project right-of-way. 
Project right-of-way lines have been established at the back of curb or shoulder line. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 21-504. - Permissible encroachments. 
(a)  Revocable permits may be issued by the village for the temporary retention of permissible encroachments (hereinabove defined) subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  It must be a permissible encroachment, as defined in subsection 21-501(4). 
(2)  Said revocable permit shall be approved by the state and federal highway administration as a condition of its issuance. 
(3)  Said revocable permit shall be revoked when the encroachment impairs the highway or the free and safe flow of traffic as determined by either the Illinois Department of Transportation or the Federal Highway Administration or the Village of Villa Park. 
(4)  Said revocable permit shall be expressly limited to the property specified in the permit and only for those encroachments which fall under the definition of permissible encroachments (hereinabove defined). 
(b)  Revocable permits have been issued by the village for the temporary retention of the following permissible encroachments (hereinabove defined): 
(1)  Andrew and Evelyn Milletto, their assigns, successors in interest or heirs, owners of the property described as: 
Lots 204 and 205 in F. D. Payne's Addition to Villa Park, being a subdivision in the Southwest quarter of Section 3, Township 39 North, Range 11 East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the Plat thereof recorded April 8, 1922, as document 155003, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Commonly known as 150, 152, and 154 St. Charles Road, Villa Park, Illinois with encroachments being fixed or rigid metal awnings overhanging said rights-of-way attached to the building and/or buildings on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 21-505. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 21-505, entitled "Penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 2053, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 1983.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARKWAY PARKING IN THE NORTH AVENUE INDUSTRIAL AREA 
 
Sec. 21-601. - Parking permitted. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, parking on the paved parkway within the village's right-of-way shall be a permissible encroachment within the North Avenue Industrial Area ("NAIA") pursuant to this article. The NAIA shall include the following village rights-of-way: 
(1)  Michigan Avenue. CN Railroad right-of-way to North Avenue; east and west sides. 
(2)  Harvard Avenue. CN Railroad right-of-way to North Avenue; east and west sides. 
(3)  Yale Avenue. CN Railroad right-of-way to North Avenue; east and west sides. 
(4)  Princeton Avenue. CN Railroad right-of-way to North Avenue, east and west sides. 
(5)  Schiller Street. Yale Avenue to Ardmore Avenue, north and south sides. 
(6)  West Frontage Road of Ardmore Avenue. East side. 
It shall be unlawful for any parkway parking to block the street, sidewalk or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 3737, § 2, 3-18-13)  
Sec. 21-602. - Construction and maintenance of parking. 
(a)  An adjoining owner to the right-of-way within the NAIA shall be allowed to construct or continue to maintain parking spaces in the parkway. These parking spaces shall be considered an extension of the driveway apron and can exceed the width requirements for driveway aprons and extend from side lot line to side lot line. 
(b)  New parking shall be allowed when constructed with a permit in compliance with all village requirements and conditions imposed by the director of public works. No tree or other existing village structures shall be removed or interfered with to construct the parking. 
(c)  Existing parking and newly constructed parking after its completion, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary manner and in compliance with all village requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3737, § 2, 3-18-13)  
Sec. 21-603. - Conditions. 
Parking on the parkway is subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The owner agrees to comply with all rules and regulations imposed by the village regulating parking in the parkway. 
(2)  The village at its sole discretion may prohibit, impose additional regulations, or remove the parkway parking area without compensation to the owner. 
(3)  The village or other public utility may permanently or temporary remove the parkway parking for the installation or maintenance of utilities in the right-of-way without compensation to the owner. 
(4)  The owner agrees to not allow any mechanic's lien or other encumbrance to be filed against the adjoining right-of-way. 
(5)  The owner agrees that as long as parking is permitted, to the fullest extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officials, agents and employees, against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may in anywise accrue against the village, its officials, agents and employees, arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the use of the parkway for parking. 
(Ord. No. 3737, § 2, 3-18-13)  
ARTICLE VII. - PARKWAY PARKING IN THE HOME AVENUE INDUSTRIAL AREA 
 
Sec. 21-701. - Parking permitted. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, parking on the paved parkway within the village's right-of-way shall be a permissible encroachment within the Home Avenue Industrial Area ("HAIA") pursuant to this article. The HAIA shall include the village right-of-way of West Home Avenue from South Harvard Avenue to South Ardmore Avenue on its north and south sides. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parkway parking to block the street, sidewalk or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 3923 , § 2, 7-25-16)  
Sec. 21-702. - Construction and maintenance of parking. 
(a)  An adjoining owner to the right-of-way within the HAIA shall be allowed to construct or continue to maintain parking spaces in the parkway. These parking spaces shall be considered an extension of the driveway apron and can exceed the width requirements for driveway aprons and extend from side lot line to side lot line. 
(b)  New parking shall be allowed when constructed with a permit in compliance with all village requirements and conditions imposed by the director of public works. No tree or other existing village structures shall be removed or interfered with to construct the parking. 
(c)  Existing parking and newly constructed parking after its completion shall be maintained by the adjoining owner in a safe and sanitary manner and in compliance with all village requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3923 , § 2, 7-25-16)  
Sec. 21-703. - Conditions. 
Parking on the parkway is subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The owner agrees to comply with all rules and regulations imposed by the village regulating parking in the parkway. 
(2)  The village at its sole discretion may prohibit, impose additional regulations, or remove the parkway parking area without compensation to the owner. 
(3)  The village or other public utility may permanently or temporary remove the parkway parking for the installation or maintenance of utilities in the right-of-way without compensation to the owner. 
(4)  The owner agrees to not allow any mechanic's lien or other encumbrance to be filed against the adjoining right-of-way. 
(5)  The owner agrees that as long as parking is permitted, to the fullest extent permitted by law, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officials, agents and employees, against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may in anywise accrue against the village, its officials, agents and employees, arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the use of the parkway for parking. 
(Ord. No. 3923 , § 2, 7-25-16)  
Chapter 22 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— State regulation of public pools, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111½, § 88 et seq.; health power of village, Ch. 24, § 11-20-5; power of village to regulate private pools, Ch. 24, § 11-30-9. 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Generally. 
All swimming pools shall be constructed, operated and maintained as required by the county health department.  
Chapter 23 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2 amusement tax, § 4-104; vehicle license tax, Ch. 13, Art. III. 
 
ARTICLE II. - RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3349, § 3, adopted April 24, 2006, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 1135, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 4, 1969. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. The non-rule rule taxes imposed by this article shall be in addition to the use and occupation taxes assessed and collected pursuant to 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq. through and including 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-201. - Non-home rule retailer's occupation tax imposed. 
A non-home rule tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in the village at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business. This non-home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics. 
The imposition of this non-home rule tax is in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3). 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 3, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 3967 , § 1, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 23-202. - Collection and enforcement. 
The tax hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 3, 4-24-06)  
Sec. 23-203. - Use of tax revenues. 
The tax revenues received by the village pursuant to this article shall be maintained in a special fund and shall only be expended for public infrastructure or for property tax relief as defined in 65 ILCS 8-11-1.2, as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 3, 4-24-06)  
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3349, § 4, adopted April 24, 2006, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 1134, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 4, 1969. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. The non-rule rule taxes imposed by this article shall be in addition to the use and occupation taxes assessed and collected pursuant to 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq. through and including 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-301. - Non-home rule municipal service occupation tax imposed. 
A non-home rule tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of services at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. This non-home rule municipal service occupation tax shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics. 
The imposition of this non-home rule tax is in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11- 1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4). 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 4, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 3967 , § 2, 4-24-17)  
Sec. 23-302. - Collection and enforcement. 
The tax hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 4, 4-24-06)  
Sec. 23-303. - Use of tax revenues. 
The tax revenues received by the village pursuant to this article shall be maintained in a special fund and shall only be expended for public infrastructure or for property tax relief as defined in 65 ILCS 8-11-1.2, as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 4, 4-24-06)  
ARTICLE IV. - USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3349, § 5, adopted April 24, 2006, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 1503, §§ 1—6, adopted Oct. 14, 1974. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. The non-rule rule taxes imposed by this article shall be in addition to the use and occupation taxes assessed and collected pursuant to 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq. through and including 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-401. - Non-home rule municipal service tax. 
A non-home rule tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using, in the village, any item of tangible personal property which is purchased at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of the government of the State of Illinois, based on the selling price of such tangible personal property, as selling price is defined in 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq. (the "Use Tax Act"), as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 5, 4-24-06)  
Sec. 23-402. - Collection and enforcement. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected from persons whose Illinois address for title or registration purposes is given as being in the village. The village shall collect such tax in the manner hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 5, 4-24-06)  
Sec. 23-403. - Duties of the finance director. 
Upon receiving information that a tax is due under this article, the director of finance shall send notice to the taxpayer of the amount due and owing the village and shall cause the person liable for the tax to make immediate payment thereof to the village. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 5, 4-24-06)  
Sec. 23-404. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and, in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of the tax due plus a late charge in the amount of one (1) percent per month. A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 5, 4-24-06)  
Sec. 23-405. - Use of tax revenues. 
The tax revenues received by the village pursuant to this article shall be maintained in a special fund and shall only be expended for public infrastructure or for property tax relief as defined in 65 ILCS 8-11-1.2, as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 3349, § 5, 4-24-06)  
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY TAX[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2946, adopted July 13, 1998, amended Art. V as herein set out. Formerly, Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 1, 4, and 6—8 of Ord. No. 974, adopted Nov. 21, 1966; § 1 of Ord. No. 1004, adopted July 10, 1967; § 1 of Ord. No. 1124, June 2, 1969; §§ 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9 of Ord. No. 2007, adopted Jan. 4, 1982; § 1 of Ord. No. 2063, adopted Mar. 7, 1983; §§ 1—6 of Ord. No. 2521, adopted Sept. 23, 1991; §§ 1—6 of Ord. No. 2530, adopted Oct. 28, 1991; §§ 1, 2 of Ord. No. 2549, adopted Feb. 10, 1992; and §§ 2—5 of Ord. No. 2774, adopted July 10, 1995. 
 
DIVISION 1. - OCCUPATION/PRIVILEGE TAX 
 
Sec. 23-501. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of Division 1 of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Gross receipts means the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.  
Sec. 23-502. - Imposed. 
(a)  A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(2)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(b)  No tax is imposed by this division with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this division for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(c)  Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. 
(d)  The tax imposed under this division shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under Division 2 of this Article V. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-502.1. - Tax rate based on gross receipts. 
The new tax rate provided pursuant to section 23-502(a)(1) and (2), shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the first day of August 1995. Any amounts due and payable for any tax period ending prior to August 1, 1995 shall be subject to the tax imposed at the rate of four (4) percent. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-503. - Tax return. 
(a)  Each taxpayer shall make a tax return as required by this Division 1, to the village treasurer on or before the last day of each month stating: 
(1)  His name; 
(2)  His principal place of business; 
(3)  His gross receipts during the second preceding month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
(4)  Amount of tax; 
(5)  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
(b)  The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village finance department the amount of tax herein imposed. In connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-504. - Credits. 
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this division, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due or to become due under this division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. 
If a taxpayer under this Division 1 is unable to use a credit authorized by this section solely because the tax imposed by this division has been replaced by the tax imposed under Division 2 of this article, then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under Division 2. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-505. - Limitation on commencement of actions. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Division 1 shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASE AT RETAIL TAX 
 
Sec. 23-506. - Definitions. 
As used in this Division 2 of Article V, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Village means the Village of Villa Park. 
Person means any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Person maintaining a place of business in this state means any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state. 
Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail. 
Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-507. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(i)  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.574 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(ii)  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.394 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(iii)  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.376 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(iv)  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.277 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(v)  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.250 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(vi)  For the next 2,000,00 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.220 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(vii)  For the next 2,000,00 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.190 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(viii)  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.150 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(ix)  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.110 cents per kilowatt-hour; and 
(x)  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: 0.080 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(b)  The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the state. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Illinois. 
(d)  The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after September 1, 1998; and, with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers, beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-508. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 23-510 regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this division shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. 
(b)  Any tax required to be collected by this division, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. 
(c)  Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. To the extent permitted by law, persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three (3) percent of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon request. For purposes of this division, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-509. - Tax remittance and return. 
(a)  Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the village manager or his designee. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this division. 
(b)  If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under section 23-510, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village manager, or his designee, and pay the tax directly to the village finance department on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-510. - Resales. 
(a)  Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village manager or his designee and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale. 
(b)  If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village manager or his designee for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this division on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application, the village manager, or his designee, shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
(d)  The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this division for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number: 
(1)  was obtained through misrepresentation, or 
(2)  is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales. 
(e)(1) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this division directly to the village finance department pursuant to section 23-509, on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to section 23-508 and remit the tax pursuant to section 23-509 on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. 
(2)  Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village manager or his designee the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-511. - Books and records. 
Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this division shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this division. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-512. - Credits and refunds. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this division unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one (1) year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village finance department. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
Sec. 23-513. - Violations. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this Article V is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 2946, § 2, 7-13-98)  
ARTICLE VI. - TAX ON FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 23-601. - Imposed; rate. 
Every corporation, company and association which is not incorporated under the laws of this state and which is engaged in effecting fire insurance in the village shall pay to the village treasurer for the use and benefit of the fire department a sum equal to two (2) percent of the gross receipts received from fire insurance upon property situated within the village. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 8-19-27) 
State Law reference— Tax on foreign fire insurance companies authority, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-602. - Reports. 
Every person who acts in the village as agent, or otherwise, on behalf of a corporation, company or association upon which a tax or license fee is levied by the provisions of this article, shall render to the village clerk on or before the fifteenth day of July of each year, a full and true account, verified by his oath, of all of the premiums which, during the year ending on the first of July preceding the report, were received by him, or by any other person for him on behalf of that corporation, company or association. He shall specify in this report the amounts received for fire insurance, and he shall pay to the village treasurer at the time of rendering this report, the amount at determined by the rate fixed herein for which his corporation, company, or association is accountable under this article. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 2, 8-19-27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-603. - Payment. 
Each corporation, company and association on which a tax or license fee is levied by the provisions of this article shall pay at the rate required herein, upon the amount of all premiums which have been received during the year ending on every first day of July for all fire insurance effected or agreed to be effected on property situated within the village, by that corporation, company or association. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 1, 8-19-27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-604. - Effect of failure to pay. 
If the account required herein is not rendered on or before the fifteenth day of July of each year, or if the sum due remains unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any corporation, company or association, so in default, to transact any business in the municipality or fire protection district until the same due has been fully paid. This section shall not relieve any corporation, company or association from the payment of any loss upon any risk that may be taken in violation of this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 3, 8-19-27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-605. - Examination of records. 
The village clerk may examine the books, records and other papers and documents of an agent, corporation, company or association liable for the tax or license fee required by the provisions of this article for the purpose of verifying the correctness of the report of the amounts received for fire insurance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-606. - Recovery in civil action. 
The amount of the tax or license fee required by the provisions of this article may be recovered from the corporation, company or association which owes it, or from its agent, by an action in the name and for the use of the village as for money had and received. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 4, 8-19-27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-607. - Exemption. 
This article shall not be applicable to receipts from contracts of marine insurance, even though they include insurance against fire, where the premium for the fire insurance is not separately specified. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-10-1.  
Sec. 23-608. - Use of funds. 
All monies received by the village pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be disbursed to the designated treasurer of the fire department for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department, as determined by the rules of said Department; or, said funds collected shall be deposited in the firemen's pension fund, as established by village ordinance No. 1349, as codified in the Villa Park Municipal Code, Chapter 9, Division 2, section 9-321. Said funds shall be disbursed on an annual basis pursuant to one of the two aforestated options, to be selected by the president and board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 225, § 5, 8-19-27; Ord. No. 2192, § 1, 7-21-86) 
State Law reference— Use of fund, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-10-2.  
ARTICLE VII. - AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION AND USE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009, §§ 1—3, and Ord. No. 2010, §§ 1—4, both adopted Dec. 21, 1981, as subsequently amended, did not expressly amend the Code; therefore, codification as §§ 23-701—23-707 was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 23-701. - Automobile renting occupation tax—Imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one per cent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in effect in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2016, § 1, 1-11-82)  
Sec. 23-702. - Same—Report. 
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by Sections Two and Three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 2, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2016, § 2, 1-11-82)  
Sec. 23-703. - Same—Payment. 
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 3, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2016, § 3, 1-11-82)  
Sec. 23-704. - Automobile renting use tax—Imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the rate of one per cent of the rental price of such automobile while this article is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2017, § 1, 1-11-82)  
Sec. 23-705. - Same—Report. 
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by Sections Two and Three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010, § 2, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2017, § 2, 1-11-82) 
Editor's note— Perhaps the modes of procedure to be followed are prescribed in Sections 2 and 4 of the "Use Tax Act."  
Sec. 23-706. - Same—Collection. 
The tax provided for in section 23-704 shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this village. 
(Ord. No. 2010, § 3, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2017, § 3, 1-11-82)  
Sec. 23-707. - Same—Payment. 
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 2010, § 4, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 2017, § 4, 1-11-82)  
ARTICLE VIII. - HOTEL OPERATOR'S OCCUPATION TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2283, §§ 1—8, adopted May 2, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as Art. VIII, §§ 23-801—23-808, was at the discretion of the editor. Sections 9, 10 and 11, providing for severability, penalty and effective date have been omitted from codification. 
State Law reference— Authority to impose tax, rate, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 8-3-14. 
 
Sec. 23-801. - Definitions. 
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the following meanings, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Department means the finance department for the Village of Villa Park. 
Hotel means any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the rooms or rooms. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel. 
Permanent resident means any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Rent or rental means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature. 
Room or rooms means any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 1, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 23-802. - Rate. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel at the rate of five (5) percent of the total gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 2, 5-2-88; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 7-31-89)  
Sec. 23-803. - Reimbursement. 
Any and all persons subject to any tax imposed pursuant to authority granted by this article and paragraph 8-3-14 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with the state tax imposed under the "Hotel Operator's Occupation Tax Act." 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 3, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 23-804. - Restrictions. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or does hereby impose a tax upon the privilege of engaging in any business in interstate commerce or otherwise, which business may not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 4, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 23-805. - Refunds. 
If any hotel operator collects an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such operator for the tax imposed by this article measured by receipts which are not subject to the tax imposed by this article, or if any hotel operator, in collecting an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such operator for the tax imposed by this article, collects more from the customer than the hotel operator's tax liability in the transaction is, the customer shall have a legal right to claim a refund of such amount from such operator. However, if such amount is not refunded to the customer for any reason, the hotel operator is liable to pay such amount to the Village of Villa Park. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 5, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 23-806. - Maintenance of records. 
Every operator shall keep separate books or records of his business as an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under this article separately from his transactions not taxable hereunder. If any such operator fails to keep such separate books or records, he shall be liable to tax at the rate designated in section 23-802 upon the entire proceeds from his hotel. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 6, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 23-807. - Return of taxpayer. 
On the dates specified in this section, every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the Village of Villa Park shall file a return with the department for each calendar quarter, stating: 
(1)  The name of the operator; 
(2)  His residence and the address of his principal place of business and the address of the principal place of business (if that is a different address) from which he engages in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the Village of Villa Park; 
(3)  The total amount of rental receipts received by him during the calendar quarter from renting, leasing or letting rooms during such calendar quarter; 
(4)  Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the calendar quarter from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent residents during such calendar quarter; 
(5)  Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental receipts allowed by this article; 
(6)  Gross rental receipts which were received by him during the calendar quarter and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
(7)  The amount of tax due; 
(8)  Such other reasonable information as the department may require; 
(9)  If the operator's average quarterly tax liability to the Village of Villa Park does not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00), the department may authorize his returns to be filed on an annual bases, with the return for a given year being due by January 31 of the following year. Such annual return, as to form and substance, shall be subject to the same requirements as quarterly returns; 
(10)  Quarter annual returns shall be filed as follows: 
(a)  Quarter annual returns for January, February and March of a given year being due by April 30 of such year; 
(b)  Quarter annual returns for April, May and June of a given year being due by July 31 of such year; 
(c)  Quarter annual return for July, August and September of a given year being due by October 31 of such year; 
(d)  Quarter annual returns for October, November and December of a given year being due by January 31 of the following year; 
(11)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article concerning the time within which the operator may file his return, in the case of any operator who ceases to engage in a kind of business which makes him responsible for filing returns under this article, such operator shall file a final return under this article with the department not more than one (1) month after discontinuing such business; 
(12)  The filing requirements as set forth in this article may be satisfied by filing with the department a copy of any return or returns required to be filed pursuant to the Hotel Operator's Occupation Tax Act, together with a supplemental return in a form prescribed by the department indicating any additions, deletions or other changes to the return or returns filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to the Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act. The supplemental return shall include the amount of the gross receipts subject to this tax in the calendar quarter and the amount of the tax for the calendar quarter; 
(13)  Where the operator is a corporation, the return filed on behalf of such corporation shall be signed by the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer or by the properly accredited agent of such corporation; 
(14)  The person filing the return herein provided for shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the Village of Villa Park the amount of tax herein imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 7, 5-2-88)  
Sec. 23-808. - Disposition of tax proceeds. 
The amounts collected by the Village of Villa Park pursuant to this article shall be segregated into a separate fund designated hotel tax fund, and monies contained in said fund shall be expended by the Village of Villa Park solely to promote tourism and conventions within the Village of Villa Park or to otherwise attract nonresident overnight visitors to the Village of Villa Park. No funds received pursuant to this article shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business. 
(Ord. No. 2283, § 8, 5-2-88)  
Secs. 23-809—23-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3156, § 3, repealed art. IX, §§ 23-901—23-910 in their entirety. Section 4 of said ordinance provided for the inclusion of a new art. IX, §§ 23-901—23-905, to read as herein set out. It should be noted that Sections 2 and 3 of Ord. No. 3156 provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2003. 
 
Sec. 23-901. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Amount paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid. 
(b)  Department means the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
(c)  Gross charge means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within this state, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within this state, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross charge" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this article, (ii) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges, or (v) charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the village; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; 
(7)  Bad debts means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; or 
(9)  Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(d)  Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state. 
(e)  Intrastate telecommunications means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state. 
(f)  Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state. 
(g)  Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail. 
(h)  Retailer means every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion. 
(i)  Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state means any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state. 
(j)  Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale. 
(k)  Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
(l)  Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by the article. 
(m)  Telecommunications, in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this Act. For purposes of this section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in Section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupations Tax Act. 
(Ord. No. 3156, § 4, 9-30-02)  
Sec. 23-902. - Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges: 
(a)  The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six (6) percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. 
(b)  The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six (6) percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3156, § 4, 9-30-02)  
Sec. 23-903. - Collection of tax by retailers. 
(a)  The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the Department. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. 3156, § 4, 9-30-02)  
Sec. 23-904. - Returns to department. 
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this article on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, Section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this Act. 
(Ord. No. 3156, § 4, 9-30-02)  
Sec. 23-905. - Resellers. 
(a)  If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Department may reasonably require. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales. 
(c)  Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale. 
(Ord. No. 3156, § 4, 9-30-02)  
Secs. 23-906—23-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TAXPAYER BILL OF RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 23-1001. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
Locally imposed and administered tax means a tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village and not an agency or department of the state. A "locally imposed and administered tax" does not include a tax imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
Local tax administrator means the treasurer of the village or other village government officers charged with the administration or collection of a locally imposed and administered tax, including their staffs, employees, or agents to the extent they are authorized by the village treasurer to act in the village treasurer's stead. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1002. - Application of tax payments. 
Any payment or remittance of a locally imposed and administered tax shall be applied to the taxpayer's outstanding tax liability for the tax period in the following order: 
(1)  Tax for the period; then 
(2)  Interest due for the period; then 
(3)  Penalties due for the period. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1003. - Late payment. 
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any village tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (a) physically received by the village on or before the due date or (b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U. S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1004. - Interest. 
Interest shall accrue and be assessed at the rate of one (1) percent per month for any late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1005. - Late filing penalties. 
Late filing penalties shall be imposed at five (5) percent of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return. A late filing penalty may not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the village pursuant to section 23-1007. The village treasurer may determine that the late filing was due to reasonable cause and abate the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1006. - Late payment penalty. 
Late payment penalties shall be assessed at five (5) percent of the tax due and not timely paid or remitted to the village. This penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the village pursuant to sec. 23-1007. The village treasurer may determine that the late payment was due to reasonable cause and abate the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1007. - Failure to file penalty. 
If no return is filed before the issuance of a notice of tax deficiency or of tax liability to the taxpayer, a failure to file penalty shall be assessed at twenty-five (25) percent of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to have been filed. The village treasurer may determine that the failure to file a return was due to reasonable cause and abate the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1008. - Credits and refunds. 
No refund or credit of any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment shall be made even though a village tax may be declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. A taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid a tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be two (2) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment or remittance in error was made. The village shall not be required to grant a credit or refund of taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid or remitted the amounts directly to the village. The rate of interest for overpayment of tax shall be five (5) percent simple interest per annum. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1009. - Credit and refund claim procedure. 
The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows. The taxpayer shall submit to the village treasurer in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying: 
(1)  The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
(2)  The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
(3)  The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment; 
(4)  The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and 
(5)  A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount owed, and, as applicable, related interest and penalties; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village. 
Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the village treasurer of any claim for a refund or credit, the village treasurer shall either: 
(1)  Grant the claim, or 
(2)  Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1010. - Statute of limitations regarding locally imposed and administered taxes. 
In accordance with state law, the village hereby determines that the applicable limitations period for the determination and assessment of locally imposed and administered taxes shall be as follows: 
(1)  No notice of determination of tax due or assessment may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the period was filed or the end of the calendar year in which the return for the period was due, whichever occurs later. 
(2)  If any tax return was not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by village the tax paid or remitted was less than seventy-five (75) percent of the tax due for that period, the limitations period shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar year in which the return for the period was due or the end of the calendar year in which the return for the period was filed, whichever occurs later. 
(3)  This section does not place any limitation on an action by the village for taxes due or payable if a fraudulent tax return is filed. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1011. - Audit procedures. 
Taxpayers must be notified in writing of a proposed audit by the village of the taxpayer's books and records. The notice of audit must specify the tax and time period to be audited and must detail the minimum documentation or books and records to be made available to the auditor. Audits must be held only during reasonable times of the day and unless impracticable, at times agreed to by the taxpayer. An auditor who determines that there has been an overpayment of tax during the course of the audit is obligated to identify the overpayment to the taxpayer so that the taxpayer can take the necessary steps to recover the overpayment. If the overpayment is the result of the application of some or all of tile taxpayer's tax payment to an incorrect local government entity, the auditor must notify the correct local government entity of the taxpayer's application error. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1012. - Appeals process. 
The village shall refer to this article and shall include a written statement of rights whenever the village issues a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The statement must explain the reason for the assessment, the amount of the tax liability proposed, the procedure for appealing the assessment, and the obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund, and collection process. In no event may a taxpayer be provided a time period less than forty-five (45) days after the date the notice was served in which to protest a notice of tax determination or notice of tax liability. Any notice of tax assessment due must be sent by United States registered or certified mail. The village treasurer shall adopt procedures for opening up any closed protest period or extending the protest period upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1013. - Appeal hearing procedures. 
(a)  If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the village treasurer shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. 
(b)  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under sec. 23-1012, the village treasurer shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. 
(c)  No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days. 
(d)  At the hearing, the village treasurer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the village treasurer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1014. - Installment contracts. 
If the village treasurer allows installment payment agreements for delinquent tax amounts, the village treasurer may not cancel any installment contract unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due on time and falls to cure the delinquency in the allowable time supplied by village treasurer or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring any installment plan agreement or contract with the village treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1015. - Voluntary disclosure. 
For any tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the village treasurer, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the village treasurer for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one (1) percent per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed, provided, however, that if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due as provided in this section, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest required under this section must be made within ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application, except that any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1016. - Criminal penalties. 
Criminal penalties may not be imposed on taxpayers for noncompliance with the provisions of a locally imposed and administered tax unless the noncompliance is a result of willful or fraudulent disregard of the village's tax laws. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1017. - Review of liens. 
The village treasurer shall establish an internal review process concerning liens against taxpayers. If the lien is determined to be improper, the village treasurer must remove the lien at the village's own expense, correct the taxpayer's credit record, and correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1018. - Publication of tax ordinances. 
The village shall publish and make copies of its taxing ordinances readily available to the public at the village clerk's office upon request. Posting of the tax ordinances on the Internet satisfies the publication requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Sec. 23-1019. - Application. 
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this article, this article shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 3073, § 2, 12-18-00)  
Secs. 23-1020—23-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESTAURANT TAX 
 
Sec. 23-1101. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as hereinafter set forth: 
(a)  Director means the director of finance of the village. 
(b)  Place for eating or restaurant means all premises located within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park where prepared food is sold at retail for immediate consumption, with seating provided for consumption of said prepared food on the premises, whether consumed on the premises or not, and whether or not such place for eating use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premises or business establishment. 
(c)  Gross receipts means the gross amount paid to the restaurant by customers for the consumption of products sold, prepared or served by the restaurant. Gross receipts do not include amounts paid for federal, state and local taxes, including the tax levied by this article XI, and do not include amounts paid as gratuities for the employees of the place for eating. 
(d)  Owner means any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a place for eating. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1102. - Tax imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the owner of each restaurant in the village. The rate of the tax shall be one and one-half (1.5) percent of the gross receipts received by the restaurant on or after June, 1, 2010. The tax imposed by this section shall be upon the place for eating and shall be in addition to any other taxes upon the selling price of food or alcoholic beverages sold at retail that may be permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1103. - Exemptions. 
Sales of food and alcoholic beverages that may not be taxed under applicable law, if any, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1104. - Tax payments and returns. 
Each restaurant owner shall collect and shall pay or remit the tax imposed by this article to the director of finance. Tax returns shall be filed with the director on a monthly basis on or before the final business day of each month with respect to sales occurring during the prior month. Every owner of a restaurant in the village shall register with the director on or before May 15, 2010, or the date of becoming an owner, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1105. - Rules and regulations. 
The director is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1106. - Books and records. 
Every person required to pay or remit the tax to the director shall keep accurate and complete books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents, such as purchase orders, invoices and receipts, and other documents listing, summarizing or pertaining to the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to the tax liability or exemption that may be claimed. All such books, records and accounts shall be available for inspection by the director or his designee at all reasonable times during business hours of the day. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1107. - Delinquent payment. 
If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, interest and a penalties shall accrue as provided in article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1108. - Collection. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the village attorney shall, upon the request of the village finance director, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Sec. 23-1109. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of the tax due plus any penalties. A separate offense shall be determined to have been committed each day during which or on which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 3602, § 2, 4-12-10)  
Chapter 24 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Power of village to license, tax and regulate taxicabs, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-101. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated below: 
Owner. Every person having the use or control of one (1) or more taxicabs. 
Taxicab. All public vehicles driven by mechanical power, used for the carriage of persons for hire, except those vehicles commonly known as buses. 
Taximeter. A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by means of figures. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 1, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-102. - Duty of owners to furnish service. 
Every owner shall furnish such reasonably safe and adequate service at just and reasonable rates within the municipality as may reasonably be required to assure adequate accommodations to the public in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 14, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-103. - Drivers to report changes in residences. 
If any person licensed as a taxicab driver under this article changes his residence at any time while his license is in force, he shall forthwith notify the chief of police of such act. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 35, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-104. - Duty to carry passengers. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no driver of a taxicab shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request anywhere in the village unless previously engaged or unable to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 18, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-105. - Cruising prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab about the streets of the village or otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 24, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-106. - Parking at taxicab stands. 
Only taxicabs in such numbers and of such kinds as are set forth on the required metal sign may remain at the stand while waiting for employment, and only in single file pointed in accordance with the traffic regulations. No taxicab standing at the head of any such line shall refuse to carry any orderly person applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper fare, but this shall not prevent any person from selecting any taxicab he may desire on the stand, whether it be at the head of the line or not. As the taxicabs leave the line with passengers those behind shall move up, and any taxicab seeking a space on the stand shall approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall stop as near as possible to the last cab already on the line. No taxicab shall stand at the curb within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance of any building adjacent to a taxicab stand located and designated by the corporate authorities which distance shall be determined by measuring fifteen (15) feet on each side of the point of the curb opposite the middle of the entrance to the adjacent building. No private vehicle shall be permitted to stand or use the space in a public stand except to receive or to discharge passengers or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 23, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-107. - Specific contracts. 
This chapter shall not affect the right of a duly licensed taxicab business licensee to enter into private contracts, whether verbal or written, with any person for a regular carrying for hire of special persons or groups, as the parties may contract; however, nothing in this section shall authorize any taxicab licensee to negotiate fares upon any pick-up in the usual course of business. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 22, 9-8-70)  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-201. - Insurance as prerequisite to business or vehicle license. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance or renewal of a taxicab vehicle or business license, the applicant shall file a policy of insurance issued by a solvent company authorized to do business in the state and approved by the village treasurer, insuring the licensee or owner of such license vehicle against liability for any damage or injury to, including death of, any person and for damage or injury to property resulting from the negligence of such licensee, owner or his agent in the operation of such vehicle. Such policy of insurance may cover one or more vehicles. The limits of liability shall, with respect to each vehicle covered by such policy, be not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), for injury to any one person, or a maximum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), for personal injuries in any one occurrence, and not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damage to property in any one occurrence. Such policy of insurance shall provide for the payment and satisfaction of any final judgment rendered against the licensee or owner of such vehicle for damage to property or for personal injury, including death. The policy shall be further endorsed to provide for thirty (30) days written notice of cancellation to the village. 
(b)  If the village receives a notice of cancellation pursuant to such endorsement, the taxicab business license and all taxicab vehicle licenses and taxicab drivers' licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this ordinance, shall immediately terminate as of the effective date of such insurance termination unless the taxicab business licensee provides a substitute policy of insurance complying with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  In case a final judgment or claim has been paid by any indemnitor or insuror, and as a result of which the original amount of coverage required herein is proportionately reduced, all licenses covered by such bond or insurance shall be revoked automatically, subject to reinstatement, within thirty (30) days, by replacement of the coverage so demised. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 7, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-202. - Revocation or suspension of business or driver's license generally. 
A taxicab business or driver's license shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon second conviction of its holder within the license year of a violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 24-203. - Revocation or suspension of business or driver's license generally. 
A taxicab business or driver's license shall be subject to an automatic suspension of thirty (30) days upon a second conviction of its holder of a violation of this chapter within the license year. The board of trustees or any regularly constituted board or commission appointed by the board may, at a public hearing during such thirty (30) day suspension period, permanently revoke such license. The holding of such public hearing shall be after not less than five (5) days' written notice to the licensee, and the respondent in such hearing shall be afforded the opportunity to cross-examine adverse witnesses and to present witnesses and evidence in his own behalf. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 49, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-204. - Effect of revocation or suspension of business or vehicle license. 
Upon suspension or revocation of any taxicab business or taxicab vehicle license granted hereunder, the holder or holders thereof shall be immediately and automatically barred from taxicab activity and operation within this village or any other municipality regulating its taxicab business in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 25, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-205. - Reciprocity. 
Taxicab businesses, taxicabs and taxicab drivers licensed by reciprocating communities, as set forth in schedule B attached hereto and hereby made a part hereof [by reference], are hereby exempted from the license and fee provisions of this chapter to the same extent that the ordinance of the municipalities set forth in said schedule B grant similar exemptions. 
Schedule B may be amended from time to time hereafter by resolution of the corporate authorities. Notice of any such amendment shall be sent to all municipalities listed in aforementioned schedule B. Any violation by such foreign licensed taxicab business, taxicab or taxicab driver shall be immediately reported to the licensing municipality for such further action as may be deemed necessary by the corporate authorities of such other municipality, and pursuant to the terms of its own taxicab ordinance. 
The licensee hereunder violating the ordinance of a reciprocating municipality, as set forth in schedule B herein, shall be subject to the same penalties provided by this chapter as if such ordinance violation had taken place within the corporate limits of this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 48, 9-8-70)  
Secs. 24-206—24-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 
 
Sec. 24-216. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the taxicab business without a license issued by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 5, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-217. - Application. 
A person desiring the license required by the provisions of this division shall make written application to the village upon a form furnished by the village giving the information required on such form.  
Sec. 24-218. - Procedure for issuance. 
There shall be as many taxicab business licenses issued as may be determined by the board of trustees, by resolution. No additional licenses shall be issued unless a public hearing has been conducted by the board. If the board determines to issue such additional license, they shall by resolution authorize the issuance of same. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 9, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-219. - Term. 
Taxicab licenses shall expire at the end of each fiscal year unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 5, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-220. - Fee. 
A person desiring the issuance or renewal of a taxicab business license shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to the village. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 6, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-221. - Revocation for abandonment of service. 
Upon complete abandonment of taxicab service for the period of ten (10) consecutive days by a taxicab business licensee, the chief of police, upon hearing after five (5) days' notice to such, shall recommend to the board of trustees that such persons' license be revoked. After a public hearing affording due process the trustees may revoke such license. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 15, 9-8-70)  
Secs. 24-222—24-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 24-246. - Required. 
Every person driving a taxicab shall be licensed as a taxicab driver both by the state and the village. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 26, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-247. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to secure a taxicab driver's license shall make application in writing therefor to the village clerk, upon a form to be provided by the clerk. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his residence and occupation, and shall be endorsed by the owner of the taxicab business said driver is to be employed by, who shall certify that the applicant is a fit person to drive and operate a taxicab and accompanied by the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 28, 9-8-70) 
(b)  Along with such application, the applicant shall file an affidavit stating his full name, residence, places of residence during the previous five (5) years, age, color, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, whether a citizen of the United States, places of previous employment, whether married or single, whether he has previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur and if so, whether his license has ever been revoked and for what cause. Such applicant shall also file his application to the clerk with two (2) recent photographs of himself, of a size which may be easily attached to his license, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued, and the other shall be filed with the application in the office of the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 28, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-248. - Qualifications. 
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must: 
(1)  Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or over. 
(2)  Be of good health with good eyesight, and not subject to other infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab. 
(3)  Be able to read, write and speak the English language. 
(4)  Be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors. 
(5)  Have successfully qualified as set forth in section 24-249 of this Code.  
Sec. 24-249. - Investigation and examination of applicants. 
The application, affidavit and photographs submitted by an applicant pursuant hereto shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall investigate the qualifications and the physical and mental conditions of the applicant. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be examined by the chief of police as to the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the traffic regulations and the geography of the village. The applicant shall be fingerprinted and the chief of police shall consider the results of a fingerprint check in his examination of the applicant. If the results of the examinations be unsatisfactory, no license shall be issued. If the chief of police shall approve the application, he shall endorse thereon such approval and return the same together with the affidavit and photographs to the village clerk, who shall forthwith issue such license.  
Sec. 24-250. - Fee and transfer. 
A person desiring the issuance or renewal of a taxicab driver's license shall pay an annual fee of five dollars ($5.00). Such license shall be transferable between municipalities at no additional cost during the term of such license. (Ord, No. 1194, § 6, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-251. - Term. 
Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be issued as of the first day of May in each year, and shall be valid to and including the last day of April next succeeding. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 30, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-252. - Form. 
Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be in such form as to contain the signature of the licensee and blank spaces upon which a record may be made of any arrest of or serious complaint against him. All taxicab driver's licenses shall be numbered when issued. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 31, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-253. - Renewal. 
The village clerk may renew a taxicab driver's license from year to year by appropriate endorsement thereon. A taxicab driver in applying for a renewal of his taxicab driver's license shall make an application upon a form to be furnished by the clerk entitled "application for renewal of license," which shall be filled out with the full name and address of the applicant, together with a statement of the date upon which his original license was granted and the number thereof. No renewal of license shall be made without the approval of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 32, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-254. - Display. 
The driver of a taxicab shall display prominently his taxicab driver's license in the taxicab at all times while the vehicle is in use as a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 31, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-255. - Defacing. 
No holder of a taxicab driver's license shall deface, remove or obliterate any official entry made upon his license. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 34, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-256. - Records. 
There shall be kept in the office of the village clerk and the police department a complete record of each taxicab driver's license issued and of all renewals, suspensions or revocations thereof. The clerk's record shall be kept on file with the original application of the driver for a license. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 36, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-257. - Suspension or revocation. 
A taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked at any time by the board of trustees after a hearing affording due process for any violation of this chapter. The chief of police may suspend such license for ten (10) days pending final action by the board of trustees. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a statement of the reasons therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of status by the officer suspending or revoking such license. No driver whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed as a taxicab driver in the village, unless upon presentation of reasons satisfactory to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 33, 9-8-70)  
Secs. 24-258—24-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLE LICENSES 
 
Sec. 24-271. - Required. 
No taxicab shall be operated upon the streets of the village without a taxicab license issued by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 5, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-272. - Filing and processing of application. 
Applications for taxicab vehicle license shall be made to the village clerk by the owner thereof, upon forms to be furnished by the clerk, and such application shall contain the full name and address of the owner or operator, the class of the vehicle for which the license is desired, the length of time the vehicle for which the license is desired, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons it is capable of carrying, and the motor power thereof. Such application shall thereupon be referred by the clerk to the chief of police. Upon approval of the application by the chief of police, he shall so endorse such application and file the same with the clerk, who shall, upon payment of the required fee refer the application to the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 8, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-273. - Issuance or denial. 
If the board of trustees finds after investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the taxicab for which the taxicab vehicle license is desired, it shall notify the applicant of its finding. Within sixty (60) days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the board any and all additional information which may be required, and if the board then finds that the applicant is the owner and bona fide operator of the vehicle for which the license is desired, and that such vehicle complies with all of the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village, the license shall thereupon be issued. 
If the board of trustees find from such investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicle for which the license is desired, it shall forthwith notify the applicant of such finding. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 10, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-274. - Cards and identification symbols. 
The taxicab vehicle license shall be in the form of a card which shall contain the official license number of the taxicab, together with the date of the inspection. Such card shall be signed by the clerk and shall contain a blank space upon which an entry shall be made of the date of inspection of the taxicab by the chief of police or an inspector appointed by him. License cards shall be of a distinctly different color each year, and in the case of taxicabs the license number assigned thereto shall in each case be the same as that issued to the vehicle for the year pursuant to law. Such cards shall be affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part of each taxicab. The design of such cards should be changed annually. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 11, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-275. - Fee. 
A person desiring the issuance or renewal of a taxicab vehicle license shall pay an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 6, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-276. - Term. 
Taxicab vehicle licenses shall expire at the end of each fiscal year unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 5, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-277. - Inspections. 
(a)  No taxicab vehicle shall be licensed, either upon new application or renewal, until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days before original application or renewal thereof, every taxicab shall pass a safety land inspection. The expense for such inspection shall be that of the applicant for the licensee, and the inspection shall be made at any approved facility for the making of such inspections, or such other facility as may be authorized by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 4, 10-20-70)  
ARTICLE III. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 24-301. - Established. 
No person owning, operating or controlling any taxicab within the village shall charge in excess of the following rates: 
(1)  For flag pull, one dollar and seventy cents ($1.70); 
(2)  For each one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile or fraction thereof, fifteen cents ($0.15); 
(3)  For waiting time, there shall be an additional charge of ten cents ($0.10) for each one and one-half (1½) minutes, or fraction thereof. Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning within a reasonable time after arrival at the place to which it had been called, or the time consumed while standing because of conditions beyond control of the operator, but no charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the taxicab or its operator or time consumed by premature response to a call. 
(4)  For each additional passenger, fifty cents ($0.50); provided, however, that there shall be no additional charge for children under twelve (12) who are accompanied by a parent. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided herein, for travel outside DuPage County (excluding travel to O'Hare Airport and to those Cook County municipalities bordering DuPage County service municipalities) the rates shall be one hundred fifty (150) percent of the regular rate plus any toll road fees. 
Except where the above rates are not based upon time or distance, all taxicab rates shall be determined by the taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 1194, §§ 20, 21, 9-8-70; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 3-22-76; Ord. No. 1750, § 1, 10-31-77; Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 1-29-79; Ord. No. 1986, § 1, 3-17-80; Ord. No. 2141, § 1, 3-25-85; Ord. No. 2246, § 1, 7-6-87; Ord. No. 2460, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2685, § 1, 2-21-94; Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 2-23-98)  
Sec. 24-302. - Passengers picked up subsequent to flag pull. 
Additional passengers picked up by a taxicab subsequent to an original flag pull will be charged for the prorated meter reading as determined by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 17, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-303. - Prepayment. 
Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 18, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-304. - Receipts. 
If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same at the time of such payment, a receipt therefor in legible type or writing containing the name of the owner or operator, the municipal license number or the driver's license number, or the taximeter number and any items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid and the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 19, 9-8-70)  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-401. - Colors and name. 
All taxicabs owned and/or operated by a taxicab business licensee shall be identically painted so that they are readily identifiable. However, no coloring scheme or name shall be similar to that of any other taxicab business license previously issued within the boundaries of this village. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 16, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-402. - Register of owners. 
The village clerk and chief of police shall keep a register of the name and address of each person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this chapter, together with the license number and the description, make and model of such taxicab, with the date and complete record of inspections made of it. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times, and shall be public records, extracts of which may be certified for use as evidence by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 13, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-403. - Vehicle inspections. 
The chief of police shall see that all taxicabs are kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use and shall inspect all taxicabs from time to time, or on the complaint of any person, or as often as may be necessary, but not less than semiannually. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 2, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-404. - Posting of notice. 
Each taxicab providing services pursuant to this chapter shall at all times have prominently posted on the back side of the front seat, facing the rear passenger seat, the following notice: 
YOUR DRIVER IS REQUIRED TO: 
1. OPEN YOUR DOOR 
2. ASSIST WITH ANY LUGGAGE OR GROCERIES 
3. MAINTAIN A CLEAN VEHICLE 
4. PRESENT A COURTEOUS MANNER 
5. DRIVE SAFELY 

IF ANY OF THESE CONDITIONS ARE NOT SATISFACTORY, 
PLEASE CALL 530-5012 

THANK YOU 
AUTO RIDE MANAGEMENT 
CAB#_____ 
 
(Ord. No. 2685, § 2, 2-21-94)  
Secs. 24-405—24-415. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TAXIMETERS 
 
Sec. 24-416. - Required. 
Each taxicab shall have a taximeter affixed thereto and in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 37, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-417. - Prerequisite to taxicab license. 
No taxicab license shall be issued for any taxicab until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected as provided by this chapter and found to be accurate. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 38, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-418. - Specifications. 
The dial of every taximeter with which every taxicab shall be equipped shall show but one tariff. Such taximeter shall also properly and accurately register, indicate and display the time consumed by the taxicab while in waiting, the distance traveled and the amount of fare to be determined and charged therefor. Each taximeter shall be equipped with a flag at least three (3) inches by two (2) inches in size, either painted red or bearing thereon in letters at least one inch in height, the word "vacant," or the words "For hire." The flag post of such flag shall be kept up or toward a vertical position when the taxicab is for hire and when such taxicab is engaged in the service of a passenger or passengers, such flag post shall be kept down or in a horizontal position. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 40, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-419. - Inspection testing and approval. 
(a)  No person shall drive a taxicab to which is attached a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued to a taxicab it shall be the duty of the chief of police to have examined, at the operator's expense, the taximeter attached thereto, and report its condition to the village clerk. At least once annually such inspection shall be performed and the meter sealed; provided, however, that in the event complaint is made that any taximeter which registers improperly or inaccurately, it shall be the duty of the police chief immediately to have examined and inspected such taximeter complained of. If such taximeter does not comply with the requirements of the preceding section, then and in that event it shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of such taxicab to permit its use until such taxicab is equipped with a taximeter approved by the chief of police. 
(c)  Every taximeter shall be tested by running the taxicab to which it is attached over a course of standard mile-in-length or by a mechanical test to prove the accuracy of the register thereof. Either of the foregoing tests may be made at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(d)  In order to determine whether such taximeter correctly registers "waiting time," it shall be the duty of the chief of police to test such taximeter by comparing the time recorded as shown by the fare computed on the dial thereof with the standard time. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, controlling or operating a taxicab to deliver either the taxicab together with the taximeter, or the taximeter detached therefrom, to the chief of police, or any of his deputies, for the purpose of making the aforesaid test upon demand; provided, however, such person may, if desired, be present at the time such test is made. 
(Ord. No. 1194, §§ 39, 41—43, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-420. - Transferring meters to vehicle of different wheel size. 
No person shall detach any certified or inspected taximeter from any taxicab and attach the same to any other taxicab, the front wheels of which are of different diameter from those with reference to which the taximeter was originally tested, unless a new inspection or certification is had on such taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 44, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-421. - Dial to be illuminated and located in plain view of passenger. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall, during the period between sunset and sunrise, be equipped with a light which shall be so reflected upon the dial of the taximeter as to enable the passenger engaging and using such taxicab to read the figures indicated thereon. 
(b)  Every taximeter placed on a taxicab shall be so arranged that the dial thereof is in plain view of the passenger while riding in such taxicab, or upon alighting from the same. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 46, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-422. - Deception. 
No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter while carrying passengers or under employment, shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter or other similar device in such a position as to denote that he is employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he is entitled under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 47, 9-8-70)  
Sec. 24-423. - Chief of police to seal taximeters and keep records of inspections, etc. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to assure that all taximeters found accurate and correct are sealed, and to keep a record of the numbers of each taximeter and the date of the inspection thereof in the books of his office. 
(Ord. No. 1194, § 45, 9-8-70)  
Chapter 25 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; environmental control board, ch. 2, art. XXV; housing code, ch. 12; detergents containing phosphates, § 16-109; swimming pools, ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 7 of Ord. No. 3784, adopted Apr. 14, 2014, amended art. I, by deleting all instances of "clerk" or "village clerk" and replacing with "finance director". 
 
Sec. 25-101. - Application for service. 
Any person desiring the use of and service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall make application for either water or sewerage service, or both water and sewerage service, on a form furnished by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 2, 10-26-70)  
Sec. 25-102. - Security deposit. 
As a condition for the provision of water and sewer services by the village, customers shall be required to provide a security deposit as hereinafter set forth: 
(a)  To secure the payment of water and sewer bills, a security deposit shall be required from every residential unit to be served. The security deposit shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for single-family homes or one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per unit in the case of multiple-family dwellings. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, to secure the payment of water and sewer bills by commercial or industrial customers, a security deposit in the minimum amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per user shall be required. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that water and sewer usage by a commercial or industrial customer exceeds three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month, or in the event that the character of sewage from an industrial or commercial plant, building or premises is such as to present a greater risk of loss and cost of collection, then it is hereby made the duty of the village finance director, or his/her designee, to increase the amount of the security deposit required of the user, applicant, or the owner of said premises in such amount so as not to exceed the maximum estimated amount for sewer and water service which may be charged in any succeeding monthly period. 
(c)  The security deposit of the residential, commercial or industrial property shall be applied to the final bill. The village may refund the deposit of single-family owner occupied residences upon request and upon evidence of prompt payment of the account for a period of four (4) consecutive years. 
(d)  The village shall waive the security deposit required for a residential, commercial or industrial customer if said customer participates in the village's direct debit program or automatic withdrawal program. In the event the customer terminates his, her or its participation in either program, the village shall add the amount of the deposit as required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section to the customer's account. 
(e)  In cases where a shut off occurs as the result of a delinquent balance for a customer who does not have a security deposit on the account, the amount of the deposit as required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be added to the account at the time the shut off occurs. 
(f)  In cases of nonpayment of the deposit, the village finance director shall order the service terminated for nonpayment. Reinstatement of service will be in accordance with the provisions of section 25-108. 
(Ord. No. 1198, §§ 2, 4, 5, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 1926, §§ 3—5, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 3366, § 2, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 3412, § 2, 1-22-07; Ord. No. 3784, § 1, 4-14-14; Ord. No. 3864 , § 1, 4-27-15)  
Sec. 25-103. - Connection charges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to connect any premises with any part of the village sanitary sewerage system without first having paid any and all charges, fees, costs and expenses, whether imposed by ordinance, by agreement, or otherwise, including but not limited to connection fees ("Type A" and "Type B"), special connection fees, and recapture fees, of the village, and any connection fees as may be required by the ordinances of the Salt Creek Drainage Basin Sanitary District then in force and effect and due proof shall be required as to such payment to Salt Creek Drainage Basin Sanitary District. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to connect any premises with the village water system unless and until any and all charges, fees, recapture fees, whether imposed by ordinance, agreement, or otherwise, including a connection fee ("Type A" and "Type B") for the same is paid the village at the time a building or water connection permit is applied for. 
(c)  There be and there is hereby established rates or charges for the connection of premises to the village sewerage system which shall be known as "Type A" and "Type B" sewerage connection charges, which are as follows: 
(1)  "Type A" sewerage connection charges are for maintenance, improvement and expansion of the system of mains and interceptor sewers and apply to all properties and are as follows and shall be computed at the highest charge yielded by computation under paragraphs a, b or c below: 
a.  For single and multi-family residences: A basic charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) per each unit plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each bedroom, but not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). One room apartments shall be considered as one bedroom apartments and pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) hereunder. 
b.  For commercial, institutional and industrial premises: 
1.  A basic charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each fixture including lavatory, wash basin, shower, work basin, drain outlet or similar fixture, and garbage grinders up to three-fourths horsepower but no total charge for any one premises shall be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00); or, 
2.  Alternate charges, if greater than 1. above, of forty dollars ($40.00) per capita based on the population equivalent loading factor to be determined by the highest of the following criteria: 
(i)  Suspended solids 0.2 pounds per day per capita. 
(ii)  Five (5) day B.O.D. 0.17 pounds per day per capita. 
(iii)  Average flow one hundred (100) gallons per day per capita. 
(iv)  Actual number of residents and/or employees. Employees are to be counted as a population equivalent of one-half person each or one-third if more than one shift is counted. 
c.  Nothing before the contrary withstanding the minimum sewerage connection charge for all residential, commercial, institutional and industrial premises shall be not less than an amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) multiplied by the number of acres or fraction of the premises to be connected. 
(2)  "Type B" sewerage connection charges are to defray the pro rata expense of lateral or other sewers directly serving individual properties which are installed in the right-of-way adjacent to these properties, and are as follows: 
a.  A connection charge in addition to those provided by subsection (1) above to be charged to each premises to be connected to the village sewerage system to be computed and determined on the basis of forty-two dollars ($42.00) per foot of sewer line passing adjacent to the premises, except that in cases where the said sewer line is used, connected or tied into by premises, on both sides of any street or highway right-of-way the said charge shall be only twenty-one dollars ($21.00) per foot due to the increased contribution available through use of said line for abutting properties on both sides. 
b.  The "Type B" sewerage connection charge for corner lots shall be computed first along the narrow frontage as measured along the right-of-way line of the abutting street or highway and second along the longer frontage of said lot abutting the other street or highway except that the first one hundred fifty (150) feet of depth along said longer frontage shall not be counted in computing said charge. 
(d)  There be and there is hereby established rates or charges for the connection of premises to the village water system which shall be known as "Type A" and "Type B" water connection charges, which are as follows: 
(1)  "Type A" water connection charges are for maintenance, improvement and expansion of the system of wells, storage and transmission facilities and apply to all properties and are as follows and shall be computed at the highest charge yielded by computation under paragraphs a, b or c below: 
a.  For single and multi-family residences: A basic charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) per each unit plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each bedroom, but not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). One room apartments shall be considered as one bedroom apartments and pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) hereunder. 
b.  For commercial, institutional and industrial premises: A basic charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each fixture including lavatory, wash basin, shower, work basin, drain outlet or similar fixture, and garbage grinders up to three-fourths horsepower but no total charge for any one premises shall be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). However, fixtures for sprinkler systems shall not be counted for this purpose. 
c.  Nothing before the contrary withstanding the minimum water connection charge for all residential, commercial, institutional and industrial premises shall be not less than an amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) multiplied by the number of acres of fraction of the premises to be connected. 
(2)  "Type B" water connection charges are to defray the pro rata expenses of eight (8) inch diameter or smaller watermains directly serving individual properties which are installed in the right-of-way adjacent to these properties and are as follows: 
a.  A connection charge in addition to those provided by paragraph (1) above to be charged to each premises to be connected to the village water system to be computed and determined on the basis of thirty-four dollars ($34.00) per foot of water line passing adjacent to the premises, except that in cases where the said water line is used, connected or tied into by premises on both sides of any street or highway right-of-way the said charge shall be only seventeen dollars ($17.00) per foot due to the increased contribution available through use of said line for abutting properties on both sides. 
b.  The "Type B" water connection charge for corner lots shall be computed first along the narrow frontage as measured along the right-of-way line of the abutting street or highway and second along the longer frontage of said lot abutting the other street or highway except that the first one hundred fifty (150) feet of depth along said longer frontage shall not be counted in computing said charge. 
(e)  "Type B" sewer and water connection charges will not apply where the owner of the property installs or has installed sewer and water lines or has paid for this cost by special assessment, special service area, recapture fee, or otherwise. Where the village has entered into a recapture agreement for the extension of sewer or water lines, the higher fee shall prevail—except that in a case involving trunk or arterial extensions, the village board may waive the recapture fees in favor of the "Type B" fees. There shall be no connection charge made, levied or assessed against any governmental premises. 
(f)  Roosevelt Road/Euclid Avenue Sanitary Sewer Extension. A special connection fee in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) is hereby imposed upon each of the parcels set forth hereinafter, to be commonly referred to as the "Roosevelt Road/Euclid Avenue Sanitary Sewer Non-Construction Special Connection Fee." Said fee shall be assessed against each of the three (3) parcels specified herein upon application for connection to the Villa Park municipal waste water system or the waste water system line located in the Village of Villa Park between the west side of Summit Avenue and the west side of Euclid Avenue on the north side of Roosevelt Road. This special connection fee shall cover the cost of acquisition of necessary easements for the construction of the sanitary sewer main in that location. The Roosevelt Road/Euclid Avenue Sanitary Sewer Nonconstruction Special Connection Fee is separate and apart from any other fees or charges or constructions costs and specifically does not include any recapture fee or "Type A" or "Type B" charges or any other fee or charges as may be set forth in the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Parcel 1: Lots 27 and 28 (except the north 60 feet thereof) in Riordon's Subdivision, a subdivision in the east one-half of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded May 16, 1945, as Document No. 477866, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
PIN: 06-15-306-011 and 06-15-306-028 
Parcel 2: Lots 25 and 26 in Riordon's Subdivision, a subdivision in the east one-half of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded May 16, 1945, as Document No. 477866, in Dupage County, Illinois. 
PIN: 06-15-306-020, 06-15-306-024 and 06-15-306-025 
Parcel 3: Lots 23 and 24 in Riordon's Subdivision, a subdivision in the east one-half of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded May 16, 1945, as Document No. 477866, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
PIN: 06-15-306-029 
(g)  A special connection fee, to be commonly referred to as the Roosevelt Road/Euclid Avenue Sanitary Sewer Construction Fee in the amount specified hereinafter shall be and are hereby assessed against each of the parcels designated by either legal description of PIN and in the amounts designated. This special connection fee is in furtherance and in aid of certain recapture agreements approved by Resolution No. 94-75 and Resolution No. 94-76, and not in derogation thereof. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this paragraph and such recapture agreement, the recapture agreement shall prevail. The Roosevelt Road/Euclid Avenue Sanitary Sewer Construction Fee is separate and apart from any other fees or charges or connection fees, including "Type A" charges and "Type B" charges, or any other special connection fee which might be provided for by the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Parcel 1: Lots 27 and 28 (except the north 60 feet thereof) in Riordon's Subdivision, a subdivision in the east one-half of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded May 16, 1945, as Document No. 477866, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
PIN: 06-15-306-011 and 06-15-306-028 
The sum of $16,267.42, together with interest at the rate of 
5% per annum from date of acceptance. 
Parcel 2: Lots 25 and 26 in Riordon's Subdivision, a subdivision in the east one-half of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded May 16, 1945, as Document No. 477866, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
PIN: 06-15-306-020 and 06-15-306-024 and 06-15-306-025 
The sum of $11,844.41, together with interest at the rate of 
5% per annum from date of acceptance. 
For the parcels identified by: 
PIN 06-15-306-019: 	.0954  × $44,888.64 	$4,282.37 Together with interest 
PIN 06-15-306-018: 	.0958  × 44,888.64 	 4,300.33 at the rate of 5% per 
PIN 06-15-307-008: 	.1445  × $44,888.64 	 6,486,40 annum from date of 
PIN 06-15-307-007: 	.09465 × $44,888.64 	 4,248.70 acceptance. 
PIN 06-15-307-006: 	.0952  × $44,888.64 	 4,273.39 
PIN 06-15-307-005: 	.09465 × $44,888.64 	 4,248.70 
PIN 06-15-307-004: 	.09465 × $44,888.64 	 4,248.70 
 
(h)  North Side Sanitary Sewer Extension/Exemption from certain connection fees. 
(1)  Project area. The project area includes all property within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park abutting Yale Avenue from North Avenue to Armitage Avenue and along Belden Avenue between Harvard Avenue and Ardmore Avenue, Sidney Avenue between Yale Avenue and Princeton Avenue, Adele Avenue between Yale Avenue and Harvard Avenue, Armitage Avenue between Ardmore Avenue and Princeton Avenue, Ardmore Avenue between Belden Avenue to Armitage Avenue, Ardmore Avenue from Twin Lakes Park to an existing sanitary sewer three hundred ten (310) feet south, Harvard Avenue between North Avenue and Armitage Avenue, and Princeton Avenue between Adele Avenue and Armitage Avenue. 
(2)  "Low and moderate income," as used herein, shall mean a total gross income (before deductions) of all family members (one or more persons) residing at the property to be connected which does not exceed the maximum allowable gross income for a family of that number of members as established in the Income Guidelines adopted and approved by the County of DuPage or the DuPage County Development Department, Income Guidelines effective January 18, 1995, or any superseding or modifying amendments as may become effective. 
(3)  Application. Any individual seeking to connect to the North Side Sanitary Sewer Extension within the project area shall furnish with the permit or connection application, such information and documentation as may be necessarily required by the Department of Community Development or the Department of Public Works to determine the eligibility of the applicant for exemption from the Type "B" sanitary sewer connection fee provided hereinafter, which information and documentation shall include not less than the following: 
a.  Most recent Federal Income Tax Return; and 
b.  Copy of title policy or equivalent showing ownership in the name of the applicant. 
In addition, the applicant may be required to furnish items such as utility bills, property tax bills, or an affidavit of ownership and income containing such information as may be reasonably necessary to assure that the applicant is eligible for the exemption. All information furnished by the applicant to determine eligibility shall be confidential and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, shall not be disclosed except upon express written consent of all interested persons. 
Each applicant for connection to the North Side Sanitary Sewer Extension within the project area shall be advised, upon submittal of an application for a permit, of the availability of the exemption from the Type "B" sanitary sewer connection fees. Each applicant shall submit the necessary documentation to establish eligibility, or in lieu thereof, shall execute an acknowledgment properly notarized that the applicant has been fully and completely advised of the availability of the exemption and declines to furnish the necessary information. Any person executing the acknowledgment shall be deemed ineligible for the exemption. No connection to the sanitary sewer shall be permitted unless and until the applicant has submitted the appropriate acknowledgment or has made application for the exemption with all requested information and a determination has been made. 
(4)  Eligibility. Properties which are owned and occupied by a family of low or moderate income, upon furnishing proper and acceptable proof of eligibility, shall be exempt from the Type "B" sanitary sewer connection fees specified in section 25-103(c), above. 
(5)  Interpretation; application; inconsistency. This section and the definitions and terms used herein, shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with any federal, state or county rules, regulations, laws or ordinances applicable to the Community Development Block Grant program ("other regulations") and in the event of any inconsistency between such other regulations and the provisions of this section, the provisions of such other regulations shall govern. 
(i)  North Side Water Main Extension/Exemption from certain connection fees: 
(1)  Project area. The project area includes all property within the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park abutting Yale Avenue from Adele Avenue to Armitage Avenue, along Belden Avenue between Harvard Avenue and Ardmore Avenue, Sidney Avenue between Harvard Avenue and Yale Avenue, Adele Avenue between Ardmore Avenue and Harvard Avenue, Armitage Avenue between Ardmore Avenue and Harvard Avenue, Ardmore Avenue between Twin Lakes and Armitage Avenue, Harvard Avenue from Armitage Avenue to an existing water main three hundred thirty (330) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Sidney Avenue, and Princeton Avenue between Adele Avenue and Armitage Avenue. 
(2)  "Low and moderate income," as used herein, shall mean a total gross income (before deductions) of all family members (one (1) or more persons) residing at the property to be connected which does not exceed the maximum allowable gross income for a family of that number of members as established in the Income Guidelines adopted and approved by the County of DuPage or the DuPage County Development Department, Income Guidelines effective January 18, 1995, or any superseding or modifying amendments as may become effective. 
(3)  Application. Any individual seeking to connect to the North Side Water Main Extension within the project area shall furnish with the permit or connection application, such information and documentation as may be necessarily required by the Department of Community Development or the Department of Public Works to determine the eligibility of the applicant for exemption from the Type "B" water connection fee provided hereinafter, which information and documentation shall include not less than the following: 
a.  Most recent Federal Income Tax Return; and 
b.  Copy of title policy or equivalent showing ownership in the name of the applicant. 
In addition, the applicant may be required to furnish items such as utility bills, property tax bills, or an affidavit of ownership and income containing such information as may be necessary to assure that the applicant is eligible for the exemption. All information furnished by the applicant to determine eligibility shall be confidential and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, shall not be disclosed except upon express written consent of all interested persons. 
Each applicant for connection to the North Side Water Main Extension within the project area shall be advised, upon submittal of an application for a permit, of the availability of the exemption from the Type "B" water connection fees. Each applicant shall submit the necessary documentation to establish eligibility, or in lieu thereof, shall execute an acknowledgment properly notarized that the applicant has been fully and completely advised of the availability of the exemption and declines to furnish the necessary information. Any person executing the acknowledgment shall be deemed ineligible for the exemption. No connection to the water main shall be permitted unless and until the applicant has submitted the appropriate acknowledgment or has made application for the exemption with all requested information and a determination has been made. 
(4)  Eligibility. Properties which are owned and occupied by a family of low or moderate income, upon furnishing proper and acceptable proof of eligibility, shall be exempt from the Type "B" water connection fees specified in section 25-103(d), above. 
(5)  This section and the definitions and terms used herein, shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with any federal, state or county rules, regulations, laws or ordinances applicable to the Community Development Block Grant program ("other regulations") and in the event of any inconsistency between such other regulations and the provisions of this section, the provisions of such other regulations shall govern. 
(j)  Villa Avenue sanitary sewer main extension/exemption from certain connection fees. 
(1)  Project area. The project area includes all property within the corporate limits of the village abutting Villa Avenue from a point two hundred thirty (230) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Riordan Road to Blackstone Place and Villa Avenue from a point one hundred forty-four (144) feet south of the south right-of-way line of Van Buren Street to a point seventy-eight (78) feet north of the north right-of-way line of Harrison Street. 
(2)  [ Low and moderate income defined. ] `Low and moderate income,' as used herein, shall mean a total gross income (before deductions) of all family members (one (1) or more persons) residing at the property to be connected which does not exceed the maximum allowable gross income for a family of that number of members as established in the income guidelines adopted and approved by the County of DuPage or the DuPage County Development Department, Income Guidelines effective January 18, 1995, or any superseding or modifying amendments as may become effective. 
(3)  Application. Any individual seeking to connect to the Villa Avenue sanitary sewer within the project area shall furnish with the permit or connection application, such information and documentation as may be necessarily required by the department of community development or the department of public works to determine the eligibility of the applicant for exemption from the Type "B" sewer connection fee provided hereinafter, which information and documentation shall include not less than the following: 
a.  Most recent Federal Income Tax Return; and 
b.  Copy of title policy or equivalent showing ownership in the name of the applicant. 
In addition, the applicant may be required to furnish items such as utility bills, property tax bills, or an affidavit of ownership and income containing such information as may be necessary to assure that the applicant is eligible for the exemption. All information furnished by the applicant to determine eligibility shall be confidential and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, shall not be disclosed except upon express written consent of all interested persons. 
Each applicant for connection to the Villa Avenue sanitary sewer main extension within the project area shall be advised, upon submittal of an application for a permit, of the availability of the exemption from the Type "B" sanitary sewer connection fees. Each applicant shall submit the necessary documentation to establish eligibility, or in lieu thereof, shall execute an acknowledgment properly notarized that the applicant has been fully and completely advised of the availability of the exemption and declines to furnish the necessary information. Any person executing the acknowledgment shall be deemed ineligible for the exemption. No connection to the sanitary sewer main shall be permitted unless and until the applicant has submitted the appropriate acknowledgment or has made application for the exemption with all requested information and a determination has been made. 
(4)  Eligibility. Properties which are owned and occupied by a family of low or moderate income, upon furnishing proper and acceptable proof of eligibility, shall be exempt from the Type "B" sewer connection fees specified in subsection 25-103(d), above. 
(5)  [ Compliance with other regulations. ] This section and the definitions and terms used herein, shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with any federal, state or county rules, regulations, laws or ordinances applicable to the Community Development Block Grant program ("other regulations") and in the event of any inconsistency between such other regulations and the provisions of this section, the provisions of such other regulations shall govern. 
(k)  Westlands Phase II and III Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Extension/exemption from certain connection fees. 
(1)  Project area. The project area includes all property within the corporate limits of the village abutting Oakland Avenue from Harrison Street to Blackstone Place, Monterey Avenue from Kohlberg Court to Roosevelt Road, Wayside Drive from Harrison Street south to the village limits, Harrison Street from Oakland Avenue east to the village limits; Lane Drive from Oakland Avenue to Wayside Drive, Kohlberg Court from Villa Avenue to Wayside Drive, Riordan Road from Villa Avenue east to the village limits, and Blackstone Place from Villa Avenue to Monterey Avenue. 
(2)  Low and moderate income defined. "Low and moderate income," as used herein, shall mean a total gross income (before deductions) of all family members (one (1) or more persons) residing at the property to be connected which does not exceed the maximum allowable gross income for a family of that number of members as established in the income guidelines adopted and approved by the County of DuPage or the DuPage County Development Department, Income Guidelines effective March 2000, or any superseding or modifying amendments as may become effective. 
(3)  Application. Any individual seeking to connect to the Westlands Phase II and III Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Extension within the project area shall furnish with the permit or connection application such information and documentation as may be necessarily required by the department of community development or the department of public works to determine the eligibility of the applicant for exemption from the Type "B" sewer connection fee and/or Type "B" water connection fee provided hereinafter, which information and documentation shall include not less than the following: 
a.  Most recent Federal Income Tax Return; and 
b.  Copy of title policy or equivalent showing ownership in the name of the applicant. In addition, the applicant may be required to furnish items such as utility bills, property tax bills, or an affidavit of ownership and income containing such information as may be necessary to assure that the applicant is eligible for the exemption. All information furnished by the applicant to determine eligibility shall be confidential and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, shall not be disclosed except upon express written consent of all interested persons. Each applicant for connection to the Westlands Phase II and III Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Extension within the project area shall be advised, upon submittal of an application for a permit, of the availability for the exemptions from the Type "B" sanitary sewer and/or Type "B" water connection fees. Each applicant shall submit the necessary documentation to establish eligibility, or in lieu thereof, shall execute an acknowledgment properly notarized that the applicant has been fully and completely advised of the availability of the exemption and declines to furnish the necessary information. Any person executing the acknowledgement shall be deemed eligible for the exemption. No connection to the water main and/or sanitary sewer main shall be permitted unless and until the applicant has submitted the appropriate acknowledgment or has made application for the exemption with all requested information and a determination has been made. 
(4)  Eligibility. Properties which are owned and occupied by a family of low or moderate income, upon furnishing proper and acceptable proof of eligibility, shall be exempt from the Type "B" water connection and/or Type "B" sewer connection fees specified in subsections 25-103(c) and (d) above. 
(5)  Compliance with other regulations. This section and the definitions and terms used herein shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with any federal, state or county rules, regulations, laws or ordinances applicable to the community development block grant program ("other regulations") and in the event of any inconsistency between such other regulations and the provisions of this section, the provisions of such other regulations shall govern. 
(l)  This section shall not affect, supersede or modify any contract, agreement, annexation agreement or ordinance previously entered into or adopted providing specifically for connection charges to the village sanitary sewer systems and the same shall remain in effect until they expire by their own terms. 
(Ord. No. 1809, §§ 1—5, 7, 9-5-78; Ord. No. 2741, §§ 1—6, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 2767, §§ 2, 3, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 2809, § 2, 1-15-96; Ord. No. 2881, §§ 2, 3, 5-12-97; Ord. No. 2962, §§ 2, 3, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 3066, § 2, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 3257, §§ 6, 8, 7-12-04)  
Sec. 25-104. - Rates and charges—Established. 
(a)  The wastewater service charge for the use of and for services supplied by the wastewater facilities shall be comprised of operation and maintenance and equipment replacement costs. The total unit service charge shall be computed by apportioning these total costs to a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption. The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula: CW = (Vu) CU + CS + CB: 
Where CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period 
Vu = Water consumption volume for the billing period 
CU = Basic user rate in $ per 1,000 gallons 
CS = Amount of surcharge if applicable 
CB = Amount of customer billing and administrative service charge 
(b)  The following rates and charges are hereby established: 
(1)  Water rates: 
a.  For property users within the village, a charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons based on the following schedule: 
Effective Date 	Rate 
Current rate: 	$9.01 
Bills rendered as of 6/01/19 	$9.05 
 
and a customer charge per account per month as follows: 
Size of meter 	Bills rendered as of 1/1/17 
3/4 inch 	$4.74 
1 inch 	$8.54 
1 ¼ inch 	$13.28 
1 ½ inch 	$18.96 
2 inch 	$33.66 
3 inch 	$74.84 
4 inch or larger 	$134.62 
 
b.  For property not located within the village corporate limits, a charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons based on the following schedule: 
Effective Date 	Rate 
Current rate: 	$17.86 
Bills rendered as of 10/1/18 	$18.10 
 
and the customer charge per account per month by size of meter as shown above in this subsection. 
(2)  Sewer rates: For all users of the village wastewater treatment and collection system, a charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons based on the following schedule: 
Effective Date 	Rate 
Current rate: 	$2.81 
Bills rendered as of 8/1/13 	 3.15 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/14 	 3.25 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/15 	 3.35 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/16 	 3.46 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/17 	 3.57 
 
and a wastewater customer charge per account per month as follows: 
Effective Date 	Rate 
Bills rendered as of 8/1/13 	 1.53 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/14 	 1.56 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/15 	 1.59 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/16 	 1.62 
Bills rendered as of 1/1/17 	 1.66 
 
(3)  Customer billing charge: A customer billing and administrative charge for water and/or sewer service in the amount of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per month shall be added to rates and charges otherwise provided in this subsection. 
(4)  Combined sewer separation charge: Commencing on January 1, 2017, and continuing thereafter, a combined sewer separation charge of three dollars ($3.00) is hereby imposed upon each water and/or sanitary sewer residential (with two dwelling units or less) customer service account and a combined sewer separation charge of six dollars ($6.00) is hereby imposed upon each water and/or sanitary sewer commercial, industrial and residential multi-family (with more than two dwelling units) customer service accounts which shall be charged upon a monthly period or any portion thereof. The combined sewer separation charge shall only be used to fund the separation of the combined storm and sanitary sewer systems. The combined sewer separation charge shall be billed on a common statement and collected along with water and sewer system charges. If payment is insufficient to pay the total of all portions of the utility bill, the payment shall be applied first to the water service charges. Commencing on February 1, 2017, the combined sewer separation charge of a residential customer service account of a person enrolled in the State of Illinois Benefit Access Program, that provides proof of such enrollment to the finance department and occupying a single-family residence shall be charged only fifty (50) percent of the combined sewer separation charge. 
(c)  The adequacy of both the water and the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed not less often than annually by certified public accountants for the village. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs, if applicable, or a change in operation and maintenance cost, including replacement costs. The water service charge shall also be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or operations, maintenance and replacement costs. 
(d)  Each user will be notified at least annually in conjunction with a regular bill of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater collection and excess flow treatment services. 
(e)  There shall be no minimum charges. 
(f)  The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof and the user of either water or sewage service or both water and sewage service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on said premises; such service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, the occupant and the user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor. 
(g)  The rates established in subsection (b) of this section shall be effective for all bills rendered on or after the appropriate effective date, as set forth in subsection (b). 
(h)  Billing schedule. Except as provided hereinafter, all bills shall be rendered based upon a monthly billing cycle. The rates and service charges established for users in this article I shall be effective as of the date set forth hereinabove. 
(i)  The computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in this article I shall be made available to a user within ten (10) days of receipt of a written request for same. Any disagreement over the method used or the computation thereof shall be addressed by the village treasurer within thirty (30) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 3, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 1682, § 1, 12-20-76; Ord. No. 2012, § 1, 1-4-82; Ord. No. 2098, § 1, 1-23-84; Ord. No. 2112, § 1, 5-29-84; Ord. No. 2146, § 1, 5-28-85; Ord. No. 2287, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 1-3-89; Ord. No. 2398, § 2, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 2571, §§ 1—4, 5-18-92; Ord. No. 3064, § 2, 11-13-00; Ord. No. 3245, § 2, 5-24-04; Ord. No. 3366, § 3, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 3413, §§ 2—4, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 3465, §§ 2, 3, 3-24-08; Ord. No. 3496, § 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 3552, § 2, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 3603, § 2, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 3655, § 2, 5-23-11; Ord. No. 3679, § 2, 12-12-11; Ord. No. 3732, § 2, 1-28-13; Ord. No. 3756, § 1, 8-12-13; Ord. No. 3784, §§ 2, 6, 4-14-14; Ord. No. 3933 , § 2, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 3955 , § 2, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 4025 , § 5, 4-23-18; Ord. No. 4032 , § 1, 5-21-18; Ord. No. 4085 , § 1, 6-10-19)  
Sec. 25-105. - Same—Due date; penalty for later payment. 
All bills for service shall be written monthly and shall be payable within twenty (20) days. If payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within twenty (20) days, a late fee of five (5) percent shall be added to the amount due. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 3, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 1270, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. 1926, § 2, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 3564, § 2, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 3784, § 3, 4-14-14)  
Sec. 25-106. - Same—Duty of finance director. 
The finance director shall render bills for service pursuant hereto and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all money due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 7, 10-26-70)  
Sec. 25-107. - Same—Lien for nonpayment. 
In the event the charges for either water or sewerage service, or both water and sewerage service, are not paid within thirty-five (35) days after rendition of the bill for such monthly service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent; and, thereafter, such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is supplied; and the finance director or designee is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements of such delinquencies in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county; and the filing of such statements in such office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for service. A lien and release preparation and filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be added to the delinquent amount owed and shall be included in the lien amount. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 4, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 3549, § 2, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 3784, § 4, 4-14-14; Ord. No. 3864 , § 2, 4-27-15)  
Sec. 25-108. - Same—Termination of service. 
If the charges for water or sewerage service or both are not paid within thirty-five (35) days after rendition of the bill for such service, then, following notice of the service termination date and, if requested, a hearing as hereinafter provided, the finance director shall order such service terminated, and such service shall not be reinstated until all past bills, including service charges, are paid in full, together with an additional charge of one hundred dollars ($100,00) for reinstating such service between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. during normal village business hours. Reinstatement of service at any other time shall be at a cost of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 6, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 1270, § 3, 11-15-71; Ord. No. 2398, § 3, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3366, § 4, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 3412, § 3, 1-22-07; Ord. No. 3413, § 5, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 3549, § 2, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 3564, § 3, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 3784, § 4, 4-14-14; Ord. No. 3864 , § 3, 4-27-15)  
Sec. 25-109. - Handling and use of funds. 
(a)  Segregation of revenues. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the waterworks system and sewerage system shall be held in segregated funds as set forth hereinafter. 
(b)  Waterworks system. 
(1)  All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the waterworks system shall be held in a segregated fund by the finance director, separate and apart from private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village and delivered to the village treasurer not more than five (5) days after receipt of the same or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the corporate authorities. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided, the village treasurer shall receive all such revenues and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of the water system as same may be delivered to the treasurer and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the water supply fund of the village. Said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided, any surplus which results from the water rates and charges therefor shall be used for water system improvements only. 
(c)  Sewerage system. 
(1)  All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be held in a segregated fund by the finance director, separate and apart from private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village and delivered to the village treasurer not more than five (5) days after receipt of the same or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the corporate authorities. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided, the village treasurer shall receive all such revenues and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of the sewer system as the same may be delivered to the treasurer and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the wastewater fund of the village. Said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided, any surplus which results from the sewage rates and charges therefor shall be used for sewer system improvements only. 
(Ord. No. 1198, §§ 8, 9, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 1682, § 1, 12-20-16; Ord. No. 2398, § 4, 2-12-90)  
Secs. 25-110, 25-111. - Reserved.  
Sec. 25-112. - Duty of treasurer to keep records, accounts, etc. 
(a)  The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks and sewerage systems, and at the regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks and sewerage systems. 
(b)  The annual audit report shall reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including replacement costs, to indicate that sewer service charges under the user charge system are adequate. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
(1)  Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year. 
(2)  Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year. 
(3)  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year if any. 
(4)  Number of users connected to the system. 
(5)  Number of nonmetered users. 
(6)  A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and volume of waste discharged if any. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 10, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 2398, § 5, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-113. - Notice to public. 
A copy of the water and sewage rates and charges properly certified by the finance director is filed in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the waterworks and sewerage systems on their properties. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 11, 10-26-70)  
Sec. 25-114. - Access to records. 
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village that are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of any water or sewer loan agreement and rules or any water or sewer state loan. 
(Ord. No. 3413, § 6, 2-19-07)  
Sec. 25-115. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3413, § 6, 2-19-07)  
ARTICLE II. - EXTENSION POLICY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Financing municipal projects, § 2-201. 
 
Sec. 25-201. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Applicant: Any person who shall seek an extension of water mains in place or sanitary sewers in place for the purpose of serving territory within the village not served at the time an extension of service may be sought. 
Engineer: The engineer employed by the village as a consulting engineer, whose duties include general supervision of all new construction of water mains and sanitary sewers within the village, the preparation of specifications and plans for said new construction, the estimating of costs therefor, securing state permits from and general supervision of such construction. 
Sanitary sewer: Any sewer line serving or capable of serving more than one (1) user for sanitary sewer within the village. 
Water mains: Any pipeline serving or capable of serving more than one (1) user of water within the village.  
Sec. 25-202. - Extension application. 
(a)  Any applicant desiring water service or sanitary sewer service to any territory not theretofore furnished such service shall make an application in duplicate, in writing, for an extension of such existing service in the manner hereinafter provided, and such application shall show the following specific facts and contain the following information: 
(1)  A legal description of the boundaries of the territory to be served. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by a plat or map showing such legal boundaries, together with all streets, alleys, easements or thoroughfares included within the territory, and the lot lines and numbers of all lots platted therein. The plat shall be drawn to suitable scale and shall be referenced to section lines or known survey monuments of record so as to be readily identifiable on the ground. Such plat shall further show, by appropriate marking thereon, the location, size and material of all water mains or sanitary sewers traversing said area for the purpose of serving the same. 
(3)  An estimate of the total number of users of water or sanitary sewer service within the area covered by said application, and such estimate shall be divided into three (3) parts, namely: 
a.  Those users presently residing therein; 
b.  The number of users expecting to connect within one (1) year from the date of application; 
c.  The total number of users to be ultimately served within said area. 
(4)  Where any use in the territory sought to be served is for other than residential purposes, such use shall be stated in the application and the estimated average daily consumption of water by such user shall be shown therein. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant and all drawings or engineering data attached to such application shall be signed and dated by the engineer or individual who prepared the same for the applicant. 
(c)  Every application shall be filed in duplicate with the manager.  
Sec. 25-203. - Application fee. 
Every applicant shall pay to the manager, at the time of the filing of said application, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) as a filing fee.  
Sec. 25-204. - Manager's duty. 
Immediately upon the filing of an application under this article with the manager, accompanied by the filing fee as herein provided, the manager shall forward one (1) copy thereof to the engineer, and the manager shall further present the remaining copy thereof to the corporate authorities at their next regular meeting.  
Sec. 25-205. - Engineer's duty. 
Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this article, the engineer shall make such studies thereof on the ground as he may deem necessary, and shall, from such studies, determine the size of water mains and sanitary sewer pipe to be installed to serve the territory included within such application, and such water mains and sanitary sewer pipe shall be of sufficient size to supply the entire territory with the maximum number of users therein as specified in said application, and the engineer shall determine not only the size of the water mains and sanitary sewer pipe, but also their exact location, whether that be the location shown on the plat attached to the application or otherwise. Upon determining the facts aforesaid, the engineer shall further estimate the cost of installing the water mains and sanitary sewer pipe required to properly serve the territory included within such application, and such estimate of costs shall include not only the cost of labor and material to install said water mains and sanitary sewer pipe, but also all supervision, engineering or legal fees and all other expenses incident to the construction thereof, including the cost of repaving any street or relaying any sidewalk which may be destroyed or damaged in connection with such work, and the engineer shall thereupon submit to the corporate authorities all such estimates so prepared by him, together with his recommendation as to whether or not such additional mains and sanitary sewer pipe should be constructed.  
Sec. 25-206. - Action by corporate authorities. 
Upon receipt of such estimates from the engineer, together with a copy of the application, the corporate authorities shall duly consider the same and shall determine as to whether or not the extension of water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipe required under such application shall be made, and if the corporate authorities shall determine that such extension shall be made, they shall authorize the same under the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth in this article.  
Sec. 25-207. - Deposits. 
Unless otherwise specified by the corporate authorities, the applicant, upon receipt of advice that the corporate authorities has approved his application, shall deposit with the manager the entire estimated cost of the extension required under such application, such deposit to be made within ten (10) days after receipt of advice of the approval thereof.  
Sec. 25-208. - Easements. 
Should any portion of the water mains and sanitary sewer pipe to be constructed under such application be over private property, then and in such event, the applicant shall also deposit with the manager fully executed easements from the owner or owners of such property, said easement to be correctly described and to show easement width, or widths, giving the village the right to construct, maintain and renew water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipe over such private property in perpetuity.  
Sec. 25-209. - Construction of water mains or sanitary sewer pipes. 
After any deposit herein required has been made and all easements required have been furnished, the village shall proceed to construct the water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipes required in the estimate of the engineer and such extension shall be either by contract or by private individuals as may be in each case determined by the corporate authorities and the entire expense of such extension shall be paid by the village out of the funds deposited by the applicant.  
Sec. 25-210. - Completion and payment for the work. 
When water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipe have been completed, the village shall cause the same to be inspected by proper public authority, and upon acceptance thereof shall refund to the applicant any moneys remaining out of said applicant's deposit not expended in and about the work occasioned by such application, but if the amount deposited shall not be equal to the total cost of said extension, then the corporate authorities may require the applicant to pay to the village an additional amount so that the total cost of said extension shall be fully borne by the applicant.  
Sec. 25-211. - Ownership of water mains or sanitary sewer pipes. 
All water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipes constructed under any application as herein provided for shall be and become the sole and exclusive property of the village and all easements granted for said water mains shall be held and construed to be easements to the village and no applicant or any other person holding by, through or under him, shall ever claim or seek to claim any right, title or interest in any such water main and/or sanitary sewer pipe or any easement constructed or held under said application.  
Sec. 25-212. - Operation of water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipes. 
When the extension required under any application shall have been completed, and approval of such extension shall have been received from proper public authority, the village shall proceed to operate said water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipes in the same manner as other water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipes within the village are operated, and connections may be made thereto in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations as connections will be made in other portions of the village and said water mains and/or sanitary sewer pipe including connections, shall be and become a part of the water distribution and sanitary system owned and operated by the village.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— DuPage Water Commission, Ch. 2, Art. XIX. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-301. - Superintendent defined. 
As used in this article, the term superintendent shall mean the person designated to enforce the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 25-302. - Interference with system. 
No unauthorized person shall interfere in any manner with any hydrant or stopcock, or deposit any material in any stopcock box, or turn any stopcock, or do any act to obstruct the use thereof or injure in any manner, or use or interfere with any property of the waterworks. 
State Law reference— Power of city to prevent injury to water system, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-125-1.  
Sec. 25-303. - Turning on service. 
The water supply to any premises shall not be turned on without the approval of the superintendent.  
Sec. 25-304. - Records. 
The superintendent shall keep a record of all official actions taken by him.  
Sec. 25-305. - Right of village to turn off water. 
The village reserves the right to turn off the water for nonpayment of water bills or for making repairs at any time.  
Sec. 25-306. - Resale of water or common connections prohibited. 
No person shall take or use village water from premises other than his own, and no person shall sell water for his own premises for any purpose. Except as otherwise provided no connection for the furnishing of water to any premises shall hereafter be made to the service line for the furnishing water to any other premises, even though the ownership of both properties may be the same. 
(Ord. No. 444, § XIII, 5-15-40; Ord. No. 980, § 1, 2-20-67)  
Sec. 25-307. - Article to be contractual. 
The provisions of this article and all water rates shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who is supplied with water.  
Secs. 25-308—25-315. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE PIPES AND CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 25-316. - Service pipe specifications. 
All water service pipes shall be of copper or ductile iron of such size, design and specifications as will properly service the proposed use of the property to be serviced and as approved by the director of public works or his designee. The connection of the building waterline into the public water main shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village or the procedure set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federal Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 6, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-317. - Depth of service pipes. 
All water service pipes shall be at least four and one-half (4½) feet below the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2378, § 7, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-318. - Tap—Generally. 
All taps must be inserted at or near the top of the water main or pipe, and in no case shall they be within fifteen (15) inches of the bell or hub. Saddles may be required in lieu of direct connections at the discretion of the director of public works or his designee. In no case shall a tap which is inserted in any main of six (6) inches or less exceed three-fourths of an inch in size, and in no case shall such tap exceed one (1) inch in diameter and in all other cases shall be of such size in accordance with the installation instructions of the director of public works or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 8, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-319. - Same—Making. 
The actual tapping into the water system shall be made by village employees or a licensed plumbing contractor approved by the village and then only under the supervision of the director of public works or his designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 9, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-320. - Excavations; fees; penalty. 
(a)  All materials removed from the streets in making excavations for water taps shall be deposited in such a manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the public and provide for the passage of water through gutters. Suitable barricades shall be erected around the excavation and amber lights maintained if the excavation is not filled in before nightfall. All excavations for water main and water service lines and water main and water service line connections shall be as provided in this article or to the extent that it is consistent with Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, May 1986, or the most current edition published by the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Prior to any excavation, the property owner shall secure all necessary permits as are appropriate and pay the fees according to the following fee schedule: 
Permit for excavation in a parkway (per opening) ..... $20.00 
Permit for excavation in a street (per opening) ..... 20.00 
(c)  In addition, the property owner or developer, prior to excavation in a parkway or street shall provide an appropriate public improvement guarantee as required by Appendix D of the Village Code to ensure proper restoration of the street and/or parkway. In the event that restoration of either the street or the parkway or both is satisfactorily completed and approved, the guarantee shall be refunded. In the event that the restoration is not made and approved by the village, any applicable bond shall be forfeited; and any person, firm or corporation to whom the permit has been issued, together with the owner of the promises serviced, shall be responsible for any and all additional repairs above and beyond those secured by the guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 10, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3053, § 5, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 25-321. - New installations for water service. 
(a)  All excavations done in connection with the installation of a water service pipe and the costs of the service pipe and the installation shall be done at the expense of the person desiring the connection. In addition, the applicant for a new water service connection shall pay the following fees; except that as to fees set forth in subsection (2), these fees will be paid only if the village performs the tapping. These fees are in addition to such other fees and charges as may be otherwise provided in this chapter: 
Water permit ..... $20.00 
(1)  Water taps (¾" to 1½"): 
¾-inch tap ..... 160.00 
1-inch tap ..... 200.00 
1½-inch tap ..... 280.00 
(2)  Water taps (2"): The director of public works or his designee may in his sole discretion determine that the following size taps shall be performed by the village; and if the village performs the service, the fee for tapping, in addition to such other fees and charges as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be as follows: 
4 x 2 ..... 958.75 
6 x 2 ..... 1,007.50 
8 x 2 ..... 1,087.50 
10 x 2 ..... 1,525.00 
12 x 2 ..... 1,535.00 
(b)  All taps not installed by the village shall be performed by a licensed plumbing contractor approved by the village and retained by the property owner and then only under the supervision of the director of public works or his designated agent and according to his direction. The fee schedule set forth above for the above-listed tap(s) include the following materials: 
Corporation stop, curb stops, tapping saddles, and buffalo boxes and labor to install the corporation stop and tapping saddle are also included. All excavations(s) and labor and responsibility for the installation of any curb stop, buffalo box and necessary copper piping from the water main to the premises are to be made by a licensed plumbing contractor approved by the director of public works or his designated agent and retained by the property owner at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 11, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-322. - Repairs. 
(a)  Service pipes from the water main to the shut-off box and the shut-off box itself shall be kept in good repair at the expense of the village. All repairs on service lines between the shut-off box and the meter setting as well as repairs in the plumbing system of the building served, except meters, shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the premises served. 
(b)  In case of emergency the village may repair any service pipe and if such repairs are the responsibility of the owner of the premises served, the costs of such repairs shall be repaid to the village by the owner of the premises served. An emergency would be considered anything that would affect life, health or public safety, such as life support systems requiring water, schools, etc. Authorization for such emergency repairs must originate in the village manager's office. 
(c)  Upon the arrival of the operator at the address the water department employee will immediately determine the responsibility for the leak by placing a shut-off rod on the curb stop and turn the valve off. If the leak stops, the leak is between the shut-off box and the house and is the homeowners responsibility to repair. If the leak continues to flow, it is between the shut-off box and the main and is the responsibility of the village to repair it. 
(d)  If the leak in the opinion of the superintendent is of a nature that excessive water will be wasted or constitutes a safety hazard such as freezing on sidewalks or streets, service shall be discontinued immediately. 
(e)  The village will hook up water from a neighbor for temporary service providing both parties are agreeable. 
(f)  Service lines of lead or galvanized pipe shall not be repaired but must be replaced in their entirety with three-fourths-inch Type "K" copper for single-family residences and appropriate size Type "K" copper, or ductile iron for commercial and industrial services. Antisiphon device(s) shall also be installed if required by the Illinois State Plumbing Code and then in accordance with governing regulations. 
(g)  Repairs to the homeowner's service shall be made only by a licensed plumber and then only after taking out the proper permit and posting any and all requisite bonds. 
(h)  The village will furnish a current list of approved contractors that are on file with the building department. By furnishing the list, the village is not recommending any contractor and will not be held responsible for the contractor's performance. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 12-14, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-323. - Inspection fees. 
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection shall be charged by the village for the inspection or reinspection of all new water service installations, water service repairs or abandonments. The fee shall be paid prior to each such plumbing inspection by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3414, § 3, 2-19-07)  
Secs. 25-324—25-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER METERS 
 
Sec. 25-336. - Required. 
(a)  Except as provided in subparagraph (b), no water shall be taken for the village's water system except through a village water meter. 
(b)  During the period of any construction for which appropriate permits have been obtained and upon the request of the contractor or developer, the contractor or developer shall be allowed to utilize village water from the village's water supply system without a water meter but only in accordance with direction of the director of public works or his designee and then only on payment of the fees set forth hereinafter: 
Builder's water (residential/single-family dwelling) ..... $250.00 
Builder's water (commercial/multi-family dwelling) ..... 500.00 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 6, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 2398, § 15, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3257, § 5, 7-12-04)  
Sec. 25-337. - Ownership and maintenance. 
(a)  All water meters shall be the property of and maintained by the village's waterworks and sewerage department. 
(b)  In addition to all other fees for permits, water taps, or any bonds required to be posted, there shall be a charge for the village providing a water meter in accordance with the following schedule: 
¾" x ¾" meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... $ 460.00 
Full 1" meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... 500.00 
Full 1½" compound meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... 1,500.00 
Full 2" compound meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... 1,700.00 
Full 3" compound meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... 2,100.00 
Full 4" compound meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... 3,450.00 
Full 6" compound meter with meter interface unit, outside remote and connections ..... 5,650.00 
All other size meters shall be charged as follows: Actual cost of meter, materials, labor and equipment + ten (10) percent overhead. 
(c)  Prior to the installation of any water meter and in addition to the water meter charge set forth above and any other charges imposed by this article, a security deposit shall be made in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  1" water service line and smaller: Actual cost. 
(2)  Commercial or multifamily, 1½" up: Actual cost but not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Said deposit may be utilized to defray in whole or in part any costs to repair or replace a water meter as provided in section 25-338. In the event that the deposit is used to defray the cost of repair or replacement of a meter, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to deposit such additional funds as will provide a security deposit for each water meter installed or repaired in accordance with the above schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 16, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 2765, § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 3070, § 1, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 3270, § 1, 11-8-04; Ord. No. 3366, § 5, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 3649, § 1, 4-11-11)  
Sec. 25-338. - Duty of owner to preserve and protect. 
When a water meter has been installed on the premises to be served, it shall be the duty of the owner of the premises, the occupant and user of the service to preserve and protect such meter from damage by freezing, excessive heat, mechanical injury and from theft; and the owner of the premises, the occupant and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the costs of repairing or replacing meter if damaged or lost for any of the foregoing reasons. The village may utilize any portion of the deposit made pursuant to the preceding section and in the event that the owner fails or refuses to pay for the repairs incurred under this section or refuses or fails to pay additional funds to provide the appropriate security deposit, the village may terminate water service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 6, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 2398, § 17, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-339. - Number, location and access. 
There shall be a single water meter for each building or structure which is under unified ownership (e.g., single-family dwellings, apartment buildings, commercial buildings, etc.). Where a building or structure is under multiple ownership (e.g., condominiums), a water meter for each separately owned unit shall be supplied. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the superintendent determines that the installation by the village of water meters in the manner heretofore provided is impractical because of cost, fixture configuration, etc., for any particular building, the superintendent shall have the authority to have the water meter(s) installed in the most practical number and manner permitted under the circumstances. 
All water meters shall be placed n the buildings so as to afford easy access for installation, inspection, repair and reading. If such access is not provided for a period of thirty (30) days, and if notice by mail has been given to the owner of the premises, the occupant and the user of the service that access has not been provided and is desired, then after a period of thirty (30) days from the last notice so given, the service may be discontinued after notice and an opportunity to be heard have been provided. If the water service is terminated, it shall not be reinstated until the required access is provided and payment made of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for reinstating such service between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. during normal village business hours. Reinstatement of service at any other time shall be at a cost of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 6, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 2398, § 18, 2-12-90; 2790, § 2, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 3784, § 5, 4-14-14)  
Sec. 25-340. - Testing and repair; correction of bill. 
A person upon whose premises there is located a water meter may request that the public works department test the meter. Upon making such a request, a person shall pay a deposit of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if the size of the water service line is less than two (2) inches in interior diameter. For water meters connected to a service line of two (2) inches of interior diameter or greater, the person making the request shall submit a deposit of two hundred dollars ($200.00). The department or a testing service retained by the department shall then test the meter in accordance with the latest specifications adopted by the American Waterworks Association. If the test shows that the meter is not measuring water correctly in accordance with such specifications, then the meter shall be repaired and reinstalled or replaced by another meter at the expense of the village, and the deposit submitted under this section shall be credited to the account of the applicant or be refunded to the applicant upon demand. The village manager or his delegate shall have the authority to adjust disputed bills for water and sewer service, If, however, the test shows that the water meter is measuring water correctly in accordance with such specifications, any deposit made under this section shall become the property of the village as and for the reimbursement for the costs of the testing. 
(Ord. No. 1198, § 6, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 2398, § 19, 2-12-90)  
Secs. 25-341—25-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EMERGENCY WATER USE PLAN 
 
Sec. 25-351. - Generally. 
The corporate authorities, acting at either a regular or special meeting called for that purpose, may declare a water shortage crisis to exist in the village. In the event a water shortage crisis is declared by the corporate authorities, the corporate authorities shall also declare which water use restrictions are to be in effect, and said restrictions shall be those set forth in either section 25-352, 25-353 or 25-355 of this division or any or all of these sections in order to reduce water demand. The provisions of sections 25-354 and 25-356 shall apply whenever a water shortage crisis is declared. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the corporate authorities of the village from subsequently modifying, rescinding or extending the water use restrictions in effect should circumstances warrant. 
(Ord. No. 1738, §§ 1, 2, 10-3-77; Ord. No. 2293, § 1, 6-13-88)  
Sec. 25-352. - Residential external use ban. 
All nonessential external uses of water, including but not limited to: Lawn sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers; filling of nonmunicipal swimming pools; car washing (when not a part of any established commercial car-washing business); outside cleaning with water, including washing of sidewalks, driveways, outside of buildings or other outdoor surfaces; or for the operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1738, § 2(A), 10-3-77; Ord. No. 2416, § 2, 5-14-90)  
Sec. 25-353. - Industrial use restrictions. 
(a)  The use of all water cooled air conditioning systems shall be prohibited. 
(b)  All swimming pools, public and private, shall be closed. 
(c)  All commercial laundromats shall be closed. 
(d)  All industries consuming large amounts of water on a regular and daily basis, shall be subject to closing, depending upon the severity of the water shortage. 
(e)  All commercial car washing shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1738, § 2(B), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-354. - Consumer education program. 
The village shall report the status of a water shortage weekly by means of radio and newspapers, and if practical, direct mailing to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1738, § 2(D), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-355. - Consumer per capita consumption restriction. 
There will be a sixty-gallon per day per capita maximum water consumption allocation, during this period. All water meters will be checked monthly to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1738, § 2(C), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-356. - Termination of service. 
The village may terminate water service, during the period of such declared water shortage crisis, to any person or firm found to be in violation of this division, after conducting a hearing with regard to said violation, giving the alleged offender due notice and an opportunity to be heard. This action may be taken in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1738, § 2(F), 10-3-77)  
Secs. 25-357—25-365. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 25-366. - Scope. 
Any building being serviced with village water shall be governed by this division, regardless of whether said building is within or without the corporate boundaries of the village. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(A)(3), 10-3-77; Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 7-7-80)  
Sec. 25-367. - Exterior water use protection. 
(a)  Except as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) below, beginning on May 15 of each year and continuing through September 15 of each year, water from the village municipal water distribution system may only be used for the watering or sprinkling of lawns as follows: 
(1)  All buildings with even-numbered addresses (i.e., addresses ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may use water from the village water distribution system for lawn sprinkling on even-numbered calendar dates from 12:01 a.m. to 12:00 noon and from 6:01 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on that even-numbered day. 
(2)  All buildings with odd-numbered addresses (i.e., addresses ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may use water from the village water distribution system for lawn sprinkling on odd-numbered calendar dates from 12:01 a.m. to 12:00 noon and from 6:01 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on that odd-numbered day. 
(b)  During the first four (4) weeks after new sod or new seed has been placed, property owners who have received the appropriate sprinkling permit from the village department of community development may use water from the village water distribution system for the sprinkling of newly sodded areas or newly seeded areas without restriction, and sprinkling for such areas shall be exempt from the provisions of subparagraphs (a)(1) and (2) above. The fee for such permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) and shall state on its face the expiration date of the permit. The permit shall be kept on the premises and displayed upon request to any authorized representative of the village. Sprinkling pursuant to this exemption shall be limited to those areas of the lawn that are newly sodded or newly seeded. Sprinkling of areas of established lawns shall be done in compliance with subparagraph (a) above. All lawn sprinkling after the expiration date of the permit shall be done only in conformity with subparagraph (a) above. 
(c)  There shall be no restrictions as to hours or days when water from the village water distribution system may be used for other outside water uses, including but not limited to the watering of: 
(1)  Gardens, trees, shrubs or other outdoor plants and other outside uses where such watering or sprinkling is done by a person using a hand-held watering device; or 
(2)  Trees, plants and shrubs by means of root feeders; or 
(3)  Trees, plants and shrubs by means of drip feeders. 
(d)  The village reserves the right to further limit or suspend the use of water for sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or other nonessential uses whenever the corporate authorities shall declare that a water shortage crisis exists as provided in section 25-351 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(A)(1)—(3), 10-3-77; Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 7-7-80; Ord. No. 2398, § 20, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 2416, § 1, 5-14-90) 
Cross reference— Community development department, § 7-101.  
Sec. 25-368. - Industrial use restrictions. 
(a)  All carwashes are hereby required to install recycling equipment. 
(b)  All industry shall be required to install recycling equipment of all water used for cooling purposes. 
(c)  The installation of the recycling equipment required under this section shall be done within six (6) months of the opening of the business or the conversion of the premises to such case. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(B), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-369. - Metering of sources. 
All municipal water service shall be metered. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(C), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-370. - Cessation of sewer flushing and street cleaning with potable water. 
The village will cease to flush sewers and clean streets with potable water. In lieu thereof, the village will use water extracted from detention ponds which are located upon public property. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(D), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-371. - Plan to reduce unaccounted water use. 
(a)  An annual inspection and certification of all master meters pertaining to the municipal water system will be conducted under the auspices and direction of the village. 
(b)  The village has established a meter replacement program, whereby any meter older than five (5) years of age will be replaced by December 31, 1979, after which period the village will maintain a program, whereby the meters will be either recalibrated and rebuilt, or replaced, on a regular and customary basis. 
(c)  All municipal buildings shall be metered. 
(d)  Accurate records and monitoring shall be kept for all public services which require water, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Firefighting and training; 
(2)  Public and private constructions; 
(3)  Municipal use; 
(4)  Water main flushing; 
(5)  Leakage (such as water main breaks and service leaks); 
(6)  Unaccounted for water. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(E), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-372. - Consumer education program. 
(a)  The village does hereby establish the third week of July in each year as "Water Awareness Week," whereby, consumer education material will be displayed by the water and sewer department and the environmental control board. 
(b)  The water and sewer department will furnish, throughout each year, consumer education material relative to water conservation. This will be accomplished through the news media and separate mailings. 
(Ord. No. 1737, § 1(G), 10-3-77)  
Sec. 25-373. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2230, adopted April 27, 1987, repealed § 25-373, pertaining to responsibility for leaks.  
Sec. 25-374. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 25-375. - Purpose, applicability and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes of this program are: 
(1)  To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system; 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety. 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of interpretation and enforcement of this division 6, the following definitions shall apply: 
Agency: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Approved: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation. 
Auxiliary water system: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
Backflow: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
Backflow prevention device: Any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Consumer or customer: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
Consumer's water system: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system. 
Contamination: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard. 
Cross-connection: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other. 
Direct cross-connection: A cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. 
Indirect cross-connection: A cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system. 
Double check valve assembly: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
Fixed proper air gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Health hazard: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life. 
Inspection: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. 
Nonpotable water: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604. 
Plumbing: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five (5) feet beyond the foundation walls. 
Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Potable water: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes. 
Potential cross-connection: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point. 
Process fluid(s): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters; 
(3)  Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(4)  Cooling waters; 
(5)  Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems; 
(6)  Chemicals in solutions or suspension; 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
Public water supply: All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty-five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "non-community water supply." 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device: A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
Service connection: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user. 
Survey: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection. 
System hazard: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system. 
Used water: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian. 
Water purveyor: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-376. - Water system. 
(a)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public water supply system and the consumer's water system. 
(b)  The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the director of public works up to the point where the consumer's water system begins. 
(1)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution system. 
(2)  The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system. 
(c)  The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of use. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-377. - Installation standards. 
In addition to any other requirements imposed by the Village Park Municipal Code or by state or federal regulations, all plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or if in the judgment of either the director of public works or his designee, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, then the director of public works or his designee will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and all village ordinances, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and village ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-378. - Unpermitted connections. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the village may enter the supply or distribution system of the village, unless such private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the director of public works or his designee and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. 
(c)  No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency. 
(d)  There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-379. - Surveys and investigations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his designee to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply system of the village to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or oftener, as the director of public works or his designee shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years. 
(b)  The consumer, if ordered by the director of public works or his designee, shall procure the services of an approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the consumer's premises and shall be responsible for all costs related thereto. 
(c)  The approved cross-connection control device inspector, the director of public works, or his designee, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections. 
(d)  On demand of the director of public works or his designee, any consumer or the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village shall furnish to the director of public works or his designee any information which they may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the director of public works or his designee, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this ordinance. The director of public works or his designee shall have the right to enter any property served by a connection to the water supply or distribution system of the village and the consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to such persons for the verification of information submitted by the inspected consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 111, ¶ 1103. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that: 
(1)  All cross-connections are removed, or approved cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage. 
(2)  Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(3)  Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Testing and records. 
a.  Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. 
b.  Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 111½, ¶ 1004. 
c.  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs. 
d.  A maintenance log shall be maintained and shall include: 
1.  Date of each test; 
2.  Name and approval number of person performing the test; 
3.  Test results; 
4.  Repairs or servicing required; 
5.  Repairs and date completed; and 
6.  Servicing performed and date completed. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-380. - Where protection required. 
(a)  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgement of the director of public works, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist. 
(b)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the director of public works and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2)  Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the director of public works. 
(3)  Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the director of public works and/or the cross-connection control device inspector, are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist. 
(4)  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey. 
(5)  Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established. 
(c)  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Director of Public Works determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
(1)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes. 
(2)  Laboratories. 
(3)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping stations. 
(4)  Food or beverage processing plants. 
(5)  Chemical plants. 
(6)  Metal plating industries. 
(7)  Petroleum processing or storage plants. 
(8)  Car washes. 
(9)  Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks. 
(10)  Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-381. - Type of protection required. 
(a)  The type of protection required under section 25-380(b)(1), (2), and (3) of this Division 6 shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard. 
(2)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard. 
(3)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. 
(b)  The type of protection required under section 25-380(b)(4) and (5) of this Division 6 shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(c)  Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when: 
(1)  The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals; 
(2)  Water is pumped into the system from another source; or 
(3)  Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; 
(4)  There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system. 
(d)  All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-382. - Backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this ordinance shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications. 
(b)  Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-383. - Inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by this ordinance are installed to have inspections, tests, maintenance and repairs made at least annually or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in the manufacturer's instructions: 
(1)  Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by-passed air gaps shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(2)  Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed within five (5) days. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5) days. 
(b)  Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the devices. Proof of approval shall be in writing. 
(c)  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs. 
(d)  A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: 
(1)  Date of each test or visual inspection; 
(2)  Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection; 
(3)  Test results; 
(4)  Repairs or servicing required; 
(5)  Repairs and date completed; and 
(6)  Servicing performed and date completed. 
(e)  Whenever any backflow prevention device required by this division is found to be defective, it shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(f)  Backflow prevention devices shall not be by-passed, made inoperative, removed or other wise made ineffective without specific authorization by the director of public works. 
(g)  The director of public works shall maintain a database of backflow prevention devices, including the name and address of the consumer. The director shall cause annual reminder notices for testing of the devices to be sent to consumers, shall cause inspection reports to be reviewed and verified, an may periodically cause field tests to be performed on devices in use. Each commercial or industrial consumer shall pay an annual fee of fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) pursuant to this program, which fee shall be included on a pro-rated basis in the consumer's water bill. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 3257, § 9, 7-12-04)  
Sec. 25-384. - Booster pumps. 
(a)  Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the director of public works, at least once a year, that the device is operable. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-385. - Disconnection of service; violations; liability for costs and expenses. 
(a)  The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant(s) thereof, the water service to any premises or property wherein: 
(1)  Any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the director of public works; or 
(2)  The backflow prevention device has been removed or by-passed; or 
(3)  An unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises or property; or 
(4)  A low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order; or 
(5)  Any connection in violation of the provisions of this division is known or believed to exist. 
In addition, the director of public works is also directed to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. 
(b)  Water service to such premises or property shall not be restored until such conditions or defects have been corrected or eliminated in conformance with the provisions of this division and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, and the required reconnection or reinstatement fee (see section 25-108 of this code) is paid to the village. 
(c)  Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the director of public works is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the director of public works or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. 
(d)  Neither the village, nor its director of public works, employees, officials, officers, agents or assigns shall be liable to any persons, firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, or any customer or consumer of the village for any injuries, damages, expenses, economic loss, lost revenues, or lost profits which may result from the termination of said customer's or consumer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this ordinance, whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or without notice. 
(e)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the village by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-386. - Liability for contamination. 
The consumer or customer responsible for back-siphoned or back pressured material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection, or an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired device, or a device which had been bypassed, is liable for all costs and expenses incurred in connection with the cleanup of the potable water supply system, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any and all costs incurred by the village in connection with the operation, maintenance and staffing required to respond to such contamination at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour (or any fraction thereof) per vehicle, and the hourly rate of pay, together with all benefits, taxes, administrative overhead, workers' compensation claims, and any other expense or cost, for each employee who participates in any cleanup of any potable water supply system; 
(2)  Any and all costs incurred by the village for equipment and materials used, damaged, lost, spent, destroyed, or rendered irreparable in connection with any clean-up of any potable water supply system; 
(3)  Any and all costs, expenses, and liability set forth above, incurred by any federal, state, or local governmental agency involved in any cleanup of any potable water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 2617, § 1, 2-1-93)  
Sec. 25-387. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3316, § 3, adopted Sept. 12, 2005, repealed § 25-387 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to penalties for violations of any of the provisions of div. 6 as enacted by Ord. No. 2617, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1993.  
DIVISION 7. - USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY 
 
Sec. 25-388. - Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited. 
Except for such uses or methods in existence before September 12, 2005, the date when this section was enacted into law, the use or attempted use of groundwater as a potable water supply by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method, including at points of withdrawal by the Village of Villa Park, is hereby prohibited within the areas described and visually depicted in appendices 1 through 12 of this chapter 25. 
(Ord. No. 3316, § 3, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 3371, § 2, 7-24-06; Ord. No. 3397, § 2, 11-13-06; Ord. No. 3560, § 2, 5-18-09; Ord. No. 3840, § 2, 10-27-14)  
Sec. 25-389. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their representatives, agents or assigns. 
Potable water: Any water for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods. 
(Ord. No. 3316, § 3, 9-12-05; Ord. No. 3840, § 4, 10-27-14)  
Sec. 25-390. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 25-390, entitled "Penalties", which derived from: Ord. No. 3316, § 3, adopted Sept. 12, 2005.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-401. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, Thirty-Third U.S. Congress (Public Law 95-217). 
Administrator: The Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Basic user charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Capital improvement charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works. 
Clarification of word usage: Shall is mandatory; may is permissible. 
Combined sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
Commercial user: Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services. 
Compatible pollutant: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit. 
Control manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the village representative to sample and/or measure discharges. 
Debt service charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of any bond debt to be paid by revenue generated from the operation of the treatment works. 
Depreciation: The decrease in the monetary value of an asset with time. Each component of the sewage works shall be assumed to depreciate at a constant rate over its anticipated service life. 
Director: The chief administrative officer of a state water pollution control agency or interstate agency. In the event that responsibility for water pollution control and enforcement is divided among two (2) or more state or interstate agencies, the term director means the administrative officer authorized to perform the particular procedure to which reference is made. 
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent criteria are defined in any applicable NPDES permit. 
Federal grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II, Grants for Construction of Treatment Works, of the act. 
Floatable oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Hearing board: The board appointed according to section 25-411 of this Code or the board of trustees. 
Incompatible pollutant: Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
Industrial users: Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into products as identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A—Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing. 
(2)  Division B—Mining. 
(3)  Division D—Manufacturing. 
(4)  Division E—Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services. 
(5)  Division I—Services. 
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the superintendent that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Industrial wastes: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Institutional governmental user: Schools, hospitals, churches, penal institutions and users associated with federal, state and local governments. 
Local approving authority: The public works director. 
Local capital cost charge: A charge for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement costs. 
Major contributing industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: 
(1)  Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five (5) percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; 
(3)  Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under Section 307(a) of the act; or 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l): A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand (1,000) milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million (ppm), to which it is approximately equivalent in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. 
Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
NPDES permit: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator or, where appropriate, by the director after the enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972 to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the act. 
Person: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ions concentration expressed by one (1) of the procedures outlined in the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
Population equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One (1) population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated as the equivalent of the highest of three (3) parameters. Impact on a stream is the higher of the BOD and suspended solids parameters. 
ppm: Parts per million by weight. 
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works. 
Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that serve one (1) or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary or combined sewer system even though those sewers may not have been constructed with village funds. 
Public works director: The village director of public works or such other persons who are designated to enforce the provisions of this article. The term shall also include when appropriate any official designated by the Salt Creek Drainage Basin Sanitary District or any other sanitary district in the village to regulate wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works. 
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term operation and maintenance includes replacement. 
Residential user: All dwelling units, such as houses, mobile homes, apartments and permanent multifamily dwellings. 
Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. It is used interchangeably with wastewater. 
Sewage treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works: All facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
State act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970. 
State grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the State of Illinois. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer): A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and groundwater drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Stormwater runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers. 
Superintendent or superintendent of operations: See public works director. 
Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established in division 5, section 25-489, of this article. 
Suspended solids: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
Unpolluted water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause the violation of receiving water-quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Useful life: The estimated period during which the treatment works will be operated; anticipated to exceed thirty (30) years from the date of start-up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a federal grant. 
User charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement. 
User class: The type of user, residential, institutional/governmental, commercial or industrial as defined herein. 
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent to a watercourse. 
Wastewater fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system. 
Wastewater service charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in division 5, section 25-490, and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge if applicable. 
Wastewater treatment works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant or pollution control plant. 
Water quality standards are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois. 
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 21, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-402. - Superintendent generally. 
The superintendent shall have general supervision of the public sewers of the village. He shall ascertain the conditions and needs thereof and shall, from time to time, report the same to the manager. The superintendent shall keep proper records of the location of all sewers, "Y" branches, and building sewer connections, and the condition of private sewage disposal systems and building sewers. He shall also have the duties specifically set forth in this article and shall have authority to supervise the construction of private sewage disposal systems and the construction and installation of building sewers and to issue permits therefor. The superintendent shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and he is hereby authorized to make such inspections, observations, measurements, samplings, and tests as may be necessary in that regard and is authorized to enter upon any property for that purpose.  
Sec. 25-403. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 25-403, pertaining to unlawful discharge to any natural village outlet, has been deleted by the editor as having been superseded by § 25-404(b).  
Sec. 25-403.1. - Discharges to storm sewers; North Avenue improvement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge sanitary and industrial wastewater into the storm sewer constructed as part of the North Avenue improvement, nor shall there be any discharge of wastewater into any storm sewer in the village. 
(Ord. No. 2143, § 1, 4-1-85) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2143, § 1, adopted April 1, 1985, did not specifically amend the Code. Inclusion herein as § 25-403.1 has been at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 25-404. - Use required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 22, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-405. - Privies, cesspools, etc., generally. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.  
Sec. 25-406. - Use required. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line, and provided capacity is available in downstream sewers, lift stations, pumping stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant, including pollutant-removal capacity for BOD and suspended solids.  
Sec. 25-407. - Pretreatment of wastes generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise required, pretreatment for the removal of compatible pollutants is not required. 
(b)  In addition to the other prohibitions set forth in this article, the pretreatment standard for incompatible pollutants introduced into a treatment works by a major contributing industry shall be that established by a promulgated effluent limitations guideline defining best practicable control technology currently available pursuant to Sections 301(b) and 304(b) of the act. Compliance with pretreatment standards shall be as provided for by the act and subsequent rules and regulations as promulgated by the administrator. 
(c)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this article and any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village; but not less than once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and local standards is being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 23, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-408. - Measurements, tests, etc. 
(a)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
(b)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special control manhole exists, the control manhole shall be considered to be at the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected, provided the superintendent shall be permitted to take samples within the premises of the user, including lagoons, ponds and other places. 
(c)  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 24, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-409. - Damaging, defacing, etc., system. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.  
Sec. 25-410. - Entry powers and inspections. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a), the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 25-457 of this Code. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.  
Sec. 25-411. - Hearing board. 
(a)  Unless the board of trustees chooses to act as a hearing board, a hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of difference between the superintendent and sewer users of matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article by the superintendent. The cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the village and sewer user. 
(b)  One (1) member of the board shall be a registered professional engineer; one (1) member shall be a practicing sanitary engineer; one (1) member shall be a representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; one (1) member shall be a lawyer; and one (1) member shall be selected at large for his interest in accomplishing the objectives of this article. Appointment of members to the hearing board shall be made by the mayor subject to confirmation by the board of trustees.  
Sec. 25-412. - Civil liability. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the village by reason of such violation.  
Sec. 25-413. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 25-413, entitled "Violations", which derived from: Ord. No. 2398, § 25, adopted Feb. 12, 1990.  
Sec. 25-414. - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this article and any ordinance rule or regulation promulgated by the Salt Creek Drainage Basin Sanitary District or any other sanitary district having territory which is within the village limits, such ordinance, rule or regulation shall control.  
Secs. 25-415—25-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 25-421. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any corrections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local standards. 
(c)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Class 1 for residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  Class 2 for service to an industrial user. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. The fee for a sewer permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), and this and any other required permit and inspection fees shall be paid at the time of the application except as may otherwise be provided in section 7-203.1 of chapter 7 of the Municipal Code. 
(d)  All new residential, commercial, and industrial waste connections shall be distinct from the building inflow connections to facilitate separation of wastewater and inflow should separation of the combined sewer into which the building discharges occur. In addition, all inflow connections, excluding foundation drains, shall be disconnected from wastewater piping in areas of any building being remodeled where the remodeling involves plumbing or a building addition. These inflow connections shall be routed overland or to a storm sewer if available. 
(e)  Owners of all publicly owned systems with combined sewers tributary to the village's collection systems shall have procedures in place that adequately insure that the objectives, mechanisms, and specific procedures given in paragraph 8 of the special conditions section of the village's NPDES permit are met prior to their application for permit. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 26, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 2461, § 2, 1-14-91; Ord. No. 3376, § 2, 8-14-06)  
Sec. 25-422. - Separate building sewers required; exception. 
(a)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
(b)  A building sewer permit will only be issued, and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. It shall be sufficient for the issuance of a building sewer permit if the proper permit issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Salt Creek Sanitary District have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 27, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-423. - Use of old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article.  
Sec. 25-424. - Specifications generally. 
The building sewer shall be of the following materials as are determined to be appropriate by the director of public works or his designee: 
(1)  Cast-iron soil pipe ASTM specification (A74) or equal; 
(2)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe conforming to ASTM specifications D-2672, D-2729, D-3033 or D-3034 with joints conforming to ASTM D-2564 or D-1869; and 
(3)  Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) pipe conforming to ASTM D-2680 with Type SC or OR joints. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
Any part of the building sewer that is located ten (10) feet from a water service pipe shall be laid in a separate trench and at such an elevation that the top of the sewer is at least eighteen (18) inches below the bottom of the water service pipe. If it is impossible to obtain a horizontal separation of at least ten (10) feet and a vertical separation of at least eighteen (18) inches as stipulated above, the sewer shall be constructed of mechanical or slip-on joint cast-iron pipe and be pressure-tested to assure watertightness. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 28, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-425. - Size, slope and diameter. 
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than six (6) inches. The slope of such six (6) inch pipe shall be not less than one foot per one hundred (100) feet. For larger sizes of pipe, the minimum slopes shall be according to all state and local regulations.  
Sec. 25-426. - Depth, grade and alignment. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation above the proposed or existing basement floor in accordance with the Illinois State Plumbing Code and in a manner approved by the director of public works or his designee and the building department for the village. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to any bearing wall if within three (3) feet of any said wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction or grade shall be allowed only when a proper manhole is constructed at the location of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 29, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-427. - Lifts. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.  
Sec. 25-428. - Manner of excavating, backfilling; fees and bonds for excavation. 
(a)  All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open-trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification (C12-58-T) (or the most current ASTM designation), except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(b)  In addition to other permits as required under this article for any excavation, there shall be a permit fee for the following: 
Permit for excavation in a parkway (per opening) ..... $20.00 
Permit for excavation in a street (per opening) ..... 20.00 
The permit fees provided above shall be subject to the provisions of section 7-203.1 of chapter 7 of the Municipal Code. 
(c)  In addition, the property owner or developer, prior to excavation in a parkway or street shall provide an appropriate public improvement guarantee as required by appendix D of the Village Code to ensure proper restoration of the street and/or parkway. In the event that restoration of either the street or the parkway or both is satisfactorily completed and approved, the guarantee shall be refunded. In the event that the restoration is not made and approved by the village, any applicable bond shall be forfeited; and any person, firm or corporation to whom the permit has been issued, together with the owner of the premises serviced, shall be responsible for any and all additional repairs above and beyond those secured by the guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 30, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 2461, § 3, 1-14-91; Ord. No. 3053, § 6, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 25-429. - Joints and connections to be gastight and watertight. 
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 31, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-430. - "Y" branch connection and manhole construction. 
(a)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat machined hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees. A forty-five degree ell may be used to make such connection with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. 
(b)  The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer but no higher than a point one-half of the vertical distance between the invert and the crown of the sewer. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. Manholes shall be constructed at any junction of an eight-inch diameter line or larger into a public sewer. 
(c)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedure set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federal Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2398, §§ 32, 33, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-431. - Certain discharges and connections prohibited. 
(a)  No person, public entity, or private entity, either directly or indirectly, shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, any rainwater or any groundwater into any public sanitary sewer or combined sewer system except that the villager may connect or permit to remain connected any street or curb inlets to any combined sewer system. 
(b)  No person shall connect or cause the connection of, either directly or indirectly, any of the following to any public sanitary sewer or combined sewer system or permit any such existing connection to remain connected, except that the village may connect or permit to remain connected any street or curb inlets to any combined sewer system: 
(1)  Building storm drains; 
(2)  Driveway drains; 
(3)  Roof downspouts; 
(4)  Exterior foundation drains; 
(5)  Areaway drains; 
(6)  Area drains; 
(7)  Patio drains; 
(8)  Yard drains; 
(9)  Combination sumps; 
(10)  Storm sumps; 
(11)  Diverter valves; 
(12)  Unsealed sanitary sump-pump pits; 
(13)  Sump pump drains or outlet pipes which collect or include the collection of rainwater, stormwater or groundwater. 
(14)  Any drain, pump, outlet or other structure which admits surface water runoff or groundwater. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following drains or outlet pipes existing as of January 1, 1970, in those areas designated as Areas 1, 2, 3 and 4, per Exhibit A, RJN Area Boundaries Map, dated August, 1981 (attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference), shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) hereof: 
(1)  Building storm drains; 
(2)  Driveway drains; 
(3)  Roof downspouts; 
(4)  Exterior foundation drains; 
(5)  Areaway drains; 
(6)  Area drains; 
(7)  Patio drains; 
(8)  Yard drains; 
(9)  Combination sumps; 
(10)  Storm sumps; 
(11)  Diverter valves; 
(12)  Unsealed sanitary sump-pump pits; 
(13)  Sump-pump drains or outlet pipes which collect or include the collection of rainwater, stormwater or groundwater; 
(14)  Any drain, pump, outlet or other structure which admits surface water runoff or groundwater. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following drains existing as of January 1, 1970, in those areas designated as Areas 5 and 6, per Exhibit A, RJN Area Boundaries Map, dated August 1981 (attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference), shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) hereof: foundation drains that connect directly into the sanitary sewer service line by means of a direct underground connection that is located wholly outside the foundation wall. 
Any drains, outlet pipes, roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater which were connected or installed, directly or indirectly to any public sanitary sewer system or public combined sewer system in Areas 1, 2, 3 and 4, since January 1, 1970, are declared illegal and shall be disconnected at the owner's sole expense. 
(e)  No person shall discharge or cause the discharge from any drains or pipes in such a manner as to cause or create an ice or other hazard in or on public sidewalks or public roadways. 
(f)  Subject to the exemptions provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, all prohibited connections as defined above shall be disconnected not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the property owner or agent responsible for maintenance of any structure or property within the village receives notice of the required work. 
 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, agent responsible for maintenance of a structure or property within the village or any other person, firm, contractor or corporation to perform or cause to be performed or to permit any work to be done after a certificate of compliance has been issued, which work results in a violation of this section. Each day, commencing with the date such work is commenced and the violation of this section exists, shall be an offense; and a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day shall be imposed. 
(h)  No new connection shall be made to a public sewer which would cause the average daily organic loading to exceed six hundred eighty (680) pounds of BOD or cause the average dry-weather flow to exceed four hundred thousand (400,000) gallons per day influent to the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(i)  All new construction tributary to the combined sewer system shall be designed in accordance with the village's stormwater management ordinance in order to minimize and/or delay inflow contribution to the combined sewer system. 
(j)  All existing and exempt inflow sources to the combined sewer system shall be connected to a storm sewer if a storm sewer becomes available. Property owners shall connect to the new storm sewer within one hundred eighty (180) days or, as provided in section 25-431.2, after the property owner or agent responsible for maintenance of any structure or property within the village receives notice of the required work, whichever is earlier. Property owners or agents are subject to the fines set forth in subsection (f). 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 34, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3376, §§ 3, 4, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 3700, § 3, 5-21-12)  
Sec. 25-431.1. - Access to premises and inspections for unauthorized connections. 
In addition to the other powers of inspection granted under the provisions of this chapter, the superintendent or director of public works or any of his authorized agents shall have free access at all reasonable hours, whether or not a certificate of compliance has been issued, to inspect any premises connected to a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer for the purposes of determining whether any drains or outlet pipes as described in section 25-431 exist on or serve the premises. The fact that the owner or occupant of such premises accepts and uses sanitary sewer service provided by the village shall constitute a consent to the making of such inspection. No person shall refuse to admit authorized agents of the village to any premises for such purpose. In the event that any authorized representative is refused admittance or is in any way hindered in the making of the inspection, the superintendent or director of public works or his authorized agents may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an order commanding the owner or occupant of any premises to permit access for purposes herein described. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 35, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-431.2. - Inspection required upon transfer of property. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
Beneficial interest: Any interest, regardless of how small or minimal such interest may be, in a land trust held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries of such land trust. 
(b)  Inspection; occupancy. Not more than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of title to or transfer assignment of beneficial interest in real property located within the village or connected to any sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the village the owner (seller) so such property shall obtain an inspection of such property to verify compliance with section 25-431; however, the owner (seller) and buyer by a written contract may agree that the buyer shall obtain the requisite inspections and certificate of compliance prior to occupancy. In any event, it shall be unlawful for any persons to occupy said property following the transfer of title to or transfer or assignment of beneficial interest in said real property unless and until the inspection required herein shall be performed and a certificate of compliance issued. If, after inspection by the superintendent or director of public works or any of his authorized agents, the property is determined to be in compliance with section 25-431, the director of community development or his designee shall issue a certificate of compliance of compliance to the owner of said property. The fee for each and every inspection required under this section, including subparagraphs (b) and (c) hereof, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The certificate of compliance shall contain the name of the owner and/or proposed owner as is appropriate and shall be personal to said owner and/or proposed owner. The certificate of compliance shall expire upon the expiration of thirty (30) days unless the transfer of title to or transfer or assignment of beneficial interest in the real property is made within said thirty-day period. If the transfer of title to or transfer or assignment of beneficial interest in the real property is made to the proposed owner (buyer) within said thirty-day period, then the certificate of compliance shall be valid only until a subsequent transfer of title or transfer or assignment of beneficial interest in the real property. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not limit or deprive the director of public works or his designee from conducting additional inspections pursuant to section 25-431.1. If such additional inspections disclose unpermitted connections in violation of section 25-431, the certificate of compliance shall become null and void and continued occupancy of the property unlawful. Occupancy may be resumed only when the unauthorized connections are removed, the property reinspected and a new certificate of compliance issued. The fees for reinspection and the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy shall be the same as those provided hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 36, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3257, § 7, 7-12-04)  
Sec. 25-431.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3296, § 2, adopted June 20, 2005, repealed § 25-431.3 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to reimbursement for disconnection of drains from sanitary sewer system as enacted by Ord. No. 2398, § 37, adopted Feb. 12, 1990.  
Sec. 25-432. - Connections in manholes. 
No building sewer connection shall be made in a manhole unless such manhole is designed and constructed to receive such building sewer.  
Sec. 25-433. - Notice to superintendent; making the connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday except holidays.  
Sec. 25-434. - Barricades and street restoration. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village, and any other governmental agency affected.  
Sec. 25-435. - Expenses and liabilities. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.  
Sec. 25-436. - Responsibility for maintenance of sewers mains and associated service lines. 
(a)  The village will maintain all sewer mains belonging to the village in village streets or other public ways together with factory "Y's" and/or factory "T's" which are an integral part of the sewer main. 
(b)  The owner of the premises served shall maintain the building service line on the premises served and on or under public streets or other public ways to the factory "Y" or factory "T" which is part of the sewer main. If a break-in connection is utilized, the owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service line to and including said connection. Break-in connection as used herein shall mean any connection other than a factory "Y" or a factory "T." 
(c)  Upon receiving notice of sewer backup, the village will determine the location of the obstruction causing the sewer backup by inspecting the manholes upstream and downstream of the premises affected. If the obstruction is in the building service line, the owner of the premises served shall be required to employ the services of a plumber to correct the problem at the owner's expense. If the obstruction is in the main sewer, the village will clear the obstruction at no cost to the owner of the premises served. 
(d)  Upon request, the village public works department will furnish the owner of the affected premises with a list of approved plumbing contractors. 
(e)  In those instances where excavation is required to repair or replace the building service line, the owner's contractor must first obtain a permit and post a surety bond and insurance to indemnify the village for any loss or liability caused by damage to public or private property that may result from such excavation, all pursuant to article XI of chapter 13 of this Municipal Code. Failure of a contractor to obtain the permit before commencing work shall result in the permit fee being increased and shall further subject the contractor to additional penalties, all as provided in article XI of chapter 13 of this Municipal Code. Upon excavation and repair or replacement of the building service line, the village pubic works department will place appropriate backfill in the part of the excavation within the street right-of-way and will restore the street, sidewalks, and parkway, at no cost to the owner of the premises served by said service line. 
(Ord. No. 2230, § 2, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 2398, §§ 38, 39, 2-12-90; Ord. No. 3193, § 2, 7-28-03)  
Sec. 25-437. - Inspections generally. 
(a)  The director of public works or his or her designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, is hereby authorized, as a part of any village infrastructure improvement program including the sanitary sewer reimbursement policy, to enter, at all reasonable hours, any premises as necessary to inspect the building sewer connected directly or indirectly to the village's sanitary sewer or combined sewer for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The director of public works or his or her designee shall be permitted to enter all private properties with a building sewer connected, directly or indirectly, to the village's public sewer system in order to observe, inspect, measure, repair or maintain the building sewer. 
(b)  If upon inspection, the building sewer is found to be defective or fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the repair thereof within the timeframe stated in the notice of violation. 
(c)  In the event the owner of the premises or the tenant refuses entry to the director of public works, or his or her designee with proper credentials and identification, thereby causing such inspection to be undertaken by the village by any alternate method, the owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the village for conducting such inspection through such alternative method. 
(d)  In the event the owner fails to make the necessary repairs within the timeframe stated in the notice of violation, the village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to repair the building sewer and demand payment for such repair from the owner and lien the premises in the event payment in full is not received by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3870 , § 1, 6-22-15)  
Sec. 25-438. - Repair to street right-of-way. 
(a)  In the event the repair or replacement of the building sewer to correct any problem or defect is performed by the owner of the premises within the timeframe stated in the notice of violation, the village shall be responsible to place the appropriate backfill and restore any part of the street right-of-way, sidewalk and parkway which were disturbed as a result of such repair or replacement at no cost to the owner of the premises. 
(b)  In the event streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property are disturbed as a result of an owner's failure to repair or maintain the building sewer, the owner shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the village for any repair required to any street right-of-way, sidewalk, parkway or any public property disturbed or destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 3870 , § 1, 6-22-15)  
Sec. 25-439. - Inspection fees. 
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection shall be charged by the village for the inspection or reinspection of all new sewer service installations, sewer service repairs, sump pump installations or repairs, or abandonments, or other corrective work required by section 25-431. The fee shall be paid prior to each such plumbing inspection by the village. 
(Ord. No. 3414, § 4, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 3870 , § 1, 6-22-15) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 25-437, which was renumbered by Ord. No. 3870 .  
Sec. 25-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 25-441. - Compliance required. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 25-406 of this Code, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division.  
Sec. 25-442. - Permit and inspection. 
(a)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain both a written permit signed by the superintendent and a permit issued by the DuPage County Health Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the superintendent. The required permit and the inspection fee shall be paid to the village at the time the application if filed. 
(b)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent and the County of DuPage, Department of Public Health. Both the superintendent and the DuPage County Health Department or its designated representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction; and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent and the County of DuPage, Department of Public Health, when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection by the superintendent shall be made within sixty (60) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 40, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-443. - Specifications. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. The owner shall first obtain all necessary permits and approvals from the County of DuPage, Department of Public Health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than a size suitable for the installation of an effective system. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 41, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-444. - Operation and maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the village.  
Sec. 25-445. - Abandonment. 
(a)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 25-443 of this Code, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspool and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. If water service is also available at the time of connection to the public sewer, the owner shall also connect to the public water supply system at the same time as connecting to the public sewer system. 
(b)  When a public sewer become available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 42, 2-12-90)  
Sec. 25-446. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health department or the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  
Secs. 25-447—25-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - HARMFUL WASTES 
 
Sec. 25-451. - Generally. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.  
Sec. 25-452. - Items prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, waste engine oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as may be permitted based on the conditions of the "Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois," Rule 702. A special permit must be obtained from the superintendent prior to the discharge of any mercury in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg. 
(6)  Any waste containing detectable levels of cyanide at any time except as permitted with the approval of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as specified in the "Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois," Rule 703.  
Sec. 25-453. - Items superintendent may prohibit or place certain restrictions upon. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. 
(b)  The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated planting solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing in excess of the following concentrations and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. The substances are: 
Waste or Chemical 	Concentration 
(mg/l) 
Arsenic ..... 	0.25 
Barium ..... 	2.0 
Boron ..... 	1.0 
Cadmium ..... 	0.15 
Chromium (Hexavalent) ..... 	0.3 
Chromium (Trivalent) ..... 	1.0 
Copper ..... 	3.0 
Fluoride ..... 	2.5 
Iron (total) ..... 	2.0 
Lead ..... 	0.1 
Manganese ..... 	1.0 
Nickle ..... 	1.0 
Oil & Grease, etc. (carbon tetrachloride) ..... 	100.0 
Selenium ..... 	1.0 
Silver ..... 	0.1 
Zinc ..... 	1.0 
Chlorine Demand ..... 	30.0 
Phenols ..... 	0.3 
 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 10.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual B.O.D., biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(10)  Waters and wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(c)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (b), and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes, 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of ordinances of the village. 
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.  
Sec. 25-454. - Items requiring approval of superintendent. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having: 
(1)  A five (5) day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter; or 
(2)  Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 25-453 of this Code; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than two (2) per cent of the average daily sewage flow of the wastewater treatment plant; 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(b)  Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner of any property discharging industrial waste shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) milligrams weight; or 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 25-453; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(c)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent and of the environmental protection agency of the state and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.  
Sec. 25-455. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily available for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.  
Sec. 25-456. - Maintenance of pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.  
Sec. 25-457. - Control manhole. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The owner shall install such control manhole within ninety (90) days of the date of written notification to do so.  
Sec. 25-458. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.  
Secs. 25-459—25-485. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 25-486. - To be monthly. 
There shall be monthly rates and charges for the use of and service supplied by the sewerage system of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3784, § 4, 4-14-14; Ord. No. 3864 , § 4, 4-27-15)  
Sec. 25-487. - Classes of users. 
For the purposes of determining sewer rates for the use of and service supplied by the sewerage system of the city, users of the system shall be divided into the following user classes: 
(1)  User Class I. Residential and commercial users within the corporate limits of the village who are also users of the water services of the village. 
(2)  User Class II. Residential and commercial users within the corporate limits of the village who do not use the water services of the village. 
(3)  User Class III. Industrial users within the corporate limits of the village. 
(4)  User Class IV. Residential and commercial users outside the corporate limits of the village who are also users of the water system of the village. 
(5)  User Class V. Residential and commercial users outside the corporate limits of the village who do not use the water services of the village. 
(6)  User Class VI. Industrial users outside the corporate limits of the village.  
Sec. 25-488. - Base rate. 
The base sewer rate shall be as established by the corporate authorities.  
Sec. 25-489. - Industrial user surcharge. 
When the average concentration of B.O.D. and/or suspended solids exceeds two hundred (200) mg/l or two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, respectively, an industrial user surcharge shall be added to the base user rate. The surcharge shall be equal to the base sewer rate times 0.3 times the number of one thousand (1,000) gallons used times the sum of: 
(1)  The average BOD concentration less two hundred (200) mg/l divided by two hundred (200) mg/l; plus 
(2)  The average suspended solids concentration less two hundred fifty (250) mg/l divided by two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to determine that the industrial user surcharge factors shall be conducted in conformance with section 25-408 of this Code.  
Sec. 25-490. - Determination. 
Sewer rates and charges for each user class shall be as follows: 
(1)  User Class I. The applicable base sewer rate. 
(2)  User Class II. The applicable base sewer rate. 
(3)  User Class II. The applicable base sewer rate plus the industrial surcharge if applicable. 
(4)  User Class IV. The applicable base sewer rate. 
(5)  User Class V. The applicable base sewer rate. 
(6)  User Class VI. The applicable base sewer rate plus the industrial surcharge if applicable.  
Sec. 25-491. - Audit and review. 
The village shall independently audit operation, maintenance and debt service costs for the wastewater facilities, review sewer rates and charges annually and revise sewer rates and charges periodically to reflect actual treatment works operation and maintenance costs and the cost of debt services.  
Sec. 25-492. - Metering device. 
All multifamily residences, commercial establishments and industrial establishments who use the sewerage system of the village, but who do not use the water services of the village may be required to install a control manhole as required by this article equipped with a metering device approved by the superintendent which records the total sewage flow for the purpose of determining the basis for sewer rates.  
Sec. 25-493. - Access to records. 
The IEPA, USEPA or their authorized representatives shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the village's system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the federal regulations and conditions of the federal grant. 
(Ord. No. 2398, § 43, 2-12-90)  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 25-500. - Establishment of a stormwater management program and a stormwater fund. 
(a)  The village hereby establishes a stormwater management program to provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the stormwater systems and facilities owned or operated by the village. 
(b)  The management and supervision of the stormwater management program shall be under the direction of the director of public works. 
(c)  The village hereby establishes a stormwater fund. All revenues of the stormwater management program shall be deposited into the stormwater fund and used for purposes of the stormwater management program as deemed appropriate by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 3933, § 1, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 25-501. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater management program. 
The stormwater management program shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, management and improvement of the stormwater system owned by the village including all activities required by the village's NPDES stormwater permit. 
( Ord. No. 3933 , § 1, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 25-502. - Determination of service charges. 
Stormwater service charges are established by this chapter and the revenue generated by stormwater service charges together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater management program will be used to fund the obligations of the stormwater management program. 
( Ord. No. 3933 , § 1, 9-26-16)  
Sec. 25-503. - Service charges. 
Commencing on January 1, 2017, and continuing thereafter, a stormwater management program service charge of six dollars ($6.00) is hereby imposed upon each water and/or sanitary sewer residential (with two dwelling units or less) customer service account and a stormwater management program service charge of twelve dollars ($12.00) is hereby imposed upon each water and/or sanitary sewer commercial, industrial and residential multi-family (with more than two dwelling units) customer service accounts which shall be charged upon each monthly period or any portion thereof. Commencing on February 1, 2017, the stormwater management program service charge of a residential customer service account of a person enrolled in the State of Illinois Benefit Access Program, that provides proof of such enrollment to the finance department and occupying a single family residence shall be charged only fifty (50) percent of the service charge. 
( Ord. No. 3933 , § 1, 9-26-16; Ord. No. 3955 , § 1, 1-23-17)  
Sec. 25-504. - Service charges billed in common. 
The stormwater charge shall be billed on a common statement and collected along with water and sewer system charges. If payment is insufficient to pay the total of all portions of the utility bill, the payment shall be applied first to the water service charges. 
( Ord. No. 3933 , § 1, 9-26-16)  
APPENDIX 1. - BOUNDARIES 
Commencing at the Southwest corner of the intersection of Ardmore Avenue and Roosevelt Road (in York Township, the Southwest ¼ of Section 15 and Southeast ¼ of Section 16, Township 39 North, Range 11 East, DuPage County, Illinois) and bearing West approximately 174 feet; thence North along the Western boundary of Parcel 06-16-402-049 approximately 490 feet to the northern boundary of aforesaid Parcel; thence East 260 feet to the Eastern Right-of-Way (ROW) of Ardmore Avenue; thence South approximately 24 feet to the Northern boundary of Parcels 06-15-304-034 and 06-15-304-035; thence approximately 230 feet East to the Western boundary of Parcel 06-15-304-036; thence North approximately 105 feet to the Northern boundary of Parcel 06-15-304-036; thence East approximately 87 feet to the eastern boundary of aforesaid Parcel; thence South approximately 560 feet to the Southern ROW of Roosevelt Road; thence continuing West approximately 400 feet along the Southern ROW of Roosevelt Road to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 3316, § 3, 9-12-05)  
APPENDIX 2. - DIAGRAM 
 
(Ord. No. 3316, § 3, 9-12-05)  
APPENDIX 3. - BOUNDARIES 
LOTS 15, 16, 19 AND 20 AND THE VACATED ALLEY LYING ADJACENT TO THE SOUTH OF SAID LOTS 16 AND 20, AND LOTS 21 THROUGH 25, BOTH INCLUSIVE, AND THE VACATED ALLEY LYING ADJACENT TO THE NORTH OF SAID LOTS 21 THROUGH 25, BOTH INCLUSIVE, AND LOTS 38, 39 AND 40, ALL IN NORTH ARDMORE SUBDIVISION, BEING A SUBDIVISION IN THE SOUTHEAST 1/4 OF SECTION 4, TOWNSHIP 39 NORTH, RANGE 11, EAST OF THE THIRD PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, IN DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS. 
Commonly known as: 
36, 44, 82 and 116 W. St. Charles Road, Villa Park, IL 60181 
14, 18, 22 and 28 N. Princeton, Villa Park, IL 60181 
15, 17, 23, and 25 N. Yale, Villa Park, IL 60181  
APPENDIX 4. - DIAGRAM 
  
APPENDIX 5. - BOUNDARIES 
LOTS 5 THROUGH 13, 28, 29 AND 30, AND VACATED ALLEY OF BLOCK 4 IN THE FIRST ADDITION TO NORTH AVENUE TERRACE, AND LOT 1 BLOCK 102 BEING SUBDIVISIONS IN THE NORTH 1/2 OF THE NORTHWEST 1/4 OF SECTION 4, TOWNSHIP 39 NORTH, RANGE 11 EAST OF THE THIRD PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, IN DUPAGE COUNTY. 
ALSO KNOWN AS: 
41 AND 601—701 W. NORTH AVE., VILLA PARK, IL 60181 
741 AND 737 N. WESTMORE AVE., VILLA PARK, IL, 60181 
734, 741, AND 748 N. BIERMANN AVE., VILLA PARK, IL 60181  
APPENDIX 6. - BOUNDARIES 
Parcel 1: Lots 1, 2, 3 (except the North 3.22 feet for street) and Lot 4, (except the North 3.46 feet for street) in Block 4 in First Addition to North Avenue Terrace, being a subdivision of part of the East V£ of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 4, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the Plat thereof recorded July 23, 1926, as Document No. 218019, in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Parcel 2: Lots 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 (except part taken for North Avenue) Lot 11, all of the East and West vacated alley tying Westerly of the West line of Lot 5 extended and Westerly of the Easterly line of Lot 11 extended and east of the East line of Westmore Avenue and the North half of that part of the East and West vacated alley lying Easterly of the West line of Lot 5 extended and Westerly of the East line of Lot 5, extended all in Block 4 in First Addition to the North Avenue Terrace, a Subdivision in the East Half of the North West quarter of Section 4, Township 39 North, Range 11, East of the Third Principal Meridian (excepting there from the right of way of the Illinois Central, Chicago Madison and Northern Railroad) according to the Plat thereof recorded July 23, 1926 as document 218109 in DuPage County, Illinois. 
Permanent Real Estate Index Number: 06-04-111-029 
Address of Real Estate: 541 West North Avenue, Villa Park, IL 60181  
APPENDIX 7. - DIAGRAM 
  
APPENDIX 8. - DIAGRAM 
 
(Ord. No. 3560, 5-18-09)  
APPENDIX 9. - BOUNDARIES 
Hafer Cleaners Limited Groundwater Ordinance Boundary Description 
Commencing at the intersection point of the centerlines of St. Charles Road and Summit Avenue, thence 330' west along the centerline of St. Charles Road, thence 330' south as measured along the east line of the right of way of Charles Avenue, thence 510' east as measured parallel with the St. Charles Road, thence 330' north as measured parallel with Summit Avenue, and thence 180' west to the point of commencing. 
The Limited Groundwater Ordinance covered properties are as follows: 
127 East St. Charles Road (PIN: 06-10-102-001-0000), 155-159 East St. Charles Road (PIN: 06-10-102-002-0000), 205 East St Charles Road (PIN: 06-10-103-001-0000), 211 East St. Charles Road (PIN: 06-10-103-002-0000), 19 South Charles Avenue (PIN: 06-10-102-003-0000), -23 South Charles Avenue (PIN: 06-10-102-004-0000), 
13 South Summit Avenue (PIN: 06-10-103-006-0000), 
14 South Summit Avenue (PIN: 06-10-102-012-0000), 
17 South Summit Avenue (PIN: 06-10-103-007-0000), 
18 South Summit Avenue (PIN: 06-10-102-013-0000), 
21 South Summit Avenue (PIN: 06-10-103-008-0000), 
22 South Summit Avenue (PIN: 06-10-102-014-0000), and 
Part of the Village of Villa Park street rights-of-way as indicated in Appendix 1. 
(Ord. No. 3560, 5-18-09)  
APPENDIX 12. - LIMITED GROUNDWATER ORDINANCE MAP 
 
(Ord. No. 3840, § 3, 10-27-14)  
Chapter 26 - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION  
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted June 11, 2012, amended art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. I, §§ 26-101—26-103, was entitled "Code Hearing Department", and derived from: Ord. No. 3512, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2008. 
 
Sec. 26-101. - Purpose. 
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-102. - Creation. 
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government to be known as the Village of Villa Park Ordinance Enforcement Department and to have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances as from time to time authorized by the village board (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.), including building code violations as the method designated pursuant to Section 11-31.1-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3), but not any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-204). The establishment of the Village of Villa Park Ordinance Enforcement Department does not preclude the village from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 1, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-103. - Administrative composition. 
(a)  The Village of Villa Park Ordinance Enforcement Department shall be composed of a hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, system coordinator/computer operator and such other personnel hereinafter appointed, with the power and authority as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The village manager is hereby authorized to appoint all hearing officers of this village. The village manager is hereby authorized to appoint all other persons to hold the positions hereinafter set forth below, and such other personnel as needed. Other than the hearing officer, one (1) person may hold and fulfill the requirements of one (1) or more of the above-stated positions, and compensation for each of the hereinafter stated positions shall be as approved by the president and board of trustees. 
(1)  Hearing officer: 
a.  The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a village ordinance violation exists; 
2.  Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of the village ordinance violation; 
3.  Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives; 
4.  Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; 
5.  Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a village ordinance violation exists; and 
6.  Impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with applicable village ordinance provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration or a fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Said maximum fine shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with the village's ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the village. The hearing officer upon a finding of a violation shall include an additional amount of not less than thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to be imposed by the hearing officer as administrative adjudication hearing costs unless the maximum fine penalty is imposed. This additional penalty shall not be construed as part of the fine for the purposes of any reduction made in the fine for compliance with an order of the hearing officer. 
b.  Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal training program which includes the following: 
1.  Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the hearing officer shall preside; 
2.  Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he/she will adjudicate; 
3.  Observation of administrative hearings; and 
4.  Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. 
c.  A hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years. 
(2)  Ordinance enforcement administrator: The ordinance enforcement administrator is authorized and directed to: 
a.  Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance. 
b.  Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
c.  Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability. 
d.  Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the final determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with this chapter, the laws of the State of Illinois, including 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended. 
e.  Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5. 
f.  Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created. 
g.  Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by current law. 
(3)  System coordinator/computer operator: The system coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative adjudication system of the Village of Villa Park Ordinance Enforcement Department hereby created, on a day-to-day basis, including but not limited to: 
a.  Input of violation notice information. 
b.  Establishing court dates and notice dates. 
c.  Record fine and penalty assessment and payments. 
d.  Issue payment receipts. 
e.  Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending impoundment; issue notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the ordinance enforcement administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
f.  Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed, if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 2, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-104. - Notice of violation. 
The system of administrative adjudication of any village ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Violation notice of any ordinance violation including violations of the Villa Park Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, chapter 14 of this Municipal Code, other than any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (hereinafter the "Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code"), shall be issued by the persons authorized under this Code and shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth. 
(2)  All full-time, part time, and auxiliary police officers as well as other individuals of any village department authorized by the village manager shall have the authority to issue violation notices. 
(3)  Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter or a violation of any section of any village ordinance, is authorized to issue notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth. 
(4)  The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the party violating the ordinance, if known. 
b.  The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance). 
c.  The type and nature of the ordinance violated. 
d.  Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable). 
e.  The penalty which may be assessed for failure to appear. 
f.  The names and witnesses of the violation. 
g.  The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice. 
h.  The docket number, date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance violations, if applicable, other than violations of the Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held, and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing. 
i.  If applicable to the violation in question, the amount of the fine as set by the Village Code that may be paid by any party admitting to a violation in lieu of attendance at a hearing. 
(5)  The date of the hearing shall not be less than thirty (30), nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 3, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-105. - Service and notice of hearing. 
(a)  Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice: 
(1)  In the case of violation of the Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code, service shall be made by: 
a.  Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle; or vehicle violating any compliance regulation; 
b.  Handling the notice to the registered owner, operator, or lessee of the vehicle, if present; or 
c.  Mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible for the ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to appear at the hearing. 
(2)  In the case of violation of the building code, service shall be made by: 
a.  First class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing; 
b.  If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the notice on the front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled. 
(3)  In the case of any ordinance violation other than a violation of the Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code or Building Code, service shall be made by mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible for the ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to appear at the hearing. 
(b)  The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the person issuing said notice by: 
(1)  Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or 
(2)  In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her control. 
(c)  The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business. 
(d)  Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-106. - Administrative hearings. 
(a)  An administrative hearing shall be granted for the following: 
(1)  To adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits. 
(2)  To contest the validity of a notice of impending immobilization or impending impoundment, or, the validity of a notice of impending driver's license suspension. The hearing shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, or the lessee of the "cited vehicle", 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference, and at the date, time and place as is set forth by the ordinance enforcement administrator and served upon the registered owner, operator or lessee for hearings contesting the validity of notices of impending immobilization or impending impoundment or driver's license suspension. 
(b)  No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer at the hearing except where absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the individual. Lack of preparation does not constitute cause for a continuance. No continuance may be granted for more than thirty-five (35) days. 
(c)  All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with section 26-110 hereof. Persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be on the alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation. 
(e)  Alternative nonappearance procedures. Persons who have been served vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations notice(s) in accordance with this chapter may contest the alleged violation on its merits without personally appearing at an administrative hearing by: 
(1)  Requesting a "nonresident request for hearing" form from the ordinance enforcement administrator after receiving the final notice as provided in section 26-104. 
(2)  Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space specified in the violation notice or citation and acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement filed by him/her and the facts contained in the notice or citation. 
(3)  Filing the violation notice or citation with the "request for hearing" section fully completed with the ordinance enforcement administrator postmarked within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the ordinance enforcement department. 
(4)  Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice or citation which must be filed with the ordinance enforcement administrator postmarked within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the ordinance enforcement department. 
(5)  The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident and the facts as contained in the violation notice or citation. 
(6)  Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted. 
(7)  Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States Mail. 
(8)  Provisions of this section shall apply equally to nonresidents and residents of the village. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 4, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-107. - Final determination of liability. 
(a)  A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice pursuant to section 26-111 hereof, the hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made. 
(c)  A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following the conclusion of an administrative hearing within five (5) days after the final determination of liability is made, as is hereinafter set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings: 
(1)  The hearing officer's findings of fact. 
(2)  A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact. 
(3)  A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the village. 
(4)  A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs are debts due and owing the village. 
(5)  A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the village within the time specified may result in proceeding with collection procedures. 
(6)  A warning that the person's drivers license may be suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference. 
(7)  A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the village may be immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations. 
(8)  Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-108. - Judicial review. 
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., and 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-109. - Enforcement of judgment. 
(a)  Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) may be sought for a final determination of a code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In any case in which an individual has failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by the village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing officer pursuant to this subsection, the village shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail. 
(d)  A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the individual in the amount of any debt due and owing the municipality under this chapter. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this chapter until it has been recorded in the manner provided by Article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code. 
(e)  A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty-one (21) days after the issuance of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if the petitioner establishes that the village did not provide proper service of process. If any judgment is set aside, the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result of the vacated default judgment. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 5, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-110. - Schedule of fines/penalties. 
Fines and penalties shall be imposed in accordance with the Village Code, or where no fine or penalty is expressed in the Village Code, the hearing officer may impose a fine or penalty according to his judgment. However, in no case may the fines imposed by the hearing officer exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation per day. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 6, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-111. - Failure to appear, notice. 
(a)  Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a village ordinance, other than a Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code violation, to appear at the time and date designated for a hearing, or, in the case of a violation of the Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code, the registered owner, operator, or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail, postage prepaid to the person who received the notice of an ordinance violation; or, in the case of the violation of the Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code, the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state, and shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States Mail. 
(b)  The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Upon the failure of the person receiving notice of an ordinance violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation of the Villa Park Motor Vehicle Code in chapter 14, the registered owner, operator, or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, a notice shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to the following information: 
a.  Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice. 
b.  Particular ordinance violated. 
c.  Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable). 
d.  Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment. 
e.  A section entitled "Notice of Hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, in the case of a violation of the Villa Park Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, chapter 14, or the registered owner, operator, or lessee may appear at an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing. 
f.  Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits. 
g.  Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination of liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated. 
h.  Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village. 
(c)  If on the dates set for the hearing the alleged violator or his or her attorney or designee fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the alleged violator in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a Code violation. 
(d)  Upon finding the alleged violation in default, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail, postage prepaid to the violator who received the notice of an ordinance violation. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States Mail. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12; Ord. No. 3887 , § 7, 10-26-15)  
Sec. 26-112. - Impending suspension of drivers license, notice. 
A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations: 
(1)  The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the village notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of state. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-113. - Immobilization/towing and impoundment of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s), for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized, booted, or towed and impounded if: 
(1)  The ordinance enforcement administrator has determined that a person has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more ordinance violations, for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid. 
(2)  The person determined to be liable for ten (10) or more violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the village geographical boundaries. 
(3)  A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which contains, but shall not be limited to the following: 
a.  That a final determination has been made on ten (10) or more ordinance violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid. 
b.  A listing of the violations for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation: 
1.  The ordinance violation notice number; 
2.  Date of issuance; and 
3.  Total amount of fines and penalties assessed. 
c.  That the motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the village are subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. 
d.  Date of immobilization. 
e.  Date of impending towing and impoundment. 
f.  That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by appearing in person before the ordinance administrator within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove liability, such as the following: 
1.  That the registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued; or 
2.  That the fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice were paid in full; or 
3.  That the registered owner has not accumulated ten (10) or more ordinance violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no appearance was made. 
(4)  The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability before the ordinance enforcement administrator to contest the validity of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-114. - Request for hearing in the case of towing and impoundment of motor vehicles. 
Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next scheduled hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the ordinance enforcement administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than thirty (30) days after the request for hearing is filed and shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States Mail. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-115. - Notice affixed to vehicle in cases of immobilization. 
Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of Sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. The notice also shall provide the following information specifying that a release of the immobilizing restraint may be had by: 
(1)  Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding complaints for which notice has been sent prior to the date of the immobilization; or 
(2)  Completing appearance forms on all outstanding parking violation complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the immobilization and depositing collateral in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the total fines for these outstanding parking violation complaints, or five hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-116. - Towing of immobilized vehicle. 
Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing restraint has not been released as hereinabove provided, within seventy-two (72) hours of its placement, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-117. - Post-impoundment notice. 
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in section 26-115 and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-118. - Hearing in case of vehicle immobilization. 
(a)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on an immobilization list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing before the ordinance enforcement administrator within fourteen (14) days after issuance of the notice specified in section 26-116 or within fourteen (14) days of immobilization, whichever is later. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on any business day within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand for hearing, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any amount deposited pursuant to section 26-114 shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this section shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the immobilized vehicle, but shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized or towed by determining whether the owner previously submitted evidence required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-119. - Fines and fees for immobilization. 
The fine for immobilization shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) and the fine for impoundment and towing shall be an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The owner of the vehicle shall also be charged reasonable storage and towing fees should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility, provided that no fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-120. - Towing services. 
The ordinance enforcement administrator shall appoint or retain the services of an individual, agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance herewith; provided that, that individual, agency or company is fully insured and licensed according to local or state law and has available a secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of this section a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-121. - Eviction, rights of occupants. 
In the case of a building code violation, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-122. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3887 , § 8, adopted Oct. 26, 2015, deleted § 26-122 entitled "Defenses to building code violations", which derived from Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted June 11, 2012.  
Sec. 26-123. - Sanctions applicable to the building owner. 
The order to correct a building code violation and the sanctions imposed by a municipality as the result of a finding of a code violation shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one (1) owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
Sec. 26-124. - Federal government contracts under the building code. 
A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies, including without limitation, the department of housing and urban development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and safety code violations. A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred one dollars ($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 6-11-12)  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted June 11, 2012, deleted art. II, §§ 26-201—26-212, entitled "Administrative Adjudication of Vehicular Standing, Parking and Compliance Violations", which derived from: Ord. No. 3512, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2008. 
 
Secs. 26-201—26-212. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted June 11, 2012, deleted art. III, §§ 26-301—26-312, entitled "Administrative Adjudication of Building and Housing Violations", which derived from: Ord. No. 3512, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2008. 
 
Secs. 26-301—26-312. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted June 11, 2012, deleted art. IV, §§ 26-401—26-407, entitled "Administrative Adjudication of Ordinance Violations", which derived from: Ord. No. 3512, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2008; and Ord. No. 3700, § 2, adopted May 21, 2012. 
 
Secs. 26-401—26-407. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted June 11, 2012, deleted art. V, §§ 26-501—26-505, entitled "Administration", which derived from: Ord. No. 3512, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2008; and Ord. No. 3693, § 1, adopted Mar. 26, 2012. 
 
Secs. 26-501—26-505. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 2018, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 26-601—26-608, 26-610—26-612, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to automated traffic law enforcement adjudication and derived from Ord. 3512, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2008; Ord. No. 3636, §§ 2—4, adopted Jan, 10, 2001. 
 
Sec. 26-600. - Definitions. 
Automated traffic law enforcement system means a device within the village with one (1) or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code ("Code"), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or similar violation of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Disregarding a traffic control device means failure to stop and remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in section 11-306 of the Code or similar violation of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
No turn on red means where the motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does not enter the intersection as defined by section 1-132 of the Code, during the cycle of the red signal indication unless one (1) or more pedestrians are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a stop line or crosswalk where a driver is required to stop, as specified in subsection (c) of section 11-306 of the Code or similar violation of the Villa Park Municipal Code. 
Recorded images means images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement system, which consist of either two (2) or more photographs; two (2) or more microphotographs; two (2) or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one (1) image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle. 
Traffic compliance administrator means the village's traffic compliance administrator having the following additional powers: adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by this article, collect money paid as fines and penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the Secretary of State as required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-601. - Violations. 
It shall be a violation of this article for a vehicle to disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of section 11-306 of the Code or similar violation of the Villa Park Municipal Code. All violations must be reviewed and approved by a law enforcement officer or a retired officer employed by the village. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-602. - Defenses. 
The following may be considered defenses by the hearing officer for a violation of section 26-601: 
(1)  That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation; 
(2)  That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either (i) in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or (ii) as part of a funeral procession. 
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-603. - Notice of violation. 
When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in violation of section 26-601, the village shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within thity (30) days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event later than ninety (90) days following the violation. The village shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty (60) days of the notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided within sixty (60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first class mail postage prepaid. 
A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the traffic compliance administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 26-601, or whether one (1) of the defenses enumerated in section 26-602 is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. The traffic compliance administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the above-noted statutory and village violation and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this article. 
The notice of violation shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database; 
(2)  The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
(3)  The violation charged; 
(4)  The location where the violation occurred; 
(5)  The date and time of the violation; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded images; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty should be paid (twenty (21) days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation; 
(8)  A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or lessee; 
(9)  The amount of the late fee; 
(10)  A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(11)  A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation; 
(12)  A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing; and 
(13)  A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-604. - Hearing. 
The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of section 26-601 may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of violation (twenty-one (21) days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of section 26-601. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 26-602. 
The owner's failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "Findings, Decision and Order" letter will be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the amount by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-605. - Non-residents. 
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of the village but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing, they may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic compliance administrator no later than the hearing date, together with a written statement reflecting that they are nonresidents of the village. the traffic compliance administrator shall forward all timely-submitted materials to the hearing officer for review and determination. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-606. - Final determination. 
A final determination of an automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall occur: 
(1)  Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s) liability within the required twenty-five (25) days and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth, or 
(2)  Where a person fails to appear at a prior requested administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, or fails to appear at the hearing for an automated traffic law violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior mailed notice. The hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall become final upon the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative or judicial review procedures hereinafter set forth: 
a.  Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or 
b.  Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-607. - Notice of determination of liability. 
A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the alleged violation within twenty-one (21) days of the notice of violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order's determination of automated traffic law violation liability which shall become final: 
(1)  Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or 
(2)  Upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests the violation by mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated traffic law violation Liability that is a final, appealable order. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-608. - Notice of final determination. 
A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of final determination shall include the following information: 
(1)  A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the village, and 
(2)  A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the village within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the Circuit Court of DuPage County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of the person's drivers license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more violation under this article. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-609. - Petitions to set aside determination. 
A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the traffic control administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to: 
(1)  The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date of the violation notice was issued; 
(2)  The person having already paid the fine for the violation in question; and 
(3)  Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the village shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case. The village shall notify the petitioner of the hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen (14) days of the village's receipt. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-610. - Notice of impending license suspension. 
A notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more violations of this article. The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall state the following information: 
(1)  The failure to pay the fine owing within forty-five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Code; 
(2)  A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the village along with a request for the copy. 
The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-611. - Drivers license suspension. 
The traffic compliance administrator, by certified report, shall request that the Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified and contain the following: 
(1)  The name, last known address as recorded with the Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent under this article is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license number of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state; 
(2)  The name of the village making the report pursuant to this section; and 
(3)  A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this article is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States Post office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent; and address to which such notice was sent. 
The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the Secretary of State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein. 
Any person receiving notice from the Secretary of State that their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the traffic compliance administrator. The person shall, within seven (7) days after having received notice from the Secretary of State, request an opportunity to speak with the traffic compliance administratorto challenge the accuracy of the certified report. If the traffic compliance administratordetermines that the original report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid their fine for the five (5) or more automated traffic violations, the traffic compliance administratorshall immediately notify the Secretary of State of such error in a subsequent certified report. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-612. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating section 26-601 of this article shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(b)  If the owner (or lessee) of the vehicle fails to request a hearing and does not otherswise pay the applicable fine within twenty-one (21) days following a final determiniation of liability, an additonal late payment penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed against the violator. 
(c)  A penalty shall not apply if the driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation for the same offense at the time of the violation. 
(d)  A default in the payment of any such fine or penalty, or any installment of a fine or penalty, may be collected by any legally authorized means. The president, village manager, or their designees, may retain an attorney and/or private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default fines or penalties, or any outstanding installments therof. Any fees or costs incurred by the village as a result of these collection activities (including but not limited to attorneys, private collection agents or other authroized personnel) shall be assessed against the violator. 
(e)  Said collection costs shall include an adminstrative fee of thrity-five (35) percent assessed on the default fine, penalty or outstanding installment amount. 
(f)  In the event a judgement is entered against a violator of this article, the judgment amount shall be the amount of the unpaid debt remaining on the date the judgment is entered plus litigation and collection costs, attorney fees and the amount representing all fines and penalities assesed pusuant to this section. In additon to all of the above, the balance of debt remaining unpaid on the date the judgment is entered shall be assessed an adminsitrative penalty of six (6) percent per annum during which the debt remains unpaid. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
Sec. 26-613. - System locations. 
The village hereby determines that it may establish automated traffic law enforcement systems at the following intersections located within the corporate limits of the village: 
North Avenue and Villa Avenue 
North Avenue and Ardmore Avenue 
North Avenue and Westmore Avenue 
St. Charles Road and Villa Avenue 
St. Charles Road and Ardmore Avenue 
St. Charles Road and Addison Avenue 
Roosevelt Road and Ardmore Avenue 
Roosevelt Road and Summit Avenue 
Route 83 and Riverside Drive. 
( Ord. No. 4049 , § 1, 9-10-18)  
APPENDIX A - TABLE OF FRANCHISES 
The following table indicates those franchises which are currently in force in the village. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adopted 	Franchisee 	Term 
(Years) 	Expires 
602 	 7- 8-54 	Northern Illinois Gas Company 	30 	1984 
608 	11- 1-54 	Badger Pipe Line Company 	25 	1979 
609 	10-18-54 	Illinois Bell Telephone Company 	25 	1979 
884 	 3- 2-64 	Illinois Bell Telephone Company 	25 	1989 
Note: Amended by Ord. No. 977, adopted 1-9-67 
887 	 4-20-64 	Commonwealth Edison Company 
(Public Service Company Division) 	50 	2014 
1859 	 8-20-79 	Northern Illinois Gas Company 	50 	2029 
1941 	11- 3-80 	Badger Pipe Line Company 	25 	2004 
2084 	 8- 8-83 	Continental Cablevision of Cook 
County, Inc. 	15 	1998 
2104 	 3-19-84 	Multimedia Cablevision of Villa 
Park, Inc. 	15 	1999 
3774 	11-25-13 	Comcast of Illinois II, Inc. 		
  
APPENDIX B - OFFICIAL PLAN AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 637 
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR 
THE OFFICIAL PLAN OF THE VILLAGE OF VILLA PARK 
Be It Ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Villa Park 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix contains the official plan and subdivision ordinance being Ordinance Number 637 adopted on May 7, 1956, as amended by Ord. No. 2156, adopted Aug. 19, 1985. Because of the formalities required to adopt or amend such an ordinance it has been printed in appendix form, rather than included in the body of the Code. The ordinance has been printed as enacted, except for the correction of obvious spelling errors and the use of a uniform system of capitalization. Any other change is encased in brackets [ ]. History notes indicate amendments to the ordinance. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; sale of unsubdivided lots, § 18-101; trees in subdivisions, § 21-306; basic zoning ordinance, App. C; flood control, App. D. 
 
ARTICLE I. - THE VILLAGE PLAN 
 
Section I. - Adoption of village plan. 
The comprehensive plan of Public Improvements looking to the present and future development of the Village of Villa Park, which plan has been prepared and recommended on the 3rd of December, 1984, to the board of trustees by the Blue Ribbon Committee for the Village of Villa Park, be and is hereby adopted and made the official plan of the Village of Villa Park, hereinafter designated as the Official Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 1, 8-19-85)  
Section II. - Objectives of plan. 
The official plan as hereby adopted includes and recognizes the following objectives: 
First: That the character of the Village of Villa Park and its environs as essentially a residential community be maintained, with commercial and light industrial enterprises permitted in order to maintain a proper balance of property valuations. 
Second: That for the promotion of the public health, safety and convenience and for the attainment of reasonable and practical utility and attractiveness, and for the maintenance and protection of property values, all future developments in the village and its environs shall provide: 
A.  That adequate street lighting, water supply, sanitary and drainage facilities be constructed and maintained; 
B.  That highways, streets and sidewalks be of adequate width and be so constructed and maintained as to avoid the creation of hazardous conditions; 
C.  That railroad crossings and grade separations be constructed and maintained to provide adequate public safety and convenience; 
D.  That landscaping of public and private areas be controlled to avoid the creation of hazardous conditions; 
E.  That the locations and architectural design, where applicable, of public buildings, schools, parks, recreational facilities, parking areas and airports be controlled in accordance with the best public interest; 
F.  That in regards to all annexations of property to the Village of Villa Park, it will be both an objective of this plan and a policy of the Village of Villa Park that before any annexations are approved by the village, a preannexation agreement shall be entered into by the Village of Villa Park and the owners of the property sought to be annexed. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 2, 8-19-85)  
Section III. - Elements of plan. 
The official plan as hereby adopted includes: 
A.  Map No. 1. Title, Official Plan, Village of Villa Park, Du Page County, Illinois, showing the plan of existing streets and public grounds within the corporate limits of the village and in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the village limits and not included in any municipality, and showing certain improvements which the village intends to put into execution as and when these improvements become advisable and feasible; 
B.  Subdivision regulations, set forth in Article II hereof to regulate and control the future physical development of the village and said contiguous territory. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 3, 8-19-85)  
Section IV. - Interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, such provisions shall in every instance be held to be the minimum reasonable requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 4, 8-19-85)  
Section V. - Changes and amendments. 
The zoning and planning commission may from time to time recommend to the board of trustees such changes in the official plan as may be deemed necessary by the board or by the zoning and planning commission. Such changes shall become part of the official plan after their approval by the zoning and planning commission and their adoption by the boards as amendments to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 5, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86)  
Section VI. - Maps and plats to conform to plan. 
After the passage of this ordinance no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record, affecting land within the corporate limits of the village, or in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (1½) miles from such limits and not included in any municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shown conforms with the requirements of the official plan. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 6, 8-19-85)  
Section VII. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the enforcing officer, who shall be designated by the board of trustees, to enforce the requirements of the official plan. The enforcing officer may call upon any other departments or officials of the village to furnish him with such information or assistance as he may deem necessary for the observance or enforcement of the official plan. It shall be the duty of such other departments or officials to furnish such information or assistance whenever requested. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 1, § 7, 8-19-85)  
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
[Section 1. Compliance.] 
Any person, firm or corporation, or any combination thereof desiring to obtain approval of a plat or a subdivision, dedication or vacation of property lying within the area included in the official plan shall comply with the following. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, 8-19-85) 
 
Section I. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  Subdivision. The term subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to context shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
B.  Streets and alleys. The term "street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however other designated. 
1.  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
2.  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
3.  Minor streets are those which are primarily used for access to the abutting properties. 
4.  Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
5.  Alleys are minor streets which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 1, 8-19-85) 
Cross reference— Rules of construction and definition, § 1-102.  
Section II. - Procedures and plat. 
The procedure hereinafter described entails submission of a preliminary plat for conditional approval and a final plat for final approval. 
A.  The Preliminary Plat: 
1.  Three (3) prints of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, accompanied by one key map, shall be submitted to the village board. 
2.  The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
Identification and Description: 
a.  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
b.  Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description. 
c.  Names and addresses of the owners, the developer and the surveyor who made the plat, and the title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
d.  Scale of plat, not smaller than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Date. 
f.  Northpoint. 
Delineation of Existing Conditions: 
g.  Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by a solid heavy line and a notation of the approximate total acreage encompassed thereby. 
h.  Location, widths and names of all existing streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, easements, parks and other public spaces, permanent buildings and structures, and section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the area. 
i.  Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground facilities within the tract. 
j.  Boundary lines of adjacent properties for a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the proposed subdivision. Ownership of these properties shall be shown. 
k.  Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts, in zoned areas. 
l.  Topographic data including contours at intervals of not more than two (2) feet, watercourses, marshes and other significant features. 
Delineation of Proposed Conditions: 
m.  Layout of streets, their names and widths; and also widths of alleys, cross-walkways and easements. 
n.  Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots and blocks. 
o.  Building setback lines, showing dimensions. 
p.  Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use, or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 
q.  Proposed zoning within the subdivision. 
3.  The key map shall comprise: 
a.  A print of the appropriate tax map or its equivalent at a scale not smaller than one inch equals twelve hundred (1200) feet with the boundaries of the proposed subdivision indicated thereon. Where the proposed subdivision is outside the corporate limits of the Village of Villa Park, the map shall include the area within one-half mile of the subdivision boundaries. 
4.  Reference and approval of the preliminary plat: 
a.  At the first regular meeting of the village board following the filing of the preliminary plat, the village board shall by motion refer such plat to the zoning and planning commission, and shall at the same time instruct the village engineer to collaborate with the zoning and planning commission, at their request, in the review of the plat. 
b.  The zoning and planning commission shall rule on the preliminary plat within ten (10) days after the second monthly meeting of the zoning and planning commission following receipt of the plat from the village board. When the zoning and planning commission deems that amendment of the plat is necessary to conform to the official plan, conditional approval may be granted subject to the required amendment. 
c.  Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the zoning and planning commission, the following statement signed by the chairman shall be placed on each print and key map which may comprise such preliminary plat: 
NOTICE OF CONDITIONAL APPROVAL 
Notice is hereby given that this preliminary plat has received the conditional approval of the Zoning and Planning Commission for the Village of Villa Park, subject to _____
_____ and that the Zoning and Planning Commission is now ready to receive the final plat for consideration. 
_____	_____
Date 	Chairman of the Zoning and Planning Commission forthe Village of Villa Park, Illinois 
 
d.  The three (3) prints and the key map comprising the preliminary plat shall upon approval, be distributed as follows: 
One print and the key map shall be retained by the zoning and planning commission; 
One print shall be sent to the village clerk for filing; 
One print shall be returned to the subdivider. 
e.  Conditional approval shall be effective for not more than twelve (12) months following the date of approval unless, upon written application by the subdivider, a written extension of time is granted by the zoning and planning commission. 
B.  The Final Plat. 
1.  After approval of the preliminary plat by the zoning and planning commission and fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning and planning commission a cloth tracing not larger than thirty-six (36) inches by forty-eight (48) inches, accompanied by three (3) prints therefrom, of the proposed final plat of the subdivision. Supporting documents as hereinafter required shall also be submitted with the final plat. 
2.  The final plat shall contain the following: 
Identification and Description. 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.  Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description. 
c.  Names and addresses of the owners, the developer and the surveyor who made the plat, and the title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
d.  Scale of plat, not smaller than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Date. 
f.  Northpoint. 
Delineation. 
g.  Boundary of the plat based on an accurate traverse, with angular and lineal dimensions. 
h.  Exact locations, widths, center lines and names of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all alleys and cross-walkways. 
i.  True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments (not less than three (3)) which shall be accurately described on the plat. 
j.  Municipal, township or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles. 
k.  Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangents, bearings and lengths of all curves. 
l.  All easements or rights-of-way for public services, utilities or other purposes. 
m.  All lot and block numbers with their lines accurately dimensioned in feet and hundredths. 
n.  Building set-back lines accurately shown and dimensioned. 
o.  Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners. 
Attendant Items. 
p.  Restrictive covenants shall be shown on the final plat. 
q.  Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that plat represents a survey made by him, that the monuments and markers thereon exist as located and that all dimensions and details are correct. 
r.  Notarized certification, by the owner or owners, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public area. 
s.  Form for approval of the zoning and planning commission, as follows: 
Approved by the Zoning and Planning Commission of the Village of Villa Park, DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of _____ 19___. DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of _____ , 19___. 
Signed _____
Chairman 
Attest _____
Recording Secretary 
t.  Approval of the village board as required. 
u.  Approvals of DuPage County authorities as required. 
3.  Supporting Documents. 
a.  A statement signed by the subdivider setting forth the public improvements he proposes to make in the subdivision and agreeing to make such improvements at his own expense, including all costs of inspection by the village engineer during construction, within the time limit fixed by the zoning and planning commission. Such agreement is subject to approval of the final plat by the village board. 
b.  Specifications and drawings, including profiles, cross sections and details as applicable, of all proposed public improvements. Elevations shall be referred to the standard village datum. 
Cross reference— Datum plane, § 1-101. 
c.  Complete estimates of cost of all proposed public improvements, including costs of engineering and inspection. 
d.  A statement signed by the village engineer approving the specifications, drawings and estimates of costs. 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  Satisfactory evidence that all taxes and special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid. 
g.  Written evidence from the proper governmental agencies of their willingness to accept and maintain dedicated areas. 
4.  Approval and Recommendation. 
a.  The zoning and planning commission shall rule on the final plat within ten (10) days after its second monthly meeting following receipt of the plat from the subdivider. However, should the zoning and planning commission require amendment of the final plat, the time for ruling on the final plat with amendments may be extended thirty (30) days after receipt of such amendments from the subdivider. 
b.  When the zoning and planning commission has approved the final plat, with amendments (if any), it shall be signed by the chairman and attested by the recording secretary on the form provided. 
c.  After approval by the zoning and planning commission, the final plat shall be transmitted to the village board, together with a letter of transmittal calling attention to all variations (if any) approved by the zoning and planning commission and its reasons for approving them, and conveying to the village board such other information as the zoning and planning commission may deem necessary. The zoning and planning commission shall also transmit to the village board the supporting documents submitted with the final plat. 
d.  When the village board is satisfied with the final plat and the supporting documents submitted therewith, it shall by resolution approve the said plat and authorize its president to sign the approval form provided. Such approval shall be attested by the village clerk and sealed with the corporate seal of the Village of Villa Park. 
e.  Upon approval by the village board, the tracing and the three (3) prints of the final plat, and the supporting documents, shall be distributed as follows: 
The tracing containing the approval signatures shall be returned to the subdivider; 
One (1) print shall be retained by the zoning and planning commission; 
One (1) print and all supporting documents shall be retained by the village clerk for filing. 
f.  The plat shall be recorded by the subdivider within thirty (30) days after delivery to him. The subdivider shall send three (3) print copies of the recorded plat to the village clerk within ten (10) days after the recording date. 
C.  Administrative Plat Approval Procedures. The procedure hereinafter described entails the submission for an administrative approval of a subdivision. 
1.  The director of community development department will review all plats of subdivision to determine if they are eligible for administrative plat approval. To be eligible, all of the following criteria must be met. 
a.  The lot shall be located in a residential zoning district. 
b.  The lot shall be less than one (1) acre. 
c.  The subdivision shall not involve any new streets, extension of existing streets, or easements of access. 
d.  The subdivision of land shall not exceed two (2) lots. 
e.  The subdivision shall comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, stormwater, and all other applicable ordinances. 
2.  The plat of subdivision shall contain the following information. Fifteen (15) copies and one (1) mylar of the plat shall be submitted. 
Identification and Description: 
a.  Name of the subdivision. 
b.  Legal description of the property including the parcel identification number. 
c.  Names and addresses of the owners, the developer, and surveyor who made the plat and the title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. 
d.  Drawn to engineer's scale 1" = 100' or larger and north arrow. 
e.  Date of preparation and any revisions. 
f.  Northpoint. 
Delineation: 
g.  Boundary of the plat based on an accurate traverse, with angular and lineal dimensions. 
h.  Exact locations, widths, centerlines and names of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all alleys and cross-walkways. 
i.  True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments (not less than three (3) with [which] shall be accurately described on the plat). 
j.  Municipal, township or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances or angles. 
k.  Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangents, bearing and lengths of all curves. 
l.  All easements or right-of-way for public services, utilities, drainage or other purposes. 
m.  All lot and block numbers with their lines accurately dimensioned in feet and hundredths, and the lot area of each lot in square feet and a percentage of an acre. 
n.  Building setback lines accurately shown and dimensioned. 
o.  Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners. 
Attendant Items: 
p.  Restrictive covenants shall be shown on the final plat. 
q.  Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey, that the monuments and markers thereon exists as located and that all dimensions and details are correct. 
r.  Notarized certification, by the owners, of the adoption of the plat. 
s.  All appropriate signature blocks, including: Village President, Village Clerk, Village Engineer, Community Development Director, County Clerk, County Recorder, Property Owners (with notary blocks), School Districts (with owner's signatures and notary blocks), and Surveyor. 
t.  Any other items required by other agencies for subdivision approval. 
3.  The following support documentation shall be submitted. 
a.  Executed administrative plat application. 
b.  A copy of a current plat of survey an legal description. 
c.  A copy of a plat of survey showing any structures that would remain on the lots after the subdivision with the subdivision lines and all dimensions. 
d.  Processing fee: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first plat page, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional page. 
e.  A copy of the completed Kane-DuPage County Soil and Water Conservation District land-use opinion application. 
f.  Documents establishing ownership of property. 
g.  A copy of the paid property tax bill. 
h.  If the plat is a subdivision (and not a resubdivision of an existing subdivision), the surveyor must issue a letter authorizing the village to record the plat. 
4.  Approval and Recommendation. 
a.  The director of the community development department shall rule on the plat within thirty (30) days after a final submission of all required documents and fees. After approval or disapproval, the plat shall be transmitted to the village board, together with a letter of transmittal, reasons for approval or disapproval, and supporting documents. 
b.  Provided that village board is satisfied with the plat and the supporting documentation, it shall by ordinance approve the said plat and authorized its president to sign the approval form provided. Such approval shall be attested by the village clerk and sealed with the corporate seal of the Village of Villa Park. 
c.  Upon approval by the village board, the plat will be recorded by the village clerk within thirty (30) days of approval by the village board. A copy of the recorded plat will be sent to the owner. The original recorded plat shall be retained by the village clerk for filing. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 2, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 3053, § 3, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 3108, § 1, 11-26-01)  
Section III. - Required improvements and standards of design. 
A.  Streets. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  Where such is not shown in the official plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or 
b.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the zoning and planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
3.  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
4.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street the zoning and planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear of the property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential property and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
5.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or limited access highway right-of-way, the zoning and planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for parking, commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and possible future grade separations. 
6.  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is placed with the village under conditions approved by the zoning and planning commission. 
7.  Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
8.  A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
9.  Clear visibility measured along the center line of the street shall be provided for at least three hundred (300) feet on arterial streets, at least two hundred (200) feet on collector streets, and at least one hundred (100) feet on all other streets. 
10.  Streets shall intersect in a manner to insure safe traffic flow, preferably at right angles. 
11.  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the maps of the official plan, or, if not shown, shall be not less than as shown below in the chart of subparagraph 16, except that this ordinance shall in no way reduce the minimum right-of-way width cited for any existing street by previous ordinances or action of the village board. 
12.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations; and where the zoning and planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a tract to be subdivided is adjacent to an existing half street, the other half street shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
13.  Dead-end streets shall be no longer than five hundred (500) feet and shall be provided at the closed ends with a turn around having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet, and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
14.  No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected wherever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the zoning and planning commission. 
15.  Street grades shall be not less than three-tenths (0.3) of one (1) per cent and shall be not more than three (3) per cent on arterial and collector streets, nor more than five (5) per cent on all other streets. 
16.  Street improvements shall be provided by the subdivider at his own expense. Except for other zoning classifications which may require special consideration by the zoning and planning commission, the minimum requirements shall be in accordance with the schedule below. 
SCHEDULE FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
Column A: Single-family and two-family residential districts 
Column B: Multiple-family residential districts 
Column C: Business and commercial districts 
Column D: Requirements 
A 	B 	C 	D. Requirements 
X 	X 	X 	1. 	Arterial streets, streets along subdivision boundaries and streets connecting subdivision with existing improved street system: Widths of right-of-way, pavements, sidewalks, planting strips and separation strips as determined after consultation with the Zoning and Planning Commission and the Village Engineer, and where applicable, with County or State authorities. 
		X 	2. 	Collector streets: 80 foot right-of-way, 48 foot pavement, 15 foot sidewalks one foot from property lines. 
X 	X 		3. 	Collector streets: 66 foot right-of-way, 36 foot pavement, 5 foot sidewalks one foot from property lines, 9 foot planting strips between sidewalk and curb. 
		X 	4. 	Minor streets: 60 foot right-of-way, 36 foot pavement, 11 foot sidewalks one foot from property lines. 
	X 		5. 	Minor streets: 60 foot right-of-way, 28 foot pavement, 5 foot sidewalks one foot from property lines, 10 foot planting strips between sidewalk and curb. 
X 			6. 	Minor streets: 60 foot right-of-way, 28 foot pavement, 4 foot sidewalks one foot from property lines, 11 foot planting strips between sidewalk and curb. 
		X 	7. 	Marginal access streets: 54 foot right-of-way, 36 foot pavement, 11 foot sidewalk one foot from property lines, 6 foot separation strip from arterial street. 
	X 		8. 	Marginal access streets: 50 foot right-of-way, 28 foot pavement, 5 foot sidewalk one foot from property line, 10 foot planting strip between sidewalk and curb, 6 foot separation strip from arterial street. 
X 			9. 	Marginal access streets: 50 foot right-of-way, 28 foot pavement, 4 foot sidewalk one foot from property line, 11 foot planting strip between sidewalk and curb, 6 foot separation strip from arterial street. 
				NOTE: Pavement width is distance from back to back of curbs. 
X 	X 	X 	10. 	Alleys: 20 foot right-of-way, paved full width. 
X 	X 	X 	11. 	Pavements, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and driveway aprons: in accordance with village standards. 
		X 	12. 	Curb radius at street intersections: 25 feet. 
	X 		13. 	Curb radius at street intersections: 15 feet. 
X 			14. 	Curb radius at street intersections: 15 feet. 
X 	X 	X 	15. 	Curb radius at street and alley intersections: 15 feet. 
X 	X 	X 	16. 	Storm sewers or other adequate drainage provisions in accordance with the requirements of the village. 
X 	X 	X 	17. 	Planting and separation strips: Provide a thick stand of permanent grass, with suitable soil to support growth. 
X 	X 		18. 	Street trees: Not less than 4 feet from any sidewalk or curb and spaced not more than 50 feet apart in all planting strips; trees shall be not less than two and one-half inches (2.5") in caliper and shall be a species as required in Section 21-303. 
X 	X 	X 	19. 	Street name signs: In accordance with village standards at all street intersections. 
 
B.  Alleys. Alleys are to be avoided in residential districts. They shall be provided in business and commercial districts, except that the zoning and planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the proposed uses. 
1.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
2.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities as approved by the zoning and planning commission. 
C.  Easements. 
1.  Where no alleys are platted, easements for the installation and maintenance of all public utility services shall be provided. Said easements to be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and shall be centered on the rear lot lines or in such other locations as to provide for the proper continuity of such public utility services from block to block. 
2.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and of adequate width for the purpose. 
D.  Blocks. 
1.  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
b.  Requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
c.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of existing topography. 
2.  Block lengths shall not exceed twelve hundred (1,200) feet, nor be less than six hundred (600) feet. 
3.  Pedestrian cross-walkways not less than ten (10) feet wide shall be provided where essential for circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. 
E.  Lots. 
1.  The lot width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building set back lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
2.  Lot sizes shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  All residential lots shall conform to the lot size and bulk regulations of the underlying residential zoning district, except that all lots served by septic tanks shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area. 
b.  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business or commercial purposes shall be adequate to provide the offstreet service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated, and any such commercial (including industrial) building or structure shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the lot or land area upon which such building or structure is erected and that an additional area of the lot be set aside for adequate off-street parking area and be paved with a hard surface dust-proof material. 
c.  Any apartment or multiple residence building shall provide for off-street parking to accommodate at least three (3) automobiles for each two (2) families. 
3.  All lots shall abut on a public street. 
4.  Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
5.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
6.  Repealed. 
F.  Public Sites and Open Spaces. 
1.  Where maps or plats of the official plan show a proposed park, playground, school or other public use area and where this proposed area is located entirely or in part in a subdivision, the zoning and planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision in those cases in which the zoning and planning commission deems reasonable. 
2.  Where deemed essential by the zoning and planning commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision and especially in large-scale neighborhood unit developments not anticipated in the official plan, the zoning and planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such other areas of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs created by such development for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public use areas. However, in no case shall the total amount of required public areas, in addition to public streets, exceed five (5) percent of the total gross acreage controlled by one owner. 
G.  Monuments. 
1.  Concrete or stone markers, six (6) inches square at the bottom and four (4) inches square at the top and twenty-four (24) inches in length shall be sunk in the ground at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the subdivision. 
2.  Iron pipe stakes not less than one inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches in length shall be sunk in the ground at all lots, corners, at points of tangency of curves, and at suitable intervals along curves. 
3.  All U.S., state, county or other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be preserved in precise position. 
H.  Utility Improvements. 
1.  Water supply facilities, in accordance with the requirements of the village, shall be provided by the subdivider in any subdivision. 
2.  Sanitary sewage facilities, in accordance with the requirements of the village, shall be provided by the subdivider in any subdivision. 
3.  Adequate street lighting facilities, in accordance with the requirements of the village, shall be provided by the subdivider for all public streets in any subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 3, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86; Ord. No. 3357, §§ 2, 3, 6-12-06; Ord. No. 3889 , § 5, 12-14-15)  
Section III.1. - Anti-Monotony Standards. 
Purpose. Generally, no two (2) single-family dwellings of similar front elevation shall be constructed or located on adjacent lots. To encourage architectural and visual diversity, the following standards shall apply to adjacent single-family residential properties as per sections 7.4.D and 8.4.D of the Basic Zoning Ordinance. 
a.  The following elements will be used to evaluate front elevations changes and at least three (3) of the following features must be different from the compared residence: 
i.  Roof type (hip, gable, mansard, etc.); 
ii.  Plan orientation (right-hand model vs. left-hand model, etc.); 
iii.  Site orientation (different elevation facing the street); 
iv.  Front porch (actual porch vs. stoop or steps with landing); and 
v.  Architectural style (contemporary, colonial, prairie school, neo-colonial, neo-deco, neo-federalist, futuristic, etc.). 
vi.  Garage layout (attached vs. detached or front loading vs. side loading) 
(Ord. No. 3218, § 1, 11-24-03)  
Section IV. - Public Improvement Guarantees. 
The developer shall supply the following forms of guarantee to the village for public improvements: 
A.  An improvement completion guarantee under which the developer agrees to install all required improvements, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streetlights, curbs and gutters, utilities, pavement, landscaping and stormwater management facilities, at his own expense, in accordance with the plans and specifications, within the time required as a condition of approval. However, for property outside the corporate limits of the village, no such agreement shall be required where the applicant has entered into a similar agreement covering the parcel with county authorities. 
Such improvement completion guarantee shall remain in effect until the village engineer recommends its release after an inspection of the improvements shows them to be in acceptable condition and conforming to the plans and specifications. At that time the village manager may release the completion guarantee if all other requirements have been met and the developer has executed a one year warranty for the completed improvements in favor of the village. 
(1)  Acceptable improvement completion guarantee. The following shall be acceptable forms of improvement completion guarantees. 
(i)  Cash escrow. Cash deposit or certified check in the total amount required shall be placed with the village manager. 
(ii)  Letter of credit. An irrevocable, commercial letter of credit with any financial institution in a form acceptable to the village manager and village attorney, which provides for administration of such credit in a manner as set forth in subparagraph (1)(i) above. 
(iii)  A performance surety bond, together with a labor and material surety bond issued by a surety with an A. M. Best's financial rating of A++, A+, A, A- or FPR9 and in the form set forth in Attachments B-1 and B-2 of this ordinance. 
Note— Ord. No. 3053, adopted Aug. 28, 2000, contained attachments B-1 and B-2 that are not set out in this chapter but are available for inspection in the office of the village clerk. 
(iv)  A letter of commitment issued by an insurance company or financial institution with an A. M. Best's financial rating of A++, A+, A, A- or FPR9. Such letter of commitment shall contain terms and conditions which are substantially identical to the terms and conditions of the performance surety bond (Attachment B- 1) and labor and material surety bond (Attachment B-2). 
(v)  All legal costs associated with an action to obtain such money shall be paid for by the applicant or the issuer of the completion guarantee. 
(2)  Forced completion of project. Should it become necessary to complete a project started by the developer in order to provide for the safety, health and welfare of the residents or for the protection of existing improvements, including those installed by the developer, the village manager, upon the recommendation of the village engineer, shall notify the developer in writing that the developer must immediately commence and diligently proceed with the completion of the identified improvements in accordance with the schedule established by the village engineer. If, after a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the village manager determines that the developer has either failed to commence or has failed to diligently proceed with the scheduled completion of the improvements, the developer shall forfeit whatever amount of the completion guarantee is required to finish the project to an acceptable status. 
(3)  Amount of guarantee. 
(i)  Residential development: The amount of the completion guarantee for all residential development shall be based on the following: 
(a)  Total cost of estimated construction for all required improvements as identified pursuant to subsection IV A. hereinabove, plus fifteen (15) percent of such total for contingencies, as approved by the village engineer; or 
(b)  Total cost of construction for all required improvements under contract, plus ten (10) percent of such total for contingencies, as approved by the village engineer. 
Upon final acceptance of the improvements, said completion guarantee shall be reduced to the amount of the maintenance guarantee as set forth in subparagraph (iii) below. 
(ii)  Commercial/industrial development: The amount of the completion guarantee for all commercial/industrial development shall be the total sum of the following: Total cost for estimated construction for all required public improvements including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streetlights, curbs and gutters, utilities, pavement:, landscaping and stormwater management facilities, plus fifteen (15) percent of such total for contingencies, or total cost for construction for all required public improvements as identified above under contract, plus ten (10) percent of such total for contingencies, as approved by the village engineer. 
(iii)  Upon final acceptance of the improvements, said completion guarantee shall be reduced to the amount of the maintenance guarantee as set forth in subparagraph B below. 
B.  Maintenance guarantee. In addition to the warranty required by subparagraph A, ten (10) percent of the amount of the completion guarantee (the ten (10) percent completion guarantee") hereof shall be retained by or held to the credit of the village after the final completion of the improvements covered. Such ten (10) percent completion guarantee may be held by the village for a period of twelve (12) months after the final acceptance of such improvements for the purpose of: 
(1)  Guaranteeing against and securing the correction of any defect in material or workmanship furnished for such improvements, latent in character, and not discernible at the time of final inspection or acceptance by the village. 
(2)  Guaranteeing against and securing the correction of any damage to such improvements by reason of settling of the ground, base, or foundation thereof. 
Such ten (10) percent completion guarantee shall also provide that, as such defects develop, the ten (10) percent completion guarantee may be applied by the village for any amounts incurred to correct such defects and that the balance of such deposit, if any, held at the end of such 12-month period shall be returned by the village without interest. 
C.  Construction nuisance abatement guarantee. The applicant shall also deposit cash with the village manager in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the improvement completion guarantee required under subparagraph A hereof. Said cash deposit shall in no case be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). The guarantee may be used from time to time to abate nuisances by applicant during construction, provided that no such expenditure shall be made until forty-eight (48) hours after the village has notified the applicant to abate such nuisance. The 48-hour notice may be waived at the discretion of the village engineer if the nuisance constitutes a hazard. The balance of said deposit, if any, remaining after acceptance of all improvements by the village shall be returned to the depositor without interest. If any funds are used from said guarantee to abate nuisances, the applicant shall promptly restore the guarantee to its original amount. 
D.  School and park donation guarantee. 
(1)  If land is being donated, a deed shall be submitted at the time of final plat approval. All required improvements shall have been built or guaranteed financially at the time of final plat approval. 
(2)  If cash is being donated in lieu of land, the cash shall be payable at the time of building permit approval. Failure to pay shall void the building permit and certificate of occupancy. 
E.  Stormwater improvement guarantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, guarantees for stormwater improvements shall be subject to and shall be provided in accordance with Appendix D to the Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 3053, § 2, 8-28-00)  
Section V. - Variations. 
A.  The village board, upon the recommendation of the zoning and planning commission, may approve variations from the requirements of this ordinance in specific cases where such variations do not affect the general plan or spirit of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 4, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 3-3-86)  
Section VI. - Validity. 
A.  If any section, clause, paragraph, regulation or provision of this ordinance is found invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this ordinance, but only that part found invalid by such court. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 5, 8-19-85)  
Section VII. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § art. II, § VII, entitled "Violation and penalty", which derived from: Ord. No. 905, adopted Sept. 8, 1964; and Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 6, adopted Aug. 19, 1985.  
Section VIII. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
A.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2156, Art. 2, § 7, 8-19-85)  
Section IX. - Effect. 
A.  This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication according to law. 
PASSED: This 7th day of May, 1956 
APPROVED: This 7th day of May, 1956 
Peter H. Enzweiler 
President 
Attest: 
Marion G. Noble 
Village Clerk 
PUBLISHED: This 30th day of June, 1956.  
APPENDIX C - BASIC ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4036, § 2(Exh. A), adopted June 11, 2018, repealed the former App. C, basic zoning ordinance, Arts. 1—28, and enacted a new App. C, zoning ordinance as set out herein. See the Code Comparative table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Zoning and planning commission, § 2-1601 et seq.; alcoholic liquors, ch. 3; amusements, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; planning and development, ch. 18; conditional zoning, § 18-102; official plan and subdivision regulations, app. B; floodplain zoning, app. D. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 
 
SEC. 1.1. - OFFICIAL NAME (TITLE) 
The official name of this document (Appendix A) is the "Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Villa Park, Illinois." For convenience, it is referred to throughout this chapter as the "zoning ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.2. - AUTHORITY 
This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by Illinois law. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.3. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on July 1, 2018, except as otherwise expressly stated. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.4. - APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION 
The provisions of this zoning ordinance apply to all public and private development within the village, except as provided by state or federal law or as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.5. - PURPOSES 
This zoning ordinance is adopted for the purposes of: 
1.5.1.  Protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare; and 
1.5.2.  Implementing the policies and goals contained in the comprehensive plan and other officially adopted plans of the village. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.6. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
1.6.1.  The provisions of this zoning ordinance are the minimum requirements deemed necessary to carry out the zoning ordinance's stated purpose and intent. 
1.6.2.  In addition to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, all uses and development and construction activities must comply with all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations. 
1.6.3.  All references in the zoning ordinance to other governmental regulations are for informational purposes only and do not necessarily constitute a complete list of other applicable regulations. These references do not imply responsibility for the village to enforce regulations imposed by other government authorities. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.7. - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED 
1.7.1.  Structures may not be occupied, used, erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, or enlarged, and uses may not be located, commenced or continued, unless such structure or use complies with all applicable zoning ordinance provisions. 
1.7.2.  Building permits, certificates of occupancy, or other required permits or licenses, may not be approved, and permits or licenses may not be issued by any other village department that would authorize the use or change in use of any land or structure contrary to the provisions of this zoning ordinance, or for the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any structure designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
1.7.3.  Lots improved with a structure may not be divided into two or more lots, and portions of any lot that is improved with a structure may not be sold, unless all lots resulting from the division or sale and all improvements on such lots comply with the lot and building regulations of the subject zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.8. - ONE BUILDING PER LOT 
No more than one principal building may be located on a single lot nor may a principal residential dwelling be located on the same lot with any other principal building (except as may be expressly permitted by this ordinance). 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.9. - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS  
1.9.1. - Conflict with State or Federal Regulations 
If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.  
1.9.2. - Conflict with Other Village Regulations 
If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the village, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.  
1.9.3. - Conflict with Private Agreements 
This zoning ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. if the provisions of this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by an agreement or covenant among private parties, the provisions of this zoning ordinance govern. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 1.10. - RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION  
1.10.1. - Meanings and Intent 
The language of the zoning ordinance must be read literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the specific meanings assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. General usage terms that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Specialized zoning and development-related terms have the meaning given in the latest edition of the The Complete Illustrated Book of Development Definitions.  
1.10.2. - Public Officials and Agencies 
All employees, public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the Village of Villa Park unless otherwise expressly stated.  
1.10.3. - Computation of Time. 
A.  References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly stated. References to "business days" are references to regular village government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by village government. 
B.  The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by village government, that day is excluded. 
C.  A day concludes at the close of business of village hall and any materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the following day.  
1.10.4. - Tenses and Usage 
A.  Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true. 
B.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true. 
C.  The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory. 
D.  The word "should" is advisory, not mandatory or required. 
E.  When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum of x" all include "x." 
F.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust company or corporation, as well as an individual. 
G.  The words "used" and "occupied" include "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied."  
1.10.5. - Conjunctions 
Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates, conjunctions have the following meanings: 
A.  "and" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and 
B.  "or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in combination.  
1.10.6. - Headings and Illustrations 
Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text governs.  
1.10.7. - Current Versions 
All references in this zoning ordinance to other village, state or federal regulations refer to the most current version, as adopted, unless otherwise expressly indicated.  
1.10.8. - Lists and Examples 
Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities.  
1.10.9. - Delegation of Authority 
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another officer or employee of the village to perform an act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly prohibit such a delegation. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 1.11. - Zoning Map  
1.11.1. - Establishment 
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance are shown on a geographic coverage layer entitled "zoning" that is maintained as part of a geographic information system (GIS) maintained by the village. This "zoning" geographic coverage layer constitutes the village's official zoning map. The official zoning map—together with all notations, references, data and other information shown on the map— is adopted and incorporated into this zoning ordinance. It is as much a part of this zoning ordinance as it would be if it were actually depicted within its pages.  
1.11.2. - Maintenance, Updates and Publishing 
The community development director is responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments (rezonings). Unauthorized persons may not alter or modify the official zoning map. The zoning map must be published annually as required by law.  
1.11.3. - Zoning District Boundaries 
Zoning district boundary lines must be described by legal description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing the district or amending the district boundaries. When a legal description is used, the zoning district boundary is deemed to extend to the centerline of abutting streets. When a map is used, district boundary lines must be established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the centerline of abutting streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as those features were of record at the time of adoption.  
1.11.4. - Zoning Map Interpretations 
Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning boundary, the legal description governs. When there is no legal description of the zoning district boundary, the community development director is authorized to make an interpretation of the zoning map using the following rules of interpretation. The community development director is also authorized to refer the matter to the planning and zoning commission, in which case they must also use the following rules of interpretation: 
A.  A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following lot lines or section lines will be construed as following those lot lines or section lines. 
B.  A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a street, alley or railroad line will be construed as following the centerline of the street, alley or railroad right-of-way. 
C.  A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the boundary of an adjacent municipality will be construed as following that boundary. 
D.  A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the shoreline or centerline of a river, stream, lake or other water body will be construed as following the actual shoreline or centerline of that water body. If, subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the shoreline or centerline of the watercourse moves as a result of natural processes (flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.), the boundary will be construed as moving with the shoreline or centerline of the water body. 
E.  A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately parallel to, or as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be construed as being actually parallel to, or an extension of, the feature.  
1.11.5. - Zoning of Public Ways and Rights-Of-Way 
A.  All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, will be deemed to be in the same zoning district as the property in the most restrictive classification immediately abutting the street, alley, public way or railroad rights-of-way. If the centerline of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a zoning district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, will be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to the centerline. 
B.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the village board, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way is automatically extended to the centerline of such a vacation (or to the reversionary owner should such reversionary rights be different than the centerline of the right-of-way).  
1.11.6. - Zoning of Annexed Land 
When land is annexed or otherwise brought into the zoning jurisdiction of the village, it may be automatically classified in the RS-10 district or, simultaneously with the petition for annexation, be assigned a zoning classification based on the comprehensive plan, existing land uses, approved development agreements or other relevant land use planning and zoning criteria. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 1.12. - Transitional Provisions 
The provisions of this section address the transition from the previous zoning ordinance (the one in effect before the effective date specified in section 1.3) to this zoning ordinance.  
1.12.1. - Applications, Permits and Approvals 
A.  Any building, development or structure for which a building permit was issued or a complete permit application had been accepted for processing before the effective date specified in section 1.3 may be completed in conformance with the issued building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building, development or structure does not comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If the building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the original building permit, the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Applications for special uses, temporary uses, variations or other zoning approvals that were submitted in complete form and are pending approval on the effective date specified in section 1.3 must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date specified in section 1.3. Building permits for construction and development approved under such zoning approvals may be issued even if such building, development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the building permit, then the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
C.  When a use classified as a special use under this zoning ordinance exists as an approved special use or permitted use on the effective date specified in section 1.3, that use will be considered a lawfully established special use under this zoning ordinance. When any amendment to this zoning ordinance changes the classification of a permitted use to a special use, any use lawfully established before such amendment will be considered a lawfully established special use after the effective date of the amendment. A lawfully established existing use that is not allowed as a special use or permitted use in the district in which the use is now located will be considered a nonconforming use and will be subject to all applicable regulations of article 13.  
1.12.2. - Violations Continue 
A.  Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance will continue to be a violation under this zoning ordinance and be subject to penalties and enforcement under section 12.2. 
B.  If the use, development, construction or other activity that was a violation under the previous zoning ordinance complies with the express terms of this zoning ordinance, enforcement action will cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date specified in section 1.3. 
C.  The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous zoning ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in section 1.3.  
Sec. 1.13. - Severability 
If any portion of this zoning ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be deemed severed from the zoning ordinance and in no way affects or diminishes the validity of the remainder of the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
SEC. 2.1. - GENERAL  
2.1.1. - The Districts. 
The residential zoning districts are listed in Table 2-1. Whenever this zoning ordinance refers to "residential" zoning districts or "R" districts, it is referring to these districts. 
Table 2-1: Residential Zoning Districts 
Map Symbol 	District Name 
RS-10 	Residential Single-Dwelling District-10,000 sq. ft. 
RS-7.5 	Residential Single-Dwelling District-7,500 sq. ft. 
RD-7.5 	Residential Duplex District-7,500 sq. ft. 
RM-9 	Residential Multi-Unit District -9,000 sq. ft. 
  
2.1.2. - Purposes 
A.  General 
Residential zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain and promote a variety of housing opportunities for individual households and to maintain and promote the desired physical character of existing and developing neighborhoods. While the districts primarily accommodate residential uses, some nonresidential uses are also allowed. The various R district are primarily differentiated on the basis of allowed building types and lot and building regulations. 
B.  RS-10 
The RS-10 district is primarily intended to accommodate detached houses on lots with an area of at least 10,000 square feet. 
C.  RS-7.5 
The RS-7.5 district is primarily intended to accommodate detached houses on lots with an area of at least 7,500 square feet. 
D.  RD-7.5 
The RD-7.5 district is primarily intended to accommodate duplexes and detached houses on lots with an area of at least 7,500 square feet. 
E.  RM-9 
The RM-9 district is primarily intended to accommodate multi-unit buildings on lots at least 9,000 square feet in area. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 2.2. - ALLOWED BUILDING TYPES 
Building types are permitted in R districts in accordance with Table 2-2. 
Table 2-2: Allowed Building Types (R districts) 
Lot Regulation 	RS-10 	RS-7.5 	RD-7.5 	RM-9 
Detached house 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Duplex 	- 	- 	P 	P 
Multi-unit building 	- 	- 	- 	P 
Public and civic buildings 	P 	P 	P 	P 
P = permitted     - = not permitted 
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 2.3. - LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
Lots and buildings in R districts are subject to the regulations of Table 2-3. 
Table 2-3: Lot and Building Regulations (R districts) 
Lot Regulation 	RS-10 	RS-7.5 	RD-7.5 	RM-9 
 
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 	10,000 	7,500 	7,500 	9,000 
	Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (square feet) 	10,000 	7,500 	3,750 	1,800 
 
Minimum Lot Width (feet) 	65 	50 	60 	50 
 
Maximum Lot Coverage (%) 	30 	30 	35 	40 
Building Regulations 	RS-10 	RS-7.5 	RD-7.5 	RM-9 
Minimum Building Setbacks 
 
Front Street (feet) 	30[1] 	30[1] 	25[1] 	35[1] 
 
Side Street (feet) 	20 	15 	15 	15 
 
Interior Side (feet) 	6 	6 	6 	9 
 
Rear (feet/% of lot depth, whichever is greater) 	40/20 	40/20[2] 	40/20 	40/20 
Maximum Building Height (feet) 	28 	28 	28 	35 
 
[1] Contextual setback regulations apply to infill development. See 14.1.9.B 
[2] On lots more one hundred sixty (160) feet deep, the sum of front and rear setbacks need not exceed fifty (50) percent of lot depth. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 2.4. - ALLOWED USES 
Principal uses are allowed in the R districts in accordance with the use regulations of Section 6.1. 
Figure 2-1. R District Lot and Building Regulations 
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 2.5. - RESIDENTIAL BUILDING DESIGN  
2.5.1. - Anti-Monotony Regulations 
A.  Purpose 
The anti-monotony regulations of this section are intended to promote architectural and visual diversity and to ensure that new detached houses with similar front elevations are not constructed on abutting lots. 
B.  Applicability 
The anti-monotony regulations of this section apply to all new detached houses in RS-10 and RS-7.5 districts. 
C.  Evaluation Criteria 
At least three (3) of the following features on proposed new detached houses must be different than those present on detached houses on abutting lots that front on the same street: 
1.  Roof type (hip, gable, mansard, etc.); 
2.  Plan orientation (right-hand model vs. left-hand model, etc.); 
3.  Site orientation (different elevation facing the street); 
4.  Front porch (actual porch vs. stoop or steps with landing); 
5.  Architectural style (e.g., contemporary, colonial, prairie, neo-colonial, neo-deco, neo-federalist); or 
6.  Garage layout (attached vs. detached or front loading vs. side loading)  
2.5.2. - Attached Garage Design 
A.  Purpose 
These attached garage design regulations are intended to ensure that the main entrance for pedestrians is the prominent entrance. And to provide for a more pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing garages and vehicle areas from dominating the views of the neighborhood from the sidewalk and to enhance public safety by preventing garages from blocking views of the street from inside the residence. 
B.  Applicability 
The attached garage regulations of this section apply to all new detached houses in RS-10, RS-7.5 and RD-7.5 districts and to all new duplexes in the RD-7.5 district. The regulations also apply to the addition of new garages or expansions of existing garages. 
C.  Length of Street-Facing Garage Wall 
 
1.  General 
The length of the garage wall facing the street may not exceed 50% of the length of the street-facing building facade containing the primary pedestrian building entrance. See Figure 2-2. 
2.  Exception 
For lots that are less than 60 feet in width, the garage wall facing the street may not exceed 21 feet in length. See Figure 2-3. 
D.  Street Setback 
1.  General 
A garage wall that faces a street must be set back from the street lot line in accordance with the minimum building setbacks of Section 2.3 and may be no closer to the street lot line than the longest exterior wall of the house facing the same street. See Figure 2-4. On lots with more than one street lot line, this regulation applies only to the street-facing facade on which the main pedestrian entrance is located. 
 
2.  Exceptions 
a.  A street-facing garage wall may be up to six (6) feet in front of the longest street-facing wall of the house if: (1) there is a porch at the main entrance with a minimum depth of five (5) feet and a minimum width of ten (10) feet and (2) the street-facing garage wall complies with the minimum building setbacks of Section 2.3. 
b.  For a side-loaded garage, the street-facing garage wall may extend more than six (6) feet in front of the longest street-facing wall of the house if (1) the street-facing garage wall and the garage wall opposite the garage entrance contain window and door openings on at least fifteen (15) percent of the subject walls. 
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 2.6. - OTHER REGULATIONS  
2.6.1. - Parking 
See Article 7  
2.6.2. - Accessory Uses and Structures 
See Section 6.10  
2.6.3. - Fences and Walls 
See Section 6.10  
2.6.4. - Home Occupations 
See 6.10.6 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 3. - OFFICE, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 3.1. - General  
3.1.1. - The Districts 
The office (O), commercial (C) and industrial (M) zoning districts are listed in Table 3-1. Whenever this zoning ordinance refers to "office," "commercial" or "industrial" zoning districts or "O," "C" or "M" districts, it is referring to these districts. 
Table 3-1: Office, Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts 
Map Symbol 	District Name 
O-R 	Office-Research 
C-1 	Convenience Business 
C-2 	Neighborhood Business 
C-3 	Service Business 
M-I 	Light Industrial 
M-2 	General Industrial 
  
3.1.2. - Purposes 
A.  General 
Office, commercial and industrial zoning districts are intended to accommodate and promote neighborhood, community- and region-serving commercial uses, as well as industrial and employment uses. 
B.  O-R 
The O-R district is primarily intended to accommodate office, service and other types of low-impact, non-retail commercial uses. 
C.  C-1 
The C-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate daily convenience retail and service uses in small-scale buildings. 
D.  C-2 
The C-2 district is primarily intended to accommodate neighborhood-serving retail and service uses. 
E.  C-3 
The C-3 district is primarily intended to accommodate automobile-oriented retail and service uses. 
F.  M-1 
The M-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate small-scale, low-impact industrial and service commercial uses. 
G.  M-2 
The M-2 district is primarily intended to accommodate industrial and high-impact commercial uses, generally on larger sites and in locations that will not cause adverse impacts on residential uses. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 3.2. - Lot and Building Regulations 
Lots and buildings in the O, C and M districts are subject to the regulations of Table 3-2. 
Table 3-2: Lot and Building Regulations (R districts) 
Lot Regulation 	O-R 	C-1 	C-2 	C-3 	M-1 	M-2 
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 	5,000 	- 	- 	- 	15,000 	20,000 
Minimum Lot Width (feet) 	50 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Maximum Lot Coverage (%) 	60 	- 	- 	- 	50 	50 
Building Regulations 	O-R 	C-1 	C-2 	C-3 	M-1 	M-2 
Minimum Building Setbacks 						
Front Street (feet) 	20[1] 	7[3] 	7[3] 	30[1] 	35[1] 	35[1] 
Side Street (feet) 	20[1] 	7[3] 	7[3] 	20[1] 	35[1] 	35[1] 
Interior Side (feet) 						
Abutting R District 	10[2][5] 	10[5] 	10[2][5] 	10[2][5] 	30{5] 	30{5] 
Abutting Other District 	- 	- 	- 	- 	10 	25 
Rear (feet) 						
Abutting R District 	20[2] 	20 [2][5] 	20[2][5] 	20[2][5] 	30[5] 	35 
Abutting Other District 	20 	10[4] 	10[4] 	20 	15 	25 
Maximum Building Height (feet) 	90 	28 	45 	45 	35 	35 
 
[1] Contextual setback regulations apply to infill development. See 14.1.9. 
[2] Plus one (1) foot of additional setback for each foot of building height above twenty (28) feet. 
[3] Maximum setback of twenty (20) feet, provided that minimum and maximum setbacks for infill development are established by the contextual setback regulations of 14.1.9. 
[4] Or twelve (12) feet from centerline of abutting alley, whichever results in greater setback. 
[5] Setback must include perimeter landscape buffer with minimum width of ten (10) feet (see Section 9.1 for landscaping requirements) 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 3.3. - Other Regulations  
3.3.1. - Maximum floor area limits. 
Commercial uses allowed in the C-1 district are subject to a maximum gross floor area limit of six thousand (6,000) square feet.  
3.3.2. - Outdoor storage and display. 
A.  No outdoor storage or display is allowed in the O-R district. 
B.  All business, service, research, merchandise display, and manufacturing activities and operations in M districts must be conducted wholly within completely enclosed buildings except off-street parking, off-street loading, outside storage as an accessory use and/or conditional use in districts where they are permitted. Outdoor storage areas in M districts: 
1.  May not be located in street yards; 
2.  Must be set back at least thirty (30) feet from any R-zoned lot and at least 10 feet from all other non-M-zoned lots; and 
3.  Must be screened from view of non-M-zoned lots and street rights-of-way.  
3.3.3. - Accessory Uses and Structures 
See Section 6.10.  
3.3.4. - Fences and Walls 
See Section 9.2.  
3.3.5. - Parking 
See Article 7.  
3.3.6. - Landscaping. 
See Article 9. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 4. - MX DISTRICTS 
 
SEC. 4.1. - GENERAL  
4.1.1. - The Districts 
The mixed-use zoning districts are listed in Table 4-1. Whenever this zoning ordinance refers to "mixed-use" zoning districts or "MX" districts, it is referring to these districts. 
Table 4-1: Mixed-Use Zoning Districts 
Map Symbol 	District Name 
MX-1 	Mixed-Use TOD District 
MX-2a 	Mixed-Use Main Street District (a) 
MX-2b 	Mixed-Use Main Street District (b) 
MX-3 	Mixed-Use Corridor District 
MX-T 	Mixed Transitional (Office-Residential) District 
MX-R1 	Mixed Residential District 1 
MX-R2 	Mixed Residential District 2 
  
4.1.2. - Purposes 
A.  General 
Mixed-use zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain and promote a variety of vertically and horizontally mixed-use places, and to maintain and promote the desired physical character of existing and developing mixed-use places. The various MX districts are differentiated on the basis of allowed building types and a mix of allowable uses in each building. 
1.  To guide the development of a mix of uses to further the future of the train station area, commercial corridors, and main street nodes in the village. 
2.  To support the desired character of the village, as expressed in adopted plans, policies and regulations. 
3.  To promote multiple modes of transportation, including biking, walking, and transit use, with compact development of an appropriate scale. 
4.  To provide a mix of housing types within and within walking distance of mixed-use nodes and corridors. 
5.  To achieve development that is appropriate in scale and intensity for the neighborhoods and sites proximate to the train station area, commercial corridors, and main street nodes in the village. 
B.  MX-1 
The MX-1 district is intended to accommodate low-scale mixed-use buildings in the train station area. The building form establishes an essentially continuous street wall of storefront facades along the sidewalk of primary streets, and focuses pedestrian-friendly retail and service uses on the ground story along primary streets with residential and/or office uses elsewhere. Parking is intended to be internal to the building or located in the rear of the lot, screened from the primary street with the building. 
C.  MX-2a and MX-2b 
The MX-2 districts are intended to accommodate lower-scaled mixed-use buildings in the neighborhood mixed-use nodes. The building form establishes an essentially continuous street wall of storefront facades along the sidewalk of primary streets, and focuses pedestrian-friendly retail, office and service uses on the ground story along primary streets with residential and/or office uses elsewhere. Parking is intended to be internal to the building or located in the rear of the lot, screened from the primary street with the building. 
D.  MX-3 
The MX-3 district is intended to accommodate low- to mid-scaled mixed-use buildings along commercial corridors. The building form defines a street wall of storefront facades along the sidewalk of the primary corridor, while allowing for limited interior side yard parking between the buildings to account for no on-street parking along the corridor. Uses focus a wider variety of commercial uses on the ground story along primary streets with residential and/or office uses elsewhere. Parking may also be internal to the building or located in the rear of the lot. 
E.  MX-T 
The MX-T district is intended to accommodate low- to mid-scaled office and/or residential buildings transitioning between mixed-use shopping nodes and residential uses. The building form defines compact buildings with entrances, windows, and interior uses facing the primary corridor. Parking is intended to be internal to the building; located in the rear of the lot, screened from the primary street with the building; or located in the side yard, limited in width and orientation. 
F.  MX-R1 and MX-R2 
The MX-R districts are primarily residential within a mix of building types. MX-R1 is mid-scale and intended for use in the station areas. MX-R2 is lower in scale and intended as a transition to existing single-family neighborhoods. The allowable building types, including apartment buildings and townhouses, define compact buildings with entrances, windows, and interior uses facing the primary corridor and small landscape yards in front. Parking is intended to be internal to the building or located in the rear of the lot, screened from the primary street with the building.  
4.1.3. - Uses 
Principal uses are allowed in the MX districts in accordance with the use regulations of Sec. 6.1 Individual building types may be subject to additional use regulations. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 4.2. - STREETS AND BLOCKS  
4.2.1. - Primary Streets 
A.  The designation of primary streets determines the front lot line and prioritizes those street frontages for the location of building streetwalls and storefronts. Parking and driveway locations are also limited along primary street frontages. 
B.  For the purposes of the MX districts, Villa Avenue, St Charles Avenue, and Ardmore Avenue, are considered primary streets, unless otherwise designated on the maps in Figure 4-2 and Figure 4-3. 
 
C.  When two primary streets abut a parcel, the community development director is authorized to determine which street will be the primary street. 
D.  Lot frontages that abut civic spaces or public open spaces must be treated as primary frontages. 
E.  At all intersections of primary and non-primary streets, primary frontage facade treatments must extend along the non-primary street for a distance of at least 30 feet.  
4.2.2. - Street Extensions 
The parcels located at the northern ends of North Harvard Avenue and North Yale Avenue, south of the tracks and north of West Division Street, will require street extensions for maximum applicability of the requirements of these regulations. Refer to Figure 4-1 for these locations. 
A.  Street frontages are required for all building types. To maximize street frontage in these locations, extension of the existing streets is required per Figure 4-1. 
B.  Hammerhead turnarounds can be accommodated at the ends of each street by utilizing parking lot entrances. 
C.  On-street parking can be accommodated along the street, in either a parallel or head-in configuration. 
D.  Streets must match the existing configurations, including curb, sidewalk, and parkway locations. 
  
SEC. 4.3. - BUILDING TYPES GENERALLY  
4.3.1. - General 
Many of the MX district regulations are based on building types. All principal buildings must comply with one of the building types allowed in the subject zoning district.  
4.3.2. - Descriptions 
1.  Storefront Bilding 
a.  A Storefront building is a mixed-use building located at the front and corner property lines allowing easy access to passing pedestrians. Parking may be provided in the rear of the lot, internally in the building, or, in some cases, one double-loaded aisle of parking is permitted in the interior side yard at the front property line. 
b.  Ground floor uses are limited to those with some level of pedestrian activity, such as retail, service, and office uses, with additional commercial, office, and/or residential uses in the upper stories. Storefronts with large amounts of transparency and regularly spaced entrances off the street are utilized on the ground floor front facade. 
2.  General Building 
A General building is limited in terms of uses by the district within which it is located, generally housing office and/or residential uses. Similar to Storefront buildings, General buildings are intended to be built close to the front and corner property lines allowing easy access to passing pedestrians and transit riders. Parking may be provided in the rear of the lot, internally in the building, or, in some cases, one double-loaded aisle of parking is permitted in the interior or the side yard at the front property line 
3.  Row Building 
a.  A Row building is a building comprised of multiple vertical units, each with its own entrance to the street. This building type may be organized as townhouses or rowhouses, and may also be live-work units with a publicly accessed ground story. 
b.  Parking is required to be located in the rear yard and may be incorporated either into a detached garage or in an attached garaged accessed from the rear of the building. However, when the garage is located within the building, a minimum level of occupied space is required on the front facade to ensure that the street facade is active 
4.  Civic Building 
A Civic building is a more flexible building type intended only for civic and institutional types of uses. These buildings are distinctive within the community fabric created by the other building types. In contrast to most of the other building types, a minimum setback line is required instead of a build to zone. Parking is limited to the rear in most cases.  
4.3.3. - Where Allowed 
Building types are permitted in the MX districts in accordance with Table 4-2. 
Table 4-2: Allowed Building Types (MX districts) 
Building Type 	MX-1 	MX-2 	MX-3 	MX-T 	MX-R1 	MX-R2 
Storefront Building 	P 	P 	P 	- 	- 	- 
General Building 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 
Row Building 	- 	- 	- 	P 	P 	P 
Civic Building 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	- 
P = permitted    - = not permitted 
  
4.3.4. - General Regulations 
All building types must comply with general regulations of this section. 
A.  Multiple Principal Buildings on One Lot. 
Multiple principal buildings are permitted on all lots in MX districts; however, each building must comply with the applicable building type regulations. 
B.  Corner Lots 
The intersections of two build-to zones at a street corner must be occupied by building. 
C.  Refuse, Recycling, Utility, and Loading Location 
Refuse, recycling, and loading areas are allowed only in rear yards. Utility appurtenances (such as transformers and air conditioner units) may be located only in rear yards or (interior) side yards, and must be completely screened from view from the street. 
D.  Open Areas on Lot 
1.  All front yards, build-to zones, side yards, corner side yards, and rear yards not covered by buildings, parking, or driveway shall contain either landscape, patio space, or sidewalk space. 
2.  Parking areas and driveway locations are permitted in specific locations by building type. Parking is prohibited in street yards, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
3.  Parking and driveways are prohibited in build-to zones and setbacks except that when driveway access is permitted from streets, driveways may cross perpendicularly through the buildto zone or setback. Two-way driveways may not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in width. One-way driveways and residential driveways serving eight (8) or fewer units may not exceed twelve (12) feet in width. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 4.4. - BUILDING TYPE REGULATIONS 
Regulations applicable to each building type allowed in MX districts are presented on the following pages:  
4.4.2. - Storefront Building 
	Permitted Districts	
	MX-1 	MX-2 	MX-3 	References and
Additional
Requirements
A. Building Siting (Refer to Figure 4-4) 
 
Minimum Primary Frontage
Build-to Zone Coverage 	95% 	95% 	50% 	Refer to 4.5.1 
 
Front Build-to Zone 	0' to 5' 	0' to 5' 	6' to 10' 	Minimum 13 ft. streetscape area is required along street frontages; refer to 4.5.2 
 
Corner Build-to Zone 	0' to 5' 	0' to 10' 	0' to 10' 	
 
Minimum Side Yard Setback 	0'; 5' if adjacent to other building type 	
 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	5'; 40' if abutting RS or RD district 	5'; 15' if abutting RS or RD district 	5'; 40' if abutting RS or RD district 	See 9.1.5 for required landscape screening 
 
Maximum Impervious Cover
Additional Semi-Pervious Cover 	75% 
25% 	75% 
25% 	75% 
25% 	
 
Surface Parking or Accessory Parking Structure 	Rear yard only 	Rear yard only 	Rear and limited side yard only 	Limited side yard means one double-loaded aisle of parking perpendicular to the street 
 
Permitted Driveway Access Locations 	Alley; if no alley exists, 1 driveway permitted off each non-primary streets; if no alley and non-primary street abut the parcel, 1 driveway permitted off a primary street with an administrative adjustment (see Sec. 11.6) 	Shared driveways and parking is encouraged 
 
Permitted Garage Entrance Location 	Rear facade; side facade garage access requires an administrative adjustment 	Rear, side, or corner side facade 	
B. Height (Refer to Figure 4-5) 
 

 
Overall: Minimum Height
Maximum Height	2 stories 
8 stories 	1 stories 
4 stories 	1 stories 
4 stories 	Up to 2 additional stories permitted with special use approval (see Sec. 11.4); see 4.5.3 for measuring 
 
Figure 4-4. Storefront Building: Siting 
 
	Permitted Districts	
	MX-1 	MX-2 	MX-3 	References and
Additional
Requirements
 
Ground Story:
Minimum Height
Maximum Height	14' 
24' 	14' 
18' 	14' 
24' 	Measured floor to floor; more than 18' in height counts as 2 stories; see 4.5.4 for measuring 
 
Upper Stories:
Minimum Height
Maximum Height	9' 
14' 	8.5' 
12' 	9' 
14' 	
C. Uses (Refer to Figure 4-5) 
 
Primary Frontage Ground Story 	All permitted non-residential uses. 	Refer to Article 6 
 
Non-Primary Frontage, Upper Stories, Basement 	Any permitted use. 	Refer to Article 6 
 
Parking within Building 	Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of upper floors 	
 
Required Occupied Building Space 	Minimum 20' deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade; not required in basement 	Refer to Sec. 14.2 for definition of occupied building space 
D. Facade and Roof Requirements (Refer to Figure 4-6) 
 
Primary Frontage Minimum Ground Story Transparency 	75% 	70% 	65% 	Measured between 2' and 9' above adjacent walk grade; see 4.5.5 
 
Minimum Transparency Street, Courtyard, Open Space Facade 	20% 	15% 	15% 	Measured per story of all stories; see 4.5.5 
 
Blank Wall Limitations 	Required per floor on all street facades 	Refer to 4.5.5 
 
Entrance Location and Number 	Principal entrance required on primary frontage facade; entrances required a minimum of one per every 60' of building facade 	Refer to 4.7.7 for principal entryway 
 
Entryway Configuration and Elevation 	Recessed between 3' and 8', maximum 8' wide; entrances shall be within 1.5' vertically of adjacent walk elevation. 	Refer to 4.7.8 for storefront design 
 
Ground Story Vertical Facade Divisions 	One 2" deep expression line per every 30' of facade width 	
 
Horizontal Facade Divisions 	Within 3' of the top of the ground story and the bottom of the any 5th floor 	
 
Permitted Roof Types 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Refer to Section 4.6 for roof types 
 
Figure 4-5. Storefront Building: Height and Use Requirements
 
Figure 4-6. Storefront Building: Facade Design Requirements
  
4.4.3. - General Building 
	Permitted Districts	
	MX-T 	MX-R1 	MX-R2 	References and
Additional
Requirements
A. Building Siting (Refer to Figure 4-7) 
 
Minimum Primary Frontage Build-to Zone Coverage 	75% 	75% 	60% 	Refer to 4.5.1 
 
Front Build-to Zone 	5' to 10' 	5' to 10' 	10' to 20' 	Minimum 13 ft. streetscape area is required along street frontages; refem to 4.5.2 
 
Corner Build-to Zone 	0' to 10' 	0' to 10' 	5' to 15' 	
 
Minimum Side Yard Setback 	5' 	10' 	15' 	
 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	5'; 40' if abutting RS or RD district 	See 9.1.5 for required landscape screening 
 
Maximum Building Width 	None 	None 	120' 	
 
Maximum Impervious Cover Additional Semi-Pervious Cover 	70% 
25% 	70% 
20% 	65% 
20% 	
 
Surface Parking or Accessory Parking Structure 	Rear and limited side yard only 	Rear yard only 	Rear yard only 	Limited side yard means one double-loaded aisle of parking perpendicular to the street 
 
Permitted Driveway Access Locations 	Alley; if no alley exists, 1 driveway permitted off each non-primary streets; if no alley and non-primary street abut the parcel, 1 driveway permitted off a primary street with an administrative adjustment (see Sec. 11.6) 	Shared driveways and parking is encouraged 
 
Permitted Garage Entrance Location 	Rear facade; side facade garage access requires an administrative adjustment 	rear, side, or corner side facade 	
B. Height (Refer to Figure 4-8) 
 
Overall:
Minimum Height
Maximum Height 	
  
2 stories 
5 stories 	
  
2 stories 
6 stories 	
  
2 stories 
4 stories 	Up to 2 additional stories permitted with special use approval (see Sec. 11.4); see 4.5.3 for measuring 
 
Stepped Back Upper Stories 	Stories above the third shall be stepped back a minimum of 12 feet from the front facade 	
 
All Stories:
Minimum Height
Maximum Height 	9' 
14' 	8.5' 
12' 	9' 
14' 	Measured floor to floor; see 4.5.4 for measuring 
 
  
Figure 4-7. General Building: Siting
 
	Permitted Districts	References and
Additional
Requirements
	MX-1 	MX-2 	MX-3 	
C. Uses (Refer to Figure 4-8) 
 
Ground Story & Basement 	All permitted uses except commercial service, eating and drinking establishments, and retail sales are limited to no more than 50% of gross floor area of the story 	Refer to Article 6 
 
Upper Stories 	Any permitted use except commercial service, eating and drinking establishments, and retail sales 	Refer to Article 6 
 
Parking within Building 	Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of upper floors 	
 
Required Occupied Building Space 	Minimum 20' deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade; not required in basement 	Refer to Sec. 14.2 for definition of occupied building space 
D. Facade and Roof Requirements (Refer to Figure 4-9) 
 
Minimum Transparency Street, Courtyard, Open Space Facade 	15% 	15% 	15% 	Measured per story of all stories; see 4.5.5 
 
Blank Wall Limitations 	Required per floor on all street facades 	Refer to 4.5.5 
 
Entrance Location and Number 	Principal entrance required on primary frontage facade; entrances required a minimum of one per every 90' of building facade 	Refer to 4.7.7 for principal entryway 
 
Entryway Configuration and Elevation 	Entry doors shall be off a stoop, minimum 6' wide and 3' deep; entrances shall be within 30" of adjacent street sidewalk average elevation OR between 30" and 5' with visible basement (transparency required) 	Refer to 4.7.8 for storefront design 
 
Ground Story Vertical Facade Divisions 	One 2" deep expression line per every 60' of facade width 	
 
Horizontal Facade Divisions 	Within 3' of the top of the ground story, any visible basement, and the bottom of the any 5th floor 	
 
Permitted Roof Types 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Parapet, pitched; tower permitted 	Refer to Sec. 4.6 for roof types 
 
Figure 4-8. General Building: Height and Use Requirements
 
Figure 4-9. General Building: Facade Design Requirements
  
4.4.4. - Row Building 
	Permitted Districts	
	MX-T 	MX-R1 	MX-R2 	References and
Additional
Requirements
A. Building Siting (Refer to Figure 4-10) 
 
Minimum Primary Frontage Build-to Zone Coverage 	75% 	65% 	65% 	Refer to 4.5.1 
 
Front Build-to Zone 	5' to 10' 	5' to 15' 	10' to 20' 	Minimum 13 ft. streetscape area is required along street frontages; refer to 4.5.2 
 
Corner Build-to Zone 	0' to 10' 	5' to 10' 	5' to 15' 	
 
Units outside Build-to Zone 	Each unit shall have a facade located within the primary build-to zone, except 1 of every 3 units may front a courtyard, existing open space/park, or non-primary street with its principal entrance. 	
 
Minimum Side Yard Setback 	0' per unit; 10' between buildings 	0' per unit; 15' between buildings 	
 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	5'; 25' if no alley exists 	5'; 20' if no alley exists 	5'; 35' if no alley exists 	See 9.1.5 for required landscape screening 
 
Maximum Building Width 	None 	8 units per building and 180' 	6 units per building and 140' 	
 
Maximum Impervious Cover Additional Semi-Pervious Cover 	65% 
25% 	65% 
20% 	60% 
20% 		
 
Surface Parking or Accessory Garage 	Rear yard only 	Rear yard only 	Rear yard only 		
 
Permitted Driveway Access Locations 	Alley; if no alley exists, 1 driveway permitted per building off each non-primary street; if no alley and non-primary street abut the parcel, 1 driveway permitted off a primary street with an administrative adjustment (see Sec. 11.6) 	Shared driveways and parking is encouraged 	
 
Permitted Attached Garage Entrance Location 	Rear facade only; side facade garage access requires an administrative adjustmentustment 		
 
Figure 4-10. Row Building: Siting
 
	Permitted Districts	
	MX-T 	MX-R1 	MX-R2 	References and
Additional
Requirements
B. Height (Refer to Figure 4-11) 
 
Overall: Minimum Height
Maximum Height	2 stories 
3.5 stories 	2 stories 
3.5 stories 	2 stories 
3 stories 	See 4.5.3 for measuring 
 
All Stories:
Minimum Height
Maximum Height	8.5' 
12' 	9' 
14' 	9' 
14' 	Measured floor to floor; see 4.5.4 for measuring 
C. Uses (Refer to Figure 4-11) 
 
Primary Frontage Ground Story 	All permitted uses except eating and drinking establishments 	All permitted uses 	In MX-T, commercial service and retail sales are permitted when located in live-work units at street corners; refer to Article 6 
 
Non-Primary Frontage, Upper Stories, Basement 	Any permitted use except commercial service, eating and drinking establishments, and retail sales 	All permitted uses 	Refer to Article 6 
 
Parking within Building 	Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of upper floors 	
 
Required Occupied Building Space 	Minimum 20' deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade; not required in basement 	Refer to Sec. 14.2 for definition of occupied building space 
D. Facade and Roof Requirements (Refer to Figure 4-12) 
 
Minimum Transparency Street, Courtyard, Open Space Facade 	15% 	15% 	12% 	Measured per story of all stories; see 4.5.5 
 
Blank Wall Limitations 	Required per floor on all street facades 	Refer to 4.5.5 
 
Entrance Location and Number 	One entrance required per unit on the primary frontage facade, courtyard, or open space per (4) above; minimum of one principal entrance required per 30' of primary street facade 	Refer to 4.7.7 for principal entryway 
 
Entryway Configuration 	Entry doors shall be off a stoop, minimum 4' wide and 3' deep, OR a porch, minimum 8' wide and 5' deep No more than 2 entry doors may be located off each stoop or porch 	Refer to 4.7.8 for storefront design 
 
Entryway Elevation 	80% of entrances and the ground story shall be within 30" of adjacent street sidewalk average elevation OR between 30" and 5' with a visible basement (transparency required) 	
 
Permitted Roof Types 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Parapet, pitched; tower permitted 	Refer to Sec. 4.6 for roof types 
 
Figure 4-11. Row Building: Height and Use Requirements
 
Figure 4-12. Row Building: Facade Design Requirements
  
4.4.5. - Civic Building 
	Permitted Districts	References and
Additional
Requirements
	MX-1
MX-2
MX-3	MX-T
MX-R1	
A. Building Siting (Refer to Figure 4-13) 
 
Minimum Primary Frontage Build-to Zone Coverage 	None 	None 	
 
Front Setback 	5' 	10' 	Minimum 13 ft. streetscape area is required along street frontages 
 
Corner Setback 	5' 	5' 	
 
Minimum Side Yard Setback 	5' 	5' 	
 
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 	5'; 30' if abutting RS or RD district 	See 9.1.5 for required landscape screening 
 
Minimum Lot Width 	50' 	
 
Maximum Impervious Cover Additional Semi-Pervious Cover 	70% 
20% 	70% 
10% 	
 
Surface Parking or Accessory Parking Structure 	Rear yard and limited side yard only 	Limited side yard means one double-loaded aisle of parking perpendicular to the street 
 
Permitted Driveway Access Locations 	Alley; if no alley exists, 1 driveway permitted off each non-primary streets; if no alley and non-primary street abut the parcel, 1 driveway permitted off a primary street with an administrative adjustment (see Sec. 11.6) 	Shared driveways and parking is encouraged 
 
Permitted Garage Entrance Location 	Rear facade; side facade garage access requires an administrative adjustment 	
 
 
	Permitted Districts	References and
Additional
Requirements
	MX-1
MX-1
MX-3	MX-T
MX-R1	
B. Height (Refer to Figure 4-14) 
 
Overall:   Minimum Height
Maximum Height 	2 story 
8 stories in MX-1; 
4 stories in MX-2 and MX-3 	1 story 
6 stories 	Up to 2 additional stories permitted with special use approval (see Sec. 11.4); see 4.5.3 for measuring 
 
Ground Story:    Minimum Height
Maximum Height 	9' 
20' 	9' 
16' 	Measured floor to floor; more than 18' in height counts as 2 stories; see 4.5.4 for measuring 
 
All Stories:    Minimum Height
Maximum Height 	9' 
14' 	9' 
14' 	
C. Uses (Refer to Figure 4-14) 
 
All Frontages and Stories 	Only public, civic and institutional uses permitted in district 	Refer to Article 5 
 
Parking within Building 	Permitted fully in any basement and in rear of upper floors 	
 
Required Occupied Building Space 	Minimum 20' deep on all full height floors from any primary street facade; not required in basement 	
D. Facade and Roof Requirements (Refer to Figure 4-15) 
 
Minimum Transparency Street, Courtyard, Open Space Facade 	12% 	12% 	Measured per story of all stories; see 4.5.5 
 
Blank Wall Limitations 	none 	Refer to 4.5.5 
 
Entrance Location and Number 	Principal entrance required on primary frontage facade; entrances required a minimum of one per every 150' of building facade 	Refer to 4.7.7 for principal entryway 
 
Entryway Configuration and Elevation 	Entry doors shall be off a stoop, minimum 6' wide and 3' deep; entrances shall be within 30" of adjacent street sidewalk average elevation OR between 30" and 5' with visible basement (transparency required) 	Refer to 4.7.8 for storefront design 
 
Permitted Roof Types 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Parapet, pitched, flat; tower permitted 	Other roof types permitted by administrative adjustment; refer to Sec. 4.6 for roof types 
 
Figure 4-14. Civic Building: Height and Use Requirements
 
Figure 4-15. Civic Building: Facade Design Requirements
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 4.5. - Building types—Measurements 
The following explains and further defines the standards outlined on the tables on the previous pages.  
4.5.1. - Minimum primary frontage lot line coverage. 
The minimum percentage of building facade along the primary frontage of a lot is designated on each building type table. 
A.  Measurement 
The width of the principal structures (as measured within the build-to zone along the frontage edge) is divided by the length of the frontage parallel to the property line following the street. Refer to Figure 4-16. 
B.  Courtyards 
Where noted by building type, courtyards, located along the facade in the build-to zone count towards the minimum coverage. 
C.  Civic Space Type 
Open spaces per civic space type requirements are exempt from minimum primary frontage lot line coverage. 
Figure 4-16. Minimum Primary Frontage Lot Line Coverage
  
4.5.2. - Build-to Zone 
The build-to zone is designated separately for each frontage on each building type table. Refer to Figure 4-17. 
A.  Measurement 
The build-to zone for all frontages is measured from the property line parallel to the frontage, unless otherwise noted. 
B.  Minimum Streetscape Area 
When a minimum streetscape area is required, the build-to zone is measured from the edge of the required streetscape onto the site. Minimum streetscape area is measured from back of curb to property line and is intended to accommodate clear sidewalk area and either a landscape/street tree area (parkway) or a furnishings zone at storefront locations. Furnishings zone includes the sidewalk extended to the curb with tree wells or planters for street trees. 
C.  Encroachments 
Awnings, balconies, and building mounted signage may extend up to 3 foot beyond the build-to zone into any yard area, but may not extend into the street right-of-way. 
Figure 4-17. Build-to Zones
  
4.5.3. - Heights in Stories 
Refer to Figure 4-18. 
A.  Minimum Overall Height 
Minimum heights require a minimum number of stories on the primary frontage facades of the building. The building must meet the minimum required height for the first 30 feet of occupied building space measured from the primary frontage facade into the building. 
B.  Maximum Overall Height 
Maximum heights are specified both in number of stories and overall dimension. This requirement applies to the entire building. 
1.  Towers. Where noted, towers may exceed the overall maximum height per Subsection .4.6.5. 
2.  Cap type. Where noted, certain cap types may allow additional height. 
C.  Two Half Stories 
A building incorporating both a half story within the roof and a visible basement shall count the height of the two half stories as one full story. 
Figure 4-18. Measuring Stories with Floor-to-Floor Height
  
4.5.4. - Minimum and Maximum Height Per Story 
Each story is measured with a range of permitted floor-to-floor heights. Refer to Figure 4-18. 
A.  Measurement 
Floor height is measured in feet between the floor of a story to the floor of the story above it. Minimum and maximum floor-to-floor heights are required to be met on floors along facades, a minimum of eighty (80) percent of each story. 
B.  Single Story Buildings and Top Floor Measurement 
For single story buildings and the uppermost story of a multiple story building, floor-to-floor height shall be one foot less than noted per building type and measured from the floor of the story to the ceiling. 
C.  Mezzanines 
Mezzanines may be included within the floor-to-floor height of any story, included in the calculation of stories. Mezzanines occupying more than 30 percent of the floor area below and extending above the story's allowable floor-to-floor height shall count as an additional story, including articulation of the story. 
D.  Taller Spaces 
Spaces exceeding the allowable floor-to-floor heights of the building are not permitted on primary frontage facades. These spaces are unlimited on interior lots and non-primary frontage facades, but shall be counted as the number of stories that would fit within their height.  
4.5.5. - Minimum Required Transparency 
Per the requirements of each building type, a minimum amount of transparency is required on all stories of all facades. 
A.  Measurement 
Minimum facade transparency is measured from floor-to-floor of each story separately. Refer to Figure 4-19. Transparency includes windows and any glass in doors that is highly transparent with low reflectance. The measurement may include the frame, mullions, and muntins, but shall not include trim or casing. 
B.  Blank Wall Segments 
No more than a 15-foot wide section, measured horizontally, and no more than 30 percent of any story shall be without transparency. 
1.  Exception. When a facade of any story is located within three (3) feet of a parallel building facade, no minimum transparency is required for that story. 
C.  Minimum Ground Story Transparency 
When required by the building type, ground story transparency shall be measured between two (2) feet and either eight (8) or ten (10) feet, as noted, from the average grade at the base of the facade. Minimum ground story transparency supersedes the overall minimum transparency required for the building type. 
D.  Tall Stories 
Stories that are eighteen (18) feet or taller in height shall be counted as two (2) stories for the purpose of calculating minimum facade transparency, with each horizontal half of the story calculated separately. 
E.  Half Stories 
All half stories located within roof structure and visible basements are required to meet the minimum transparency. 
Figure 4-19. Measuring Minimum Facade Transparency
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 4.6. - Roof Types 
Roof type standards apply to all building types. Refer to each building type table for permitted roof types.  
4.6.1. - General 
The following provisions apply to all roof types. 
A.  One type required. All buildings shall meet the requirements of at least one of the roof types permitted for the building type. 
B.  Measuring height. Refer to 4.5.4 for information on measuring building height. 
C.  Other roof types. Other building caps not listed as a specific type may be requested with the following requirements: 
1.  The roof type shall not create additional occupiable space beyond that permitted by the building type. 
2.  The shape of the Roof Type shall be significantly different from those defined in this section 25.2H Roof Types, i.e. a dome, spire, vault. 
3.  The building shall warrant a separate status within the community from the fabric of surrounding buildings, with a correspondence between the form of the roof type and the meaning of the building use.  
4.6.2. - Parapet Roof 
A parapet is a low wall projecting above a building's roof along the perimeter of the building. It can be utilized with a flat or low pitched roof and also serves to limit the view of roof-top mechanical systems from the street (refer to Figure 4-10). 
A.  Height is measured from the top of the upper story to the top of the parapet. 
B.  Minimum height is two (2) feet with a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
C.  The parapet shall be high enough to screen the roof and any roof appurtenances from view of the street(s). 
a.  Horizontal expression lines. An expression line shall define the parapet from the upper stories of the building and shall also define the top of the cap. 
b.  Occupied space. Occupied space shall not be incorporated behind this roof type. 
Figure 4-20. Parapet Roof Type
  
4.6.3. - Pitched Roof 
Pitched roofs are sloped. Slope is measured as the vertical rise divided by the horizontal run (refer to Figure 4-21). 
A.  The roof may not be sloped less than a 4:12 (rise:run) or more than 16:12, except that slopes of less than 4:12 are permitted on second story or higher roofs. Refer to Figure 4-21. 
B.  Configurations. 
1.  Hipped, gabled, and combination of hips and gables with or without dormers are permitted. 
2.  Butterfly roofs (inverted gable roof) are permitted with a maximum height of eight feet, inclusive of overhang. 
3.  Gambrel and mansard roofs are not permitted. 
C.  Parallel Ridge Line. A gabled end or perpendicular ridge line shall occur at least every 100 feet of roof when the ridge line runs parallel to the front lot line. (Refer to Figure 4-22). 
D.  Roof Height. Roofs without occupied space and/or dormers shall have a maximum height on street-facing facades equal to the maximum floor height permitted for the building type. 
E.  Occupied Space. Occupied space may be incorporated behind this roof type. 
Figure 4-21. Pitched Roof
 
Figure 4-22. Parallel Ridge Line
  
4.6.4. - Flat Roof 
This flat roof is flat with overhanging eaves (refer to Figure 4-24). 
A.  Configuration. Roofs with no visible slope are acceptable. Eaves are recommended on all street facing facades. 
B.  Eave depth. Eave depth is measured from the building facade to the outside edge of the eave. Eaves shall have a depth of at least fourteen (14) inches. 
C.  Eave thickness. Eave thickness is measured at the outside edge of the eave, from the bottom of the eave to the top of the eave. Eaves shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches thick. 
D.  Interrupting vertical walls. Vertical walls may interrupt the eave and extend above the top of the eave with no discernible cap. 
1.  No more than one-half of the front facade can consist of an interrupting vertical wall. 
2.  Vertical walls shall extend no more than four (4) feet above the top of the eave. 
E.  Occupied space. Occupied space shall not be incorporated behind this roof type. 
Figure 4-24. Flat Roof
  
4.6.5. - Towers 
A tower is a rectilinear or cylindrical, vertical element, that shall be used with other roof types (refer to Figure 4-23) 
A.  Quantity. All building types, with the exception of the Civic Building, are limited to one tower per building. 
B.  Tower Height. Maximum height, measured from the top of the parapet or eave to the top of the tower, is the equivalent of the height of one upper floor of the building to which the tower is applied. 
C.  Tower Width. Maximum width along all facades is one-third the width of the front facade or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Horizontal Expression Lines. An expression line shall define the tower from the upper stories, except on single family or attached house residential building types. 
E.  Occupied Space. Towers may be occupied by the same uses allowed in upper stories of the building type to which it is applied. 
F.  Application. May be combined with all other roof types. 
G.  Tower Cap. The tower may be capped by the parapet, pitched, low pitched, or flat roof roof types, or the spire may cap the tower. 
Figure 4-23. Tower
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 4.7. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
The following outlines the district design requirements that affect a building's appearance and district cohesiveness. They improve the physical quality of buildings, enhance the pedestrian experience, and protect the character of the neighborhood.  
4.7.1. - Materials and Color 
A.  Primary Facade Materials. Eighty (80) percent of each facade shall be constructed of primary materials. For facades over one hundred (100) square feet, more than one material shall be used to meet the eighty (80) percent requirement. 
Permitted primary building materials include high quality, durable, natural materials, such as stone, brick; wood lap siding; fiber cement board lapped, shingled, or panel siding; glass. Other high quality synthetic materials may be approved during the site plan process with an approved sample and examples of successful, high quality local installations. Refer to Figure 4-25). 
Figure 4-25. Primary Materials
 
B.  Secondary Facade Materials. Secondary materials are limited to details and accents and include gypsum reinforced fiber concrete for trim and cornice elements; metal for beams, lintels, trim, and ornamentation, and exterior architectural metal panels and cladding. Exterior Insulation and Finishing Systems (EIFS) is permitted for trim only or on upper floor facades only. 
C.  Roof Materials. Acceptable roof materials include three hundred (300) pound or better, dimensional asphalt composite shingles, wood shingles and shakes, metal tiles or standing seam, slate, and ceramic tile. "Engineered" wood or slate may be approved during the site plan process with an approved sample and examples of successful, high quality local installations. Figure 4-26). 
Figure 4-26. Roof Materials
 
D.  Color. Main building colors shall utilize any historic palettes from any major paint manufacturer. Other colors may be utilized for details and accents, not to exceed a total area larger than ten (10) percent of the facade surface area. 
E.  Appropriate Grade of Materials. Commercial quality doors, windows, and hardware shall be used on all building types with the exception of the Row Building and the Yard Building. Refer to Figure 4-27). 
Figure 4-27. Doors and Windows
  
4.7.2. - Windows, Awnings, and Shutters 
A.  Windows. All upper story windows on all historic, residential, and mixed use buildings shall be recessed, double hung. Percent of transparency is required per building type. Horizontal or vertical strip windows, tinted or reflective glass, and glass block (refer to Figure 4-28) are prohibited within MX districts. 
B.  Security Grills. Grills shall be fully retractable and completely within the interior of the building and inconspicuous to the extent possible. Exterior bars are prohibited on any window. Refer to Figure 4-29. 
C.  Awnings. All awnings shall be canvas or metal. Plastic awnings and canopy awnings that extend from the front facade into the right-of-way are prohibited. Awning types and colors for each building face shall be coordinated. Refer to Figure 4-31. 
D.  Shutters. If installed, shutters, whether functional or not, shall be sized for the windows. If closed, the shutters shall not be too small for complete coverage of the window. Shutters shall be wood. "Engineered" wood may be approved during the site plan process with an approved sample and examples of successful, high quality local installations. 
Figure 4-28. Windows
 
Figure 4-29. Security Grills
 
Figure 4-30 Balconies Integrate to Facade
   
4.7.3. - Balconies 
The following applies in all locations where balconies are incorporated into the facade design facing any street or parking lot. Refer to Figure 4-30. 
A.  Size. Balconies shall be a minimum of six (6) feet deep and five (5) feet wide. 
B.  Connection to Building. Balconies shall be integral to the facade at the street line. Balconies on stepped back stories shall be independently secured and unconnected to other balconies. 
C.  Facade Coverage. A maximum of forty (40) percent of the front and corner side facades, as calculated separately, may be covered with balconies, including street-facing railing and balcony structure.  
4.7.4. - Treatments at Terminal Vistas 
Refer to Figure 4-33. When a street terminates at a parcel, the parcel shall be occupied by one of the following: 
A.  If the parcel is open space, any Civic Space Type with the exception of the Pocket Park shall be utilized and a vertical element shall terminate the view. Acceptable vertical elements include a stand or grid of trees, a sculpture, or a fountain. 
B.  If the parcel is not utilized as an Civic Space Type, the front or corner side of a building, whether fronting a Primary Street or not, shall terminate the view. The building shall incorporate one of the following treatments to terminate the view: a tower, a bay, or a courtyard. Refer to Figure 4-33 for one illustration of this requirement.  
4.7.5. - Building Variety 
uilding design shall vary between vertical facade divisions, where required per the building types, and from adjacent buildings by the type of dominant material or color, scale, or orientation of that material and at least two of the following. Refer to Figure 4-32 for one illustration of this requirement. 
A.  The proportion of recesses and projections. 
B.  The location of the entrance and window placement, unless storefronts are utilized. 
C.  Roof type, plane, or material, unless otherwise stated in the building type requirements. 
Figure 4-32. Terminal Vista
   
4.7.6. - Building Lighting 
A.  Exterior lighting should serve only to illuminate entries, signage, adjacent pedestrian areas and displays, or to highlight significant architectural features above the first floor. 
B.  Traditional light fixtures and/or appropriately scaled contemporary light fixtures should be used. Fixture color should be muted, and should coordinate with the overall facade and signage color scheme. 
C.  Security lighting should be concealed to the extent practical.  
4.7.7. - Principal Entryway 
Principal entrances to buildings or units shall be clearly delineated through one or more of the following (refer to Figure 4-34): 
A.  Cap or canopy. The entryway shall be covered by a cap or canopy differentiating it from the overall building cap. 
B.  Sidelights and transom. Sidelights and/or transom windows shall be included around the entryway. 
C.  Extended articulation. The entryway shall be included in a separate bay of the building extended up at least two stories. 
D.  Other design options. The Village Manager may approve different design options that add emphasis and draw attention to the entryway through a minor exception during design review. 
Figure 4-34. Examples of Defined Principal Entryway
  
4.7.8. - Storefront Design 
Refer to Figure 4-35. A storefront is the ground story facade of a building that includes a large window area for display and entranceway into the building, usually associated with retail sales, eating and drinking establishments, and commercial service uses. 
A.  Amount of Glass. Storefront glass quantity is required by building type. 
B.  Clear Windows. Windows shall be unobstructed during the daytime and evening hours. Either displays or occupied space shall be located inside the building, viewable from outside the window. 
C.  Transom Windows. Transom windows above doors and above storefront windows are encouraged. 
D.  Bulkhead. A bulkhead, minimum height of twelve (12) inches and maximum height of thirty (30) inches is required. The bulkhead may be constructed of wood, metal, concrete, or masonry. Concrete masonry units may not be exposed. 
E.  Sign Band. A wall sign band or location, minimum eighteen (18) inches in height, is required to be designed into the facade. 
Figure 4-35. Storefront Design
  
4.7.9. - Arcade Design 
Refer to Figure 4-36. An arcade is a covered pedestrian walkway within the recess of a ground story. 
A.  An open-air public walkway is permitted from the face of the building recessed into the building a minimum of eight (8) and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet. 
B.  Build-to Zone. When the arcade is utilized, the outside face of the arcade shall be considered the front facade, located within the required build-to zone. 
C.  Column Spacing. Columns shall be spaced between 10 feet and 12 feet on center. 
D.  Column Width. Columns shall be a minimum of 1'-8" and a maximum 2'-4" in width. 
E.  Arcade Opening. Opening shall not be flush with interior arcade ceiling and may be arched or straight. 
F.  Horizontal Facade Division. Horizontally define the ground story facade from the upper stories. 
G.  Visible Basement. A visible basement is not permitted. 
Figure 4-36. Arcade Design
  
4.7.10. - Fuel Stations and Car Washes 
Fueling stations and car washes require a special use permit (refer to Article IX) and shall meet the following. Refer to Figure 4-37 for one illustration of a compliant Fuel Station. 
A.  Location of Pumps. Any fueling pumps shall be located in the rear or interior side yard. 
B.  Convenience Store/Building. A building on the premises of a fueling station shall be located in the build-to zone and shall occupy any corner. The building shall fulfill all requirements of the building type with the exception of the Minimum Primary Build-to Zone Coverage and the Minimum Height Requirement. 
C.  Car Wash Facility. Any car wash facility shall be located in the rear of the lot. Vehicle entrance doors may be located on the rear facade, non-primary street facade, or an interior facade not visible from the primary street. Vehicular entrances are prohibited on the primary street facade, unless otherwise approved through a minor design exception. 
D.  Additional Drive Entrance. One driveway entrance, in addition to the driveways permitted by building type, is permitted on the lot, maximum width 22 feet. With a minor design exception, the driveway may be located on the primary street. 
Figure 4-37. Example of Fuel Station
  
4.7.11. - Drive-Through Structures 
Refer to Figure 4-38 for one illustration of the following requirements. 
A.  Structure/Canopy. Drive-through structures or canopies shall be located on the rear facade of the building or in the rear of the lot behind the building, where permitted by use. The structure shall not be visible from any Primary Street. 
B.  Stacking Lanes. Stacking lanes shall be located perpendicular to the Primary Street or behind the building. 
C.  The canopy and structure shall be constructed of the same materials utilized on the building. 
Figure 4-38. Drive-Through Facility Layout
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 4.8. - STREETSCAPE GUIDELINES 
The following guidelines apply to all streets adjacent to MX districts with the intent of creating pedestrian oriented, multimodal streets.  
4.8.1. - Typical Street Elements 
All street rights-of-way should include the following vehicular and pedestrian realm considerations. Each street type detailed in this article outlines which facilities are applicable. Refer to Figure 4-39. 
A.  Vehicular Realm. The vehicular realm is comprised of the travel lanes, bicycle lanes, and parking lanes. 
1.  Refer to Public Works requirements for all lane widths. 
2.  Refer to this section for additional information on on-street parking and bicycle facilities. 
B.  Pedestrian Realm. The pedestrian realm is comprised of pedestrian facilities, such as sidewalk. A buffer area that serves to buffer pedestrians or bicyclists from the movements of higher speed vehicles in the vehicular realm shall consist of one of the following: 
1.  Landscape Zone. A landscape area between the back of curb to the sidewalk in which street trees, stormwater swales, lighting, and signage may be located. Typically used adjacent to residential ground floor uses. 
2.  Furnishings Zone. A hardscape area that extends from the sidewalk to the back of curb, in which street trees, street furniture, lighting, and signage may be located. Typically used adjacent to commercial or office ground floor uses. 
Figure 4-39. Typical Right-of-Way Elements
 
C.  Bicycle Facilities. Bicycle facilities should be included on any streets based on the Village's bicycle plan. The following types of bicycle accommodations are appropriate in the vehicular realm. Refer to Figure 4-40. 
1.  Dedicated Bicycle Lane. Dedicated bicycle lanes are striped lanes on the outside of the outermost travel lanes that are designated for only bicycle use. This lane occurs on both sides of the street and shall be four (4) to five (5) feet wide. 
2.  Designated Shared Lane. A designated shared lane is a lane that is shared between vehicles and bicycles. This lane is typically wider than a standard vehicular lane, minimum thirteen (13) feet, in order to accommodate both types of users, and includes a painted bicycle marker combined with a double arrow (known as a "sharrow"). This improvement occurs in both directions. 
3.  Shared Lane. A shared lane refers to a street that does not have bicycle lanes or a designated shared lane, but the speed and configuration of the street is such that bicycles could comfortably share lanes with traffic. 
D.  On-Street Parking. On-street parking should be included on both sides of all streets. Parallel, back-in diagonal, or head-in diagonal are the most appropriate types. 
E.  Parkway Trees. Street trees are required along all street frontages. Street trees shall be located in either a Landscape Zone (within a planting bed or lawn) or a Furnishings Zone (in trees wells with grate as required). 
1.  For each tree preserved or planted, a minimum amount of permeable surface area is recommended, unless otherwise stated in this article. 
2.  Preserved trees should have a permeable surface area equal to the critical root zone. The critical root zone is equal to half of the radius of the tree's mature canopy, measured from the trunk out to the dripline. 
3.  Planted trees have a suggested minimum permeable area and soil volume based upon tree size; refer to Table 4-3 for details. 
4.  Permeable area for one tree cannot count toward that of another tree. 
5.  When the critical root zone of an existing tree or the suggested permeable surface area requirement of a newly planted tree extends below any pavement, structural soil is required underneath the pavement. 
Figure 4-40. On-Street Bicycle Facilities
 
Table 4-3: Minimum Recommended Soil Volumes and
Permeable Area per Planted Tree 
Tree Size Type 	Soil Volume (cubic ft) 	Soil Surface Area (sq ft) with 2.5' Soil Depth 	Permeable Surface Area Requirement 
(sq ft) 
Medium 	2,852 	1141 (approx. 34' x 34') 	225 (15' x 15') 
Large 	6,532 	2681 (approx. 50' x 50') 	400 (20' x 20') 
  
4.8.2. - Street Configurations 
The following street configurations are provided to assist in the redesign or repaving of Ardmore Avenue to better serve the MX-1 district. 
A.  Ardmore Avenue, ninety-seven (97) feet right-of-way. The following alternatives are suggested for Ardmore Avenue north of the Metra Tracks with a ninety-seven (97) feet wide right-of-way. 
1.  Alternative 1. (Refer to Figure 4-41). This alternative provides new on-street parking with 60° angled parking on the east side and parallel parking on the west side. Two travel lanes are provided and a left turn lane is permitted at intersections. Parkways with trees buffer pedestrians on the sidewalks. 
2.  Alternative 2. (Refer to Figure 4-42). This alternative provides new on-street parallel parking on both sides of the street with two travel lanes. Parkways with trees buffer pedestrians on sidewalks. 
3.  Alternative 3. (Refer to Figure 4-43). This alternative provides new on-street parallel parking on both sides of the street with two travel lanes. Parkway with a furnishings zone buffers pedestrians on the west side of the street. On the east side, a large parkway of permeable pavers over a parkway tree structural soil system improves stormwater infiltration and tree health. 
B.  Ardmore Avenue, sixty-two (62) feet right-of-way. The following alternatives are suggested for Ardmore Avenue south of the Metra Tracks with a sixty-two (62) feet wide right-of-way. 
1.  Alternative 1. (Refer to Figure 4-44). This alternative provides new on-street parallel parking on both sides of the street with two travel lanes for traffic. Parkways with parkway trees buffer pedestrians on sidewalks. 
2.  Alternative 2. (Refer to Figure 4-45). This alternative provides one side of new on-street parallel parking. Two (2) shared travel lanes are wide enough for cars and bicycles. 
Ardmore Avenue 97' ROW—Alternative 1 
Location 	North of Metra Tracks 
Typical ROW Width 	97' 
Vehicular Realm 
Travel Lanes 	2 travel lanes 
Lane Width 	11-14 feet 
Allowable Turn Lanes 	Left permitted in place of parking at intersections 
Parking Lanes 	Parallel required on west side of street. 
60° angle required on east side of street 
Pavement Width 	51 feet 
Bicycle Facilities 	Not applicable 
Pedestrian Realm 
Pedestrian Facilities 	Minimum 8-foot sidewalk both sides 
Street Buffer 	Minimum 12 feet wide Parkway 
 
  
Figure 4-41. Ardmore avenue 97' ROW - Alternative 1 
Figure 4-41. Ardmore Avenue 97' ROW - Alternative 1
 
Ardmore Avenue 97' ROW—Alternative 2 
Location 	North of Metra Tracks 
Typical ROW Width 	97' 
Vehicular Realm 
Travel Lanes 	2 travel lanes 
Lane Width 	12 feet 
Allowable Turn Lanes 	Not applicable 
Parking Lanes 	Parallel required on both sides of street. 
Pavement Width 	40 feet 
Bicycle Facilities 	Not applicable 
Pedestrian Realm 
Pedestrian Facilities 	Minimum 8-foot sidewalk both sides 
Street Buffer 	Minimum 10 feet wide Parkway 
 
  
Figure 4-42. Ardmore avenue 97' ROW - Alternative 2 
 
Ardmore Avenue 97' ROW—Alternative 3 
Location 	North of Metra Tracks 
Typical ROW Width 	97' 
Vehicular Realm 
Travel Lanes 	2 travel lanes 
Lane Width 	12 feet 
Allowable Turn Lanes 	Not applicable 
Parking Lanes 	Parallel required on both sides of street. 
Pavement Width 	40 feet 
Bicycle Facilities 	Not applicable 
Pedestrian Realm 
Pedestrian Facilities 	Minimum 5-foot sidewalk both sides 
Street Buffer 	Minimum 10 feet parkway or furnishings zone on west side of street Minimum 16' permeable pavers on parkway tree structural soil system. 
 
  
Figure 4-43. Ardmore avenue 97' ROW - Alternative 3 
 
Ardmore Avenue 62' ROW—Alternative 1 
Location 	South of Metra Tracks 
Typical ROW Width 	62' 
Vehicular Realm 
Travel Lanes 	2 travel lanes 
Lane Width 	11 feet 
Allowable Turn Lanes 	Not applicable 
Parking Lanes 	Parallel required both sides of street. 
Pavement Width 	38 feet 
Bicycle Facilities 	Not applicable 
Pedestrian Realm 
Pedestrian Facilities 	Minimum 5-foot sidewalk both sides 
Street Buffer 	Minimum 7-foot parkway both sides 
 
  
Figure 4-44. Ardmore avenue 62' ROW - Alternative 1 
 
Ardmore Avenue 62' ROW - Alternative 2 
Location 	South of Metra Tracks 
Typical ROW Width 	62' 
Vehicular Realm 
Travel Lanes 	2 shared travel lanes 
Lane Width 	14 feet 
Allowable Turn Lanes 	Not applicable 
Parking Lanes 	Parallel required on one side of street 
Pavement Width 	36 feet 
Bicycle Facilities 	1 shared lane in each direction 
Pedestrian Realm 
Pedestrian Facilities 	Minimum 5-foot sidewalk both sides 
Street Buffer 	Minimum 9-foot parkway both sides 
 
  
Figure 4-45. Ardmore avenue 62' ROW - Alternative 2 
  
ARTICLE 5. - OVERLAY AND SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
 
SEC. 5.1. - PUD DISTRICT  
5.1.1. - Purpose and Intent 
A.  General Purpose 
The PUD, Planned Unit Development Overlay district is intended to accommodate development that: 
1.  Is consistent with the village comprehensive plan; 
2.  That may be difficult if not impossible to carry out under otherwise applicable zoning district standards; and 
3.  Result in public benefits that are at least commensurate with the degree of development flexibility provided. 
B.  Objectives 
Different types of PUDs will promote different planning goals. In general, however, PUDs are intended to promote one or more of the following objectives: 
1.  Implementation of and consistency with the comprehensive plan and other relevant plans and policies; 
2.  Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social, economic and market conditions allowing greater public benefits than could be achieved using conventional zoning and development regulations; 
3.  Efficient and economical provision of public facilities and services; 
4.  Variety in housing types and sizes to accommodate households of differing ages, sizes, incomes and lifestyle choices; 
5.  Compact, mixed-use development patterns where residential, commercial, civic and open spaces are located in close proximity to one another; 
6.  A coordinated transportation system that includes an inter-connected hierarchy of facilities for motorized and non-motorized travel; 
7.  High-quality buildings and improvements that are compatible with surrounding areas, as determined by their arrangement, massing, form, character and landscaping; 
8.  The protection and enhancement of open space amenities and natural resource features; 
9.  The incorporation of sustainable development features including green infrastructure practices in landscapes and parking area, to maximize the aesthetic and flood protection and water quality benefits of best practices in stormwater management; and 
10.  Attractive, high-quality landscaping, lighting, architecture and signage, including the use of native landscaping that reflects the unique character of the village.  
5.1.2. - Procedure 
PUDs must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures of section 11.3.  
5.1.3. - Zoning Map 
Approved PUD overlays must be identified on the zoning map by appending the map symbol "PUD" as a suffix to the base zoning district map symbol, as in "RM-9/PUD."  
5.1.4. - Developer's Statement of Intent 
Each PUD application must include a written explanation from the applicant describing how the proposed development provides greater benefits to the village than would a development carried out in accordance with otherwise applicable zoning ordinance standards. The statement must also include a comparison of the proposed development with the standards of the base zoning district and the comprehensive plan.  
5.1.5. - Regulations Eligible for Modification 
Unless otherwise expressly approved by the village board as part of the PUD approval process, PUDs are subject to all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to recommend and the village board is authorized to approve PUDs that deviate from strict compliance with specified zoning regulations and development standards if they determine that the resulting project satisfies the PUD approval criteria of section 11.4.8.  
5.1.6. - Lot and Building Regulations 
The lot and building regulations of the base zoning district may be modified as part of the PUD approval.  
5.1.7. - Allowed Uses 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the village board may, through the PUD approval process, approve use types that are not allowed in the underlying zoning district as a means of accommodating mixeduse developments, housing diversity, economic development opportunities and promoting other village policies.  
5.1.8. - Parking and Loading 
Off-street parking and loading requirements may be modified when the village board determines that modified requirements are in keeping with projected parking and loading demand of the proposed development, that other means of meeting access demand will be provided or that the requested modifications will better meet the purpose of the PUD overlay.  
5.1.9. - Infrastructure and Public Improvement Standards 
Alternatives to otherwise "standard" infrastructure and public improvement standards (e.g., streets, sidewalks, stormwater management) may be approved when the village board determines that such alternative designs would better meet the purpose of the PUD overlay. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 5.2. - PI, PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS  
5.2.1. - Mapping 
The PI, Public and Institutional zoning district designations may be applied regardless of ownership of the land on which the use is located. PI zoning is intended to identify the public or institutional use of the subject property, not necessarily the ownership or control of the property.  
5.2.2. - PI-1, Neighborhood-scale Institutional and Public district 
A.  Purpose 
The P1-1, Neighborhood-scale Institutional and Public district is intended to accommodate smallscale, low-intensity public, civic, and institutional uses that are commonly found in or near residential neighborhoods. 
B.  Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted as of right in the PI-1 district: 
1.  Natural resources preservation 
2.  Parks and recreation 
3.  Religious assembly 
4.  Safety service 
5.  Utilities and public service facility, minor 
C.  Special Uses 
The following uses are allowed in the PI-1 district if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use procedures of section 11.4: 
1.  Cemetery 
2.  Community center 
3.  Library 
4.  Fraternal organization 
5.  Governmental facility 
6.  Museum or cultural facility 
7.  School 
8.  Utilities and public service facility, major 
D.  Lot and Building Regulations 
1.  Maximum District Area 
In order to maintain the intended neighborhood-scale character of the PI-1 district, the maximum contiguous PI-1 zoned area may not exceed three (3) acres. 
2.  Lot and Building Regulations 
a.  For uses permitted as of right, the size, location, and design of all buildings, structures, activity areas and other site improvements must comply with the lot and building regulations of the most restrictive abutting zoning district, except that no minimum lot area, minimum lot width or street frontage requirements apply in an PI-1 district. 
b.  For uses requiring special use approval, the size, location, and design of all buildings, structures, activity areas and other site improvements must comply with the lot and building regulations of the most restrictive abutting zoning district, provided that no minimum lot area, minimum lot width or street frontage requirements apply in an PI-1 district and provided further that the decision-making body may establish more restrictive or less restrictive lot and building regulations at the time of special use approval. 
3.  Other Regulations 
Development in an PI-1 district is subject to all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance, including parking, landscaping, sign and other regulations of general applicability.  
5.2.3. - PI-2, Campus-scale Institutional and Public District 
The PI-2, Campus-scale Institutional and Public district is intended to accommodate development and expansion of large public, civic and institutional uses, while minimizing the potential for adverse impacts on surrounding areas. 
A.  Allowed uses 
All of the public, civic and institutional use types described in section 6.3 are permitted as of right in PI-2 districts. Additional uses may be approved in the PI-2 district only if expressly approved as part of an institutional master plan. Multiple principal uses and buildings are allowed on a single lot in the PI-2 district. 
B.  Development Review 
1.  Applicability 
Unless otherwise expressly exempted, development review and approval is required before the issuance of any building or development permit in the PI-2 district. To comply with the development review requirements of this section, applicants have the option of: 
a.  Securing special use approval for all proposed buildings development activities in the PI-2 district; or 
b.  Submitting and securing approval of an overall institutional master plan in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
2.  Exemptions 
The following are exempt from the development review requirements of this section: 
a.  Development that complies with a valid, approved institutional master plan; 
b.  Interior building alterations if the alteration will not result in an increase in the number of employees or the creation of or need for additional parking spaces; and 
c.  Exterior building modifications that will not result in an increase in the number of employees or the creation of or need for additional parking spaces 
C.  Lot and Building Regulations 
1.  Transitional Areas 
The size, location, and design of all buildings, structures, activity areas and other site improvements located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the boundary of any abutting R zoning district, are subject to the abutting R district's lot and building regulations, except that no minimum lot area, minimum lot width or street frontage requirements apply in the PI-2 district. 
2.  Interior Site Areas 
Areas of an PI-2-zoned site located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the boundary of an abutting R zoning district are governed by the regulations approved at the time of special use or institutional master plan approval, whichever is applicable. Institutional master plans and special use applications must include the applicant's detailed description of the regulations proposed to be used. 
D.  Institutional Master Plans 
1.  Purpose 
Institutional master plan requirements provide a framework for development of large public, civic and institutional uses in campus-like settings. Approval of an institutional master plan is intended to protect the character and integrity of adjacent areas while allowing flexibility in site development and design that is not possible when development occurs on a lot-by-lot or building-by-building basis. 
2.  Planning Area 
An institutional master plan must include all land located within the proposed PI-2 district and depict all land uses within the area extending out at least three hundred (300) feet from the PI-2 district boundary. 
3.  Existing Property and Uses 
The institutional master plan must include a description of land, buildings, and other structures occupied by the institution as of the date of submission of the institutional master plan. At a minimum, the following information shall be required: 
a.  Illustrative site plans showing the footprints of each building and structure, together with roads, sidewalks, parking, landscape features and other significant site improvements; 
b.  Land and building uses; 
c.  Gross floor area; 
d.  Building height; 
e.  Landscaping and lighting; and 
f.  Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
4.  Uses and Development Envelope. 
The institutional master plan must include a description of all proposed land uses to be allowed and the land area and development envelope within which future development will occur. The development envelope shall be described in narrative and through the use of drawings or models. The plan must include the following in describing the development envelope: 
a.  Floor area ratio (FAR); 
b.  Average daily and peak-hour traffic; 
c.  Height; 
d.  Setbacks; 
e.  Total site area of open space; and 
f.  Total number of motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces to be provided. 
5.  Transportation Plan 
The institutional master plan must include a study that identifies traffic and parking impacts associated with the proposed use and a plan for mitigation of transportation-related impacts, including consideration of motorized and nonmotorized travel. 
E.  Approval Procedures 
Institutional master plans require review and approval in accordance with the PUD procedures of section 11.3. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 6. - USES 
 
SEC. 6.1. - TABLE OF ALLOWED USES  
6.1.1. - Use Table 
Principal uses are allowed in in accordance with Table 6-1. 
A.  Uses identified with a "?" are permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district. 
B.  Uses identified with a "?" are permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district only when located above the ground floor. 
C.  Uses identified with an "?" may be allowed in the subject zoning district only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use procedures of Sec. 11.4. 
D.  Uses identified with an "-" are prohibited, as are uses that are not listed in the table. 
E.  The "supplemental regulations" column includes a cross-reference to additional regulations that apply to some uses. Compliance with supplemental regulations is required for permitted and special uses unless otherwise expressly stated. 
F.  Allowed accessory uses and structures, such as sheds, detached garages and home occupations, are not identified in Table 6-1. Customary accessory uses are are allowed in accordance with all applicable accessory use and structure regulations of Sec. 6.10.  
6.1.2. - Use Categories 
This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses into 8 major groupings. These major groupings are referred to as "use categories." The use categories are as follows: 
1.  Residential. See Sec. 6.2. 
2.  Public, Civic and Institutional. See Sec. 6.3. 
3.  Commercial. See Sec. 6.4. 
4.  Wholesale, Distribution and Storage. See Sec. 6.5. 
5.  Industrial. See Sec. 6.6. 
6.  Recycling. See 6.6.7. 
7.  Agricultural. See Sec. 6.7. 
8.  Other. See Sec. 6.8.  
6.1.3. - Use Subcategories 
Each use category is further divided into more specific "subcategories." Use subcategories classify principal land uses and activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions. 
A.  Specific Use Types 
Some use subcategories are further broken down to identify specific types of uses that are regulated differently than the subcategory as a whole. 
B.  Determination of Use Categories and Subcategories 
1.  The community development director is authorized to classify uses on the basis of the use category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions of this article. When a use cannot be reasonably classified into a use category, subcategory or specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most appropriate use category, subcategory or specific use type based on the actual or projected characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions provided in this section. In making such determinations, the community development director must consider: 
a.  The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the use; 
b.  The types of equipment and processes to be used; 
c.  The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or employees; 
d.  Parking demands associated with the use; and 
e.  Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination. 
2.  If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director must categorize the use in the category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the most exact, narrowest and appropriate "fit." 
3.  If the community development director is unable to determine the appropriate use category for a proposed use, the community development director is authorized to classify the use as a prohibited use and deny permits and certificates for establishment of the proposed use. This decision may be appealed in accordance with Sec. 11.7. 
Table 6-1: Use Table 
USE CATEGORY 	Zoning District 	Regulations
(Sec.) 
Subcategory 
  
Specific Use Type 	RS-10 	RS-7.5 	RD-7.5 	RM-9 	O-R 	C-1 	C-2 	C-3 	MX-1 	MX-2 	MX-3 	MX-T 	MX-R 	M-1 	M-2 	
RESIDENTIAL 																
Household Living 	6.2.1 
One household per lot 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	
Two households per lot 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	
Three or more households per lot 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	
Group Living 
Group home, small (8-persons or less) 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	6.2.2.A 
Group home, large (9 or more persons) 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	
Nursing home 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	
Sheltered Care 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL 																
Cemetery 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
College or University 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Community Center 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Fraternal Organization 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Governmental Facility 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Hospital 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Library 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Museum or Cultural Facility 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Natural Resource Preservation 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Parks and Recreation 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Religious Assembly 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Safety Service 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
School 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Utilities and Public Service Facility 
Minor 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Major 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
COMMERCIAL 																
Animal Service 
Boarding or shelter 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	6.4.1.B 
Grooming 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Veterinary care 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Assembly and Entertainment 
(except the following) 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Dance hall 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Off-track betting 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Paintball, billiards center, video game arcade 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	6.4.2. 
Theater or cinema 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Commercial Service 
Body art service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Building service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Business support service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Consumer maintenance and repair 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Personal improvement service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Fortune telling or psychic services 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Research service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Day Care 
Day care home 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	6.4.5.C 
Day care center 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	6.4.5.C 
Eating and Drinking Establishment 
Restaurant 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Bar 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Microbrewery 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Wine making facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Financial Service (except the following) 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Personal credit establishment 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	6.4.7.B 
Funeral or Mortuary Service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Lodging 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
Medical Service 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Office 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Parking, Non-Accessory 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Retail Sales 																
Convenience goods 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Consumer shopping goods 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Building supplies and equipment 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Tobacco products 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Self-service Storage Facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	6.4.14 
Sexually Oriented Business 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Trade School 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	
Vehicle Sales and Service 																
Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Commercial vehicle sales and rentals 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Fueling station 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Vehicle body and paint finishing shop 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 		
Vehicle sales and rentals 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION & STORAGE 																
Equipment & Materials Storage, Outdoor 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Trucking and Transportation Terminals 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Warehouse 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Wholesale Sales and Distribution 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
INDUSTRIAL 																6.6 
Artisan Industrial 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	- 	? 	? 	
Limited Industrial 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
General Industrial 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	
Intensive Industrial 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	
Junk or Salvage Yard 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
RECYCLING 																
Recyclable Material Drop-off Facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Recyclable Material Processing 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
AGRICULTURE 																
Crop Agriculture 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Community Garden 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	
OTHER 																
Cannabis Dispensing Organization 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Drive-in or Drive-through Facility 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	- 	- 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	? 	? 	
Wireless Telecommunications 	See Article 10 	
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18; Ord. No. 4069 , § 1, 2-25-19; Ord. No. 4084 , § 1, 6-10-19)  
SEC. 6.2. - RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY 
The residential use category includes uses that provide living accommodations for one or more persons. The residential use subcategories are as follows:  
6.2.1. - Household Living 
Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. When dwelling units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered residential; they are considered a form of lodging.  
6.2.2. - Group Living 
Residential occupancy of a building or any portion of a building by a group other than a household. Group living uses typically provide communal kitchen/dining facilities. Examples of group living uses include group homes, convents, monasteries, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, retirement centers, sheltered care facilities, homeless centers, shelters and halfway houses. 
A.  Group Home 
A detached house shared by persons with disabilities who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a long-term, household-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with a primary goal of enabling disabled residents to live as independently as possible. Group homes do not include pre-release, work-release, probationary, or other programs that serve as an alternative to incarceration. Group homes are subject to the following supplemental use regulations: 
1.  A group home may not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another group home, measured horizontally in any direction from the principal structure to be occupied as a group home to the other principal structure used as a group home. 
2.  No administrative permits or occupancy certificate may be issued for a group home until the operator has: 
a.  Obtained a state license or certificate authorizing or permitting the operation of a group home; 
b.  Demonstrated that the dwelling unit proposed to be used as a group home complies or will comply, prior to occupancy, with all applicable conditions, standards, or provisions imposed by any state license or applicable law. 
3.  Application for an administrative occupancy permit for a group home must contain a verified statement from the operator, describing: 
a.  The nature of the group home; 
b.  The qualifications of the agency that will operate the group home; 
c.  The number of individuals assigned to the home and their respective functions; 
d.  The number of residents who will reside in the group home; and 
e.  The general nature of the residents' disabilities. 
4.  No service, including, but not limited to, counseling and other treatment, is permitted for persons other than the residents of the subject group home. 
5.  The group home must, to the extent possible, conform to the type and outward appearance of the residences in the area in which it is located. 
6.  Prior to occupancy, an administrative occupancy permit must be applied for and received. 
7.  The group home must comply with all applicable zoning, building, and/or housing code regulations for the structure and/or the zoning district in which the group is to be located. 
8.  The director of community development, with the concurrence of the village manager, may revoke an occupancy permit for a group home if: 
a.  The permit was obtained by fraudulent means, material misrepresentation, or by submitting false information; or 
b.  The sponsor is no longer licensed or authorized by an agency of the State of Illinois of competent jurisdiction to operate a group home at the location specified in the administrative occupancy permit; or 
c.  The sponsor has unlawfully refused to allow an inspection of the group home by an authorized official of the Village of Villa Park; or 
d.  The dwelling unit has been determined by an appropriate official of the Village of Villa Park to be unsafe for human habitation. 
B.  Nursing home. 
A "long-term care facility," as defined in 210 ILCS 45/1-113, that provides skilled nursing care. 
C.  Sheltered care. 
A "long-term care facility," as defined in 210 ILCS 45/1-113, that provides maintenance and personal care.  
SEC. 6.3. - PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORY 
This category includes public, quasi-public and private uses that provide unique services that are of benefit to the public at-large. The public, civic and institutional subcategories are as follows.  
6.3.1. - Cemetery 
Land or structures used for burial or permanent storage of the dead or their cremated remains. Typical uses include cemeteries and mausoleums. Also includes pet cemeteries.  
6.3.2. - College or University 
Institutions of higher learning that offer courses of generalized or specialized study and that are authorized to grant academic degrees.  
6.3.3. - Community Center 
A structure, including its surrounding premises, that is owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a unit of local government or a school district and that contains rooms or other facilities limited to use for purposes of meetings, gatherings or other functions or activities carried on or performed by or under the supervision of a unit of local government, a school district or a civic, educational, religious or charitable organization. The authorization for the establishment of a municipal community center may include authorization for the incidental and accessory sale or resale of food, merchandise or services in connection with and in support of the principal activity or function being carried on or performed by such unit of local government, school district or organization.  
6.3.4. - Fraternal Organization 
The use of a building or lot by a not-for-profit organization that restricts access to its facility to bona fide, annual dues-paying members and their occasional guests and where the primary activity is a service not carried on as a business enterprise.  
6.3.5. - Governmental Facility 
Uses related to the administration of local, state or federal government services or functions that are not otherwise identified by a use category or subcategory.  
6.3.6. - Hospital 
Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering inpatient (overnight) care.  
6.3.7. - Library 
Collections of books, manuscripts and similar materials for free public lending, study and reading.  
6.3.8. - Museum or Cultural Facility 
Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibitions of works of art and similar institutions.  
6.3.9. - Natural Resources Preservation 
Undeveloped land left in a natural state for specific use as visual open space or environmental purposes. Typical uses include wildlife or nature preserves, arboretums and flood management projects.  
6.3.10. - Parks and Recreation 
Recreational, social or multi-purpose uses associated with public parks and open spaces, including playgrounds, playfields, play courts, swimming pools, community centers and other facilities typically associated with public park and open space areas. Also includes public and private golf courses and country clubs.  
6.3.11. - Religious Assembly 
Religious services involving public assembly that customarily occur in churches, synagogues, temples, mosques and other facilities where groups customarily assemble for religious worship.  
6.3.12. - Safety Service 
Facilities provided by the village, state or federal government that provide fire, police or life protection, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations and police stations.  
6.3.13. - School 
Schools at the primary, elementary, junior high or high school level that provide basic, compulsory state-mandated education.  
6.3.14. - Utilities and Public Service Facility 
A.  Minor 
Infrastructure services that need to be located in or close to the area where the service is provided. Minor utilities and public service facilities generally do not have regular employees at the site and typically have few if any impacts on surrounding areas. Typical uses include equipment and facilities used in supplying gas, sewer, water, electric, communication or governmental services of any kind. Energy production systems that generate energy from the byproducts of the principal use are considered accessory uses, including net metered installations and installations that generate power to sell at wholesale to the power grid. Minor utilities and public service facilities are subject to the following supplemental use regulations: 
1.  Site plan and architectural approval is required; and 
2.  All wiring (including transmission, distribution and service lines) for the supply of electric and communication services must be placed underground except for wiring that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Carries more than:fifteen thousand (15,000) volts; 
b.  Is for temporary service during periods of active construction; 
c.  Is relocated at the request of the village; 
d.  Is for the restoration or repair of existing facilities; and 
e.  Is lead-in or service wiring from above-ground poles to a detached houses or duplex. 
B.  Major 
Infrastructure services that typically have substantial visual or operational impacts on nearby areas. Typical uses include but are not limited to water and wastewater treatment facilities, high-voltage electric substations, utility-scale power generation facilities (including wind, solar and other renewable and nonrenewable energy sources), sanitary landfills and utility-scale water storage facilities, such as water towers and reservoirs. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 6.4. - COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORY 
The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general public. The commercial use subcategories are as follows.  
6.4.1. - Animal Service 
Uses that provide goods and services for care of companion animals. 
A.  Grooming 
Grooming of dogs, cats and similar companion animals, including dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops. 
B.  Boarding or Shelter 
Animal shelters, care services and kennel services for dogs, cats and companion animals, including boarding kennels, pet resorts/hotels, pet day care, pet adoption centers, dog training centers and animal rescue shelters. For purposes of this ordinance, the keeping of more than four (4) dogs, cats or similar household companion animals over four (4) months of age or the keeping of more than two (2) such animals for compensation or sale is deemed a boarding or shelter-related animal service use and is allowed only in those zoning districts that allow such uses. Boarding and shelter uses are subject to the following supplemental use regulations: 
1.  Outdoor runs and exercise areas must be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any R-zoned lot. 
2.  All animals must be kept either within completely enclosed structures or under direct control of the kennel operator or staff at all times, and must be kept within completely enclosed structures between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
3.  Enclosures must have an area of fifty (50) square feet for each animal based on the maximum number of animals to be in the enclosure at any given time. 
C.  Veterinary Care 
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics. Veterinary care uses with overnight boarding are regulated as boarding or shelter facilities.  
6.4.2. - Assembly and Entertainment 
Uses that provide gathering places for participant or spectator recreation, entertainment or other assembly activities. Assembly and entertainment uses may provide incidental food or beverage service. Typical uses include arenas, billiard centers, video game arcades, auditoriums, bowling centers, cinemas, stadiums and theaters. Video game arcades require an electronic game room license issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4, Article IV of the village code of ordinances.  
6.4.3. - Broadcast or Recording Studio 
Uses that provide for audio or video production, recording or broadcasting.  
6.4.4. - Commercial Service 
Uses that provide for consumer or business services and for the repair and maintenance of a wide variety of products. 
A.  Building Service 
Uses that provide maintenance and repair services for all structural and mechanical elements of structures, as well as the exterior spaces of a premise. Typical uses include contractor offices, janitorial, landscape maintenance, extermination, plumbing, electrical, HVAC, window cleaning and similar services. 
B.  Body Art Service 
Tattoo and body piercing establishments (as defined in 410 ILCS 54/1). Tattoo and body piercing establishments must be licensed in accordance with Chapter 13, Article X of the village code of ordinances. 
C.  Business Support Service 
Uses that provide personnel services, printing, copying, photographic services or communication services to businesses or consumers. Typical uses include employment agencies, copy and print shops, caterers, telephone answering services and photo developing labs. 
D.  Consumer Maintenance and Repair Service 
Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods on a site other than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring goods to the site of the repair/maintenance business). Typical consumer maintenance and repair service uses include laundry and dry cleaning pick-up shops, tailors, taxidermists, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops, locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics repair shops and similar establishments. Business that offer repair and maintenance service technicians who visit customers' homes or places of business are classified as a "building service." 
E.  Personal Improvement Service 
Uses that provide a variety of services associated with personal grooming, instruction and maintenance of fitness, health and well-being. Typical uses include barbers; hair and nail salons; day spas; health clubs; yoga and fitness studios; martial arts studios; music, dance, drama, fine arts, language and similar instruction; fortune-telling or psychic services and businesses and individuals providing massage or massage therapy services in accordance with the Massage Licensing Act, (225 ILCS 57/). Also includes artist studios and photography studios. 
F.  Research Service 
Uses engaged in scientific research and testing services leading to the development of new products and processes. Such uses resemble office buildings or campuses and do not involve the mass production, distribution or sale of products. Research services do not produce odors, dust, noise, vibration or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property.  
6.4.5. - Day Care 
Uses providing care, protection and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. Examples include state-licensed child care centers, preschools, nursery schools, head start programs, after-school programs and adult day care facilities. Day care expressly includes state-accredited adult day care facilities and facilities for child care, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act. 
A.  Day Care Home 
A dwelling unit in which day care, licensed by the State of Illinois, is provided for a maximum of eight (8) children, excluding all natural, adopted and foster children of the residents of the dwelling unit. 
B.  Day Care Center 
A facility licensed by the State of Illinois that provides day care for more than 8 children or any number of adults. 
C.  Supplemental Regulations 
All day care uses must provide at least five hundred(500) square feet of outdoor play area or be located within one-half mile of a public park or public open space. Outdoor play areas must be fenced and screened from view of R-zoned lots.  
6.4.6. - Eating and drinking establishments 
A.  Restaurant 
Uses that prepare and serve food and beverages for on- or off-premise consumption as their principal business. Typical uses include cafes, restaurants, cafeterias, ice cream/yogurt shops, coffee shops, juice bars and similar establishments, which may include accessory use bars that are customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use as an eating establishment. 
B.  Bar 
An establishment where the principal business is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Snack foods or other prepared food may be available for consumption on the premises as an ancillary use. Live entertainment may be provided as an ancillary use to a bar. 
C.  Microbrewery 
A brewery that produces less than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels of beer or ale per calendar year from malt and hops by infusion, boiling and fermentation.  
6.4.7. - Financial Service 
Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing and safe-keeping of money. Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar facilities that do not have on-site employees are not classified as financial service uses if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use (see Sec. 6.10). Typical examples of financial service use types are banks, credit unions, and personal credit establishments. 
A.  Personal credit establishments include all of the following: 
1.  Pawnshops and pawn brokers (as defined in 205 ILCS 510); 
2.  Establishments that provide (vehicle) title-secured loans or payday loans (as defined in 815 ILCS 122) and similar services; 
3.  Currency exchanges and check-cashing facilities that are primarily engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders or traveler's checks, exchanging currency, notarizing documents, selling vehicles license tags or transmitting money within the United States or overseas by any means for a fee. A business primarily engages in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders or traveler's checks, exchanging currency, notarizing documents, selling vehicles license tags or transmitting money if fifty (50) percent or more of its business transactions during any month involve the aforesaid activities; and 
4.  Establishments primarily engaged in buying jewelry or other items made of sterling silver or gold, or silver coins, or bullion to and from the public within the village from a fixed and regular place of business. A business primarily engages in buying jewelry or other items made of sterling silver or gold, or silver coins, or bullion to and from the public if fifty (50) percent or more of its business transactions during any month involve the aforesaid activities. 
B.  Personal credit establishments are subject to the following supplemental regulations: 
1.  Window and door areas must be provided on the first floor of the facility that faces a public street or sidewalk. Such windows and doors must allow views into the building at eye level and may not be blocked or otherwise reduced in area. 
2.  All transactions must occur entirely inside the facility at a service counter, with no transactions permitted through an exterior walk-up or drive-up window. 
3.  The operator of a currency exchange, payday loan, pawn shop or title loan must have a valid license issued by the State of Illinois. Pawnshops must be licensed in accordance with Chapter 13, Article VIII of the village code of ordinances.  
6.4.8. - Funeral and Mortuary Service 
Uses that provide services related to the death of a human, including funeral homes, mortuaries, crematoriums and similar uses. Also includes crematoriums for companion animals.  
6.4.9. - Lodging 
Uses that provide temporary lodging for less than thirty (30) days where rents are charged by the day or by the week. Lodging uses sometimes provide food or entertainment, primarily to registered guests.  
6.4.10. - Medical Services 
Uses providing diagnosis and treatment of human patients' illnesses, injuries and physical maladies in an office or clinic setting with no overnight care. Surgical, rehabilitation and other medical centers that do not involve overnight patient stays are included in this subcategory, as are medical and dental laboratories. Medical services uses may offer massage therapy when provided by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed practical nurse or a registered professional nurse.  
6.4.11. - Office 
Uses in an enclosed building, customarily performed in an office, that focus on providing executive, management, administrative, or professional services. Examples include corporate office, law offices, architectural firms, insurance companies and other executive, management or administrative offices for businesses and corporations.  
6.4.12. - Parking, Non-Accessory 
Parking that is not provided to comply with minimum off-street parking requirements and that is not provided exclusively to serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to the public at-large. A parking facility that provides both accessory and non-accessory parking is considered non-accessory parking if it leases twenty-five (25) percent or more of its spaces to non-occupants of or persons other than visitors to a particular use.  
6.4.13. - Retail Sales 
Uses involving the sale, lease or rental of new or used goods to the ultimate consumer within an enclosed structure, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
A.  Convenience Goods 
Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise provide (1) sundry goods; (2) products for personal grooming and for the day-to-day maintenance of personal health or (3) food or beverages for off-premise consumption, including grocery stores and similar uses that provide incidental and accessory food and beverage service as part of their primary retail sales business. Typical uses include drug stores, grocery and specialty food stores, wine or liquor stores, gift shops, newsstands, florists and tobacco stores. 
B.  Consumer Shopping Goods 
Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise provide wearing apparel, fashion accessories, furniture, household appliances and similar consumer goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for use, entertainment, comfort or aesthetics. Typical uses include clothing stores, department stores, appliance stores, TV and electronics stores, bike shops, book stores, costume rental stores, uniform supply stores, stationery stores, art galleries, hobby shops, furniture stores, pet stores and pet supply stores, shoe stores, antique shops, secondhand stores, record stores, toy stores, sporting goods stores, variety stores, video stores, musical instrument stores, office supplies and office furnishing stores and wig shops. 
C.  Building Supplies and Equipment 
Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise provide goods to repair, maintain or visually enhance a structure or premises. Typical uses include hardware stores, home improvement stores, paint and wallpaper supply stores and garden supply stores. 
D.  Tobacco Products 
Retail or wholesale sales uses that derives more than fifty (50) percent of sales or usage fees from tobacco or tobacco-related products, including e-cigarettes, nicotine-enriched solutions and other liquids intended for use with e-cigarettes. This includes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, cigars, tobacco and any tobacco-related products or paraphernalia such as pipes, papers, vaporizers and hookahs; and including the use of such products within such location.  
6.4.14. - Self-service Storage Facility 
An enclosed use that provides separate, small-scale, self-service storage facilities leased or rented to individuals or small businesses. Facilities are designated to accommodate only interior access to storage lockers or drive-up access only from consumer-size passenger vehicles and two-axle non-commercial vehicles. Such uses are subject to the following supplemental use regulations: 
A.  Employees associated with such use shall be limited to a facility manager and/or security personnel. 
B.  Storage of hazardous materials is expressly prohibited, expressly including flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, and hazardous chemicals. 
C.  Any use other than storage is prohibited, expressly including garage sales, retail business activities, and servicing or repair of motor vehicles and equipment. 
D.  Outside storage is expressly prohibited, except for vehicles, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, motorized homes, boat rafts, and boat trailers. The above-mentioned vehicles, boats, and trailers are allowed to be stored outdoors, provided they are operative and licensed, parked on a paved surface, visually screened from R-zoned areas, and not located in street yards. 
E.  Loading areas and metal building materials may not face public streets. 
F.  Multiple buildings and a maximum of seventy (70) percent lot coverage is allowed. 
G.  The site must be totally fenced and accessed through a locked security gate. 
H.  All pervious surfaces must be landscaped and continuously maintained. 
I.  An on-site residential unit used exclusively by a facilities manager and household is allowed if the unit is incorporated into the overall structure and design.  
6.4.15. - Sexually oriented Business 
The term "sexually oriented business" includes adult arcades, adult book stores, adult video stores, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment establishments, massage parlors and massage schools. 
A.  Adult Arcade 
Any retail establishment that contains six (6) or more adult mini motion picture machines. 
B.  Adult Book or Adult Video Store 
An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, films, videos, tapes, cassettes, DVDs, books, magazines, periodicals, or other video or printed media which are: 
1.  Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on sexually explicit material; or 
2.  Matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas, including an establishment with an area or section devoted to the sale, rental, display or advertising of such material. 
C.  Adult Entertainment Establishment 
A public or private establishment that: 
1.  Is defined as an "adult entertainment facility" under 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5 as now existing or hereafter amended, including the 1,000-foot separation from certain uses as required by statute; or 
2.  Features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, male or female strippers, male or female impersonators, male or female nude performers or dancers, and similar live entertainment, or wherein persons are permitted to perform acts of or acts which simulate one or more of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
D.  Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater 
An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
E.  Massage Parlor or Massage School 
Any place or establishment where massage services or massage training is made available, other than expressly allowed by this ordinance as a medical service (see 6.4.10) or personal improvement service (see 6.4.4E).  
6.4.16. - Trade School 
Uses in an enclosed building that focus on teaching the skills needed to perform a particular job. Examples include schools of cosmetology, modeling academies, computer training facilities, vocational schools, administrative business training facilities and similar uses. Truck driving schools are classified as "trucking and transportation terminals" (wholesale, distribution and storage use category).  
6.4.17. - Vehicle Sales and Service 
Uses that provide for the sale, rental, maintenance or repair of new or used vehicles and vehicular equipment. The vehicle sales and service subcategory includes the following specific use types: 
A.  Commercial Vehicle Repair and Maintenance 
Uses, excluding vehicle paint finishing shops, that repair, install or maintain the mechanical components or the bodies of large trucks, mass transit vehicles, large construction or agricultural equipment, aircraft or similar large vehicles and vehicular equipment. Includes truck stops and truck fueling facilities. 
B.  Commercial Vehicle Sales and Rentals 
Uses that provide for the sale or rental of large trucks, large construction or agricultural equipment, aircraft, or similar large vehicles and vehicular equipment. 
C.  Fueling Station 
Uses engaged in retail sales of personal or commercial vehicle fuels, including natural gas fueling stations and rapid vehicle charging stations and battery exchange facilities for electric vehicles. 
D.  Personal Vehicle Repair and Maintenance 
Uses engaged in repairing, installing or maintaining the mechanical components of autos, small trucks or vans, motorcycles, motor homes or recreational vehicles including recreational boats. Also includes uses that wash, clean or otherwise protect the exterior or interior surfaces of these vehicles. Does not include vehicle body or paint finishing shops. 
E.  Personal Vehicle Sales and Rentals 
Uses that provide for the sale or rental of new or used autos, small trucks or vans, trailers, motorcycles, motor homes or recreational vehicles including recreational watercraft. Typical examples include automobile dealers, auto malls, car rental agencies and moving equipment rental establishments (e.g., U-haul). 
F.  Vehicle Body and Paint Finishing Shop 
Uses that primarily conduct vehicle body work and repairs or that apply paint to the exterior or interior surfaces of vehicles by spraying, dipping, flow-coating or other similar means. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 6.5. - WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE USES 
This category includes uses that provide and distribute goods in large quantities, principally to retail sales, commercial services or industrial establishments. Long-term and short-term storage of supplies, equipment, commercial goods and personal items is included. The wholesale, distribution & storage subcategories are as follows:  
6.5.1. - Equipment and Materials Storage, Outdoor 
Uses related to outdoor storage of equipment, products or materials, whether or not stored in containers.  
6.5.2. - Trucking and Transportation Terminals 
Uses engaged in the dispatching and long-term or short-term storage of trucks, buses and other vehicles, including parcel service delivery vehicles, taxis and limousines. Minor repair and maintenance of vehicles stored on the premises is also included. Includes uses engaged in the moving of household or office furniture, appliances and equipment from one location to another, including the temporary onsite storage of those items.  
6.5.3. - Warehouse 
Uses conducted within a completely enclosed building that are engaged in long-term and short-term storage of goods and that do not meet the definition of a "self-service storage facility" or a "trucking and transportation terminal."  
6.5.4. - Wholesale Sales and Distribution 
Uses engaged in the wholesale sales, bulk storage and distribution of goods. Such uses may also include incidental retail sales and wholesale showrooms. This subcategory expressly includes the following uses: bottled gas and fuel oil sales, ice distribution centers, monument sales, storage building sales, vending machine sales, auctioneers, frozen food lockers. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 6.6. - Industrial Use Category 
This category includes uses that produce goods from extracted and raw materials or from recyclable or previously prepared materials, including the design, storage and handling of these products and the materials from which they are produced. The industrial subcategories are:  
6.6.1. - Artisan Industrial 
On-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, involving the use of hand tools and small-scale, light mechanical equipment in a completely enclosed building with no outdoor operations or storage. Typical uses include woodworking and cabinet shops, ceramic studios, jewelry manufacturing and similar types of arts and crafts or very small-scale manufacturing uses that have no negative external impacts on surrounding properties.  
6.6.2. - Limited Industrial 
Manufacturing and industrial uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat or package finished parts or products without the use of explosive or petroleum materials. Uses in this subcategory do not involve the assembly of large equipment and machinery and have very limited external impacts in terms of noise, vibration, odor, hours of operation and truck and commercial vehicle traffic.  
6.6.3. - General Industrial 
Manufacturing and industrial uses that process, fabricate, assemble or treat materials for the production of large equipment and machines as well as industrial uses that because of their scale or method of operation regularly produce odors, dust, noise, vibration, truck/commercial vehicle traffic or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property.  
6.6.4. - Intensive Industrial 
Manufacturing and industrial uses that regularly use hazardous chemicals or procedures or produce hazardous byproducts, including the following: manufacturing of acetylene, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster-of-Paris, chlorine, corrosive acid or fertilizer, insecticides, disinfectants, poisons, explosives, paint, lacquer, varnish, petroleum products, coal products, plastic and synthetic resins and radioactive materials. This subcategory also includes petrochemical tank farms, gasification plants, smelting, asphalt and concrete plants and tanneries. Intensive industrial uses have high potential for external impacts on the surrounding area in terms of noise, vibration, odor, hours of operation and truck/commercial vehicle traffic.  
6.6.5. - Junk or Salvage Yard 
An area or building where waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled for reclamation, disposal or other like purposes, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles.  
6.6.6. - Prohibited Industrial Uses 
A.  No lot may be used, and no structure may be erected, altered or remodeled within the Village of Villa Park for any of the following uses: abattoirs, arsenals; crematories; creosote treatment or manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks manufacture or storage; dumping or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse, ore reduction, petroleum processing or refining; pyroxylin manufacture; gutta percha manufacture or treatment; salt works; sauerkraut manufacture; smelters; stockyard or slaughter of or experimentation with animals or fowls; tallow, grease, or manufacture or treatment; tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar distillation or manufacture; cement, concrete, or asphaltic concrete, mortar or plaster batch mixing plants, or junk yards or other uses having operations that are deemed by the community development director to be incompatible with the intended environmental character of the industrial district. 
B.  All activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products that decompose by detonation are expressly prohibited in the village, except for those that are expressly licensed by the village. Examples of prohibited materials include all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetrocene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and pecric acid, propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazone and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, perchloric acid; perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35%; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials, and products and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.  
6.6.7. - Recycling Uses 
This category includes uses that collect, store or process recyclable material for the purpose of marketing or reusing the material in the manufacturing of new, reused or reconstituted products.  
6.6.8. - Recyclable Material Drop-Off Facility 
An establishment that accepts consumer recyclable commodities directly from the consuming party and stores them temporarily before transferring them to recyclable material processing facilities. Establishments that process recyclable material are classified as "recyclable material processing facilities."  
6.6.9. - Recyclable Material Processing 
Establishments that receive and process consumer recyclable commodities for subsequent use in the secondary market. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 6.7. - AGRICULTURAL USE CATEGORY 
This category includes uses such as gardens, farms and orchards that involve the raising and harvesting of food and non-food crops.  
6.7.1. - Agriculture, Animal 
The (principal or accessory) use of land for the keeping or raising of farm animals.  
6.7.2. - Agriculture, Crop 
The use of land for growing, raising, or marketing of plants to produce food, feed, or fiber commodities or non-food crops. Examples of crop agriculture include cultivation and tillage of the soil and growing and harvesting of agricultural or horticultural commodities. Crop agriculture does not include community gardens or the raising or keeping of farm animals.  
6.7.3. - Community Garden 
An area managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops or nonfood crops (e.g., flowers) for personal or group consumption, for donation or for sale that is occasional and incidental to the growing and harvesting of food crops. A community garden area may be divided into separate garden plots or orchard areas for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. A community garden may include common areas (e.g., hand tool storage sheds) maintained and used by the group. Community gardens may be principal or accessory uses and may be located at grade (outdoors), on a roof or within a building. Community gardens do not include the raising or keeping of farm animals. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 6.8. - OTHER USE CATEGORY 
This category includes uses that do not fit the other use categories.  
6.8.1. - Drive-in or Drive-through Facility 
Any use with drive-through windows or drive-through lanes or that otherwise offer service to the occupants of motor vehicles. Typical uses include drive-through restaurants, drive-through pharmacies and drive-in restaurants.  
6.8.2. - Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center 
As defined in 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.  
6.8.3. - Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization 
As defined in 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.  
6.8.4. - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
See Article 10. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 6.9. - RESIDENTIAL BUILDING TYPES  
6.9.1. - Detached House 
A detached house is a principal residential building occupied by one dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on all sides. Detached houses are not attached to and do not abut other dwelling units. Does not include mobile homes or manufactured housing units, which are expressly prohibited in the village. Detached houses include conventional ("stick-built") construction and construction involving modular or system-built components as long as such construction complies with village building codes.  
6.9.2. - Attached House 
An attached house is a dwelling unit that is attached to one or more dwelling units, each of which of which is located on its own lot with a common or abutting wall along the dwelling units' shared lot lines. Each dwelling unit has its own external entrance.  
6.9.3. - Duplex 
A duplex is a residential building occupied by 2 dwelling units, both of which are located on the same lot. The dwelling units are attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side.  
6.9.4. - Multi-unit Building 
A multi-unit building is a residential building on a single lot that is occupied by 3 or more dwelling units that share common walls and/or common floors/ceilings.  
6.9.5. - Live-above Unit 
A dwelling unit located above ground-floor, above-grade commercial use or floor space (i.e., in a vertical mixed-use building). 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 6.10. - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES  
6.10.1. - Generally Applicable Regulations 
A.  Accessory Uses Allowed 
Accessory uses and structures are allowed only in connection with lawfully established principal uses. 
B.  Allowed Uses and Structures 
Allowed accessory uses and structures are limited to those expressly regulated in this section as well as those that, in the determination of the community development director, satisfy all of the following criteria: 
1.  They are customarily found in conjunction with the subject principal use or principal structure; 
2.  They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use of the property; and 
3.  They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort, safety or convenience of occupants of the principal use. 
C.  Prohibited Uses 
None of the following are allowed as an accessory use: 
1.  Outdoor parking of trucks, buses, trailers or boats, except as provided in Sec. 7.7. 
2.  Outdoor storage, except as specifically permitted by the district regulations. 
D.  Time of Construction and Establishment 
1.  Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use of the property is in place. 
2.  Accessory buildings may be established in conjunction with or after the principal building or use. They may not be established before the principal building or use is in place. 
E.  Location 
Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same lot as the principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
F.  Compliance with Lot and Building Regulations 
1.  Unless otherwise expressly stated, accessory uses and structures are subject to the lot and building regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. 
2.  Accessory buildings must be set back at least five (5) feet from rear and side lot lines and at least twenty (20) feet from street lot lines. 
3.  Accessory buildings must be set back at least ten (10) feet from any principal building. 
G.  Human Habitation Prohibited 
An accessory structure may not include any area to be used for human habitation (i.e., living, sleeping, eating, or cooking).  
6.10.2. - Residential Accessory Structures 
The following regulations govern use and installation of accessory structures in all R districts, except as more specifically regulated in this article. 
A.  Only one accessory building is allowed per lot. 
B.  No detached accessory building may be located closer than five (5) feet to any garage. 
C.  The area of an accessory building may not exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet in exterior dimension, nor may the height of an accessory building exceed 10 feet. 
D.  An accessory building (e.g., shed) may be attached to a detached garage if the addition does not result in the area of the garage increasing by more than one hundred forty (140) square feet. 
E.  Additions to garages for storage purposes shall be permitted provided that the addition is an integral part of the design of the garage, meets all applicable standards for the construction of a garage, and generally matches and adheres to the overall appearance of the garage. 
F.  The cumulative total coverage of all accessory structures, including garages, shall all be added to the building area (footprint) of the principal structure for purposes of determining the maximum lot coverage, which shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the area of the lot.  
6.10.3. - Nonresidential Accessory Structures 
The following regulations govern use and installation of accessory structures in all districts other than R districts, except as more specifically regulated in this article. 
A.  Only one accessory building is allowed per lot. 
B.  The area of the accessory building may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet or one percent of the area of the lot, whichever is greater.  
6.10.4. - Residential Garages and Carports 
A.  RS Districts 
The residential garage and carport regulations of this subsection apply in RS districts. The regulations are primarily intended to address the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents of the premises along with limited storage of garden equipment and household items incidental to the principal use. 
1.  Only one attached or detached garage is allowed on any RS-zoned lot. 
2.  The exterior dimensions of any garage in an RS district may not exceed eight hundred sixty-four 864 square feet in area or seventy-five (75) percent of the foundation area of the principal building, provided that a garage area of up to five hundred thirty (530) square feet (exterior dimension) is permitted regardless of the size of the principal structure. 
3.  The height of a detached garage may not exceed twenty-one (21) feet or the height of the principal dwelling unit, whichever is less. For purposes of this provision, height is measured from the garage floor to the top of the highest structural member. 
4.  The height of garage door may not exceed eight (8) feet. 
5.  No detached garage may be located within ten (10) feet of any principal building. 
6.  Detached garages must be set back at least ten (10) feet from lot lines abutting a front yard of a building on an adjacent lot. Otherwise, the minimum side and rear setback for a detached garage is 5 feet. For purposes of this provision, setbacks are measured from the garage foundation. 
7.  Garages may not be located within any public utility easement, whether platted or implied. 
8.  All garages must be constructed with eaves, gutters and downspouts that are directed away from adjacent properties. 
9.  Carports are prohibited except in those cases where a carport is an integral part of an architectural design of an existing or proposed principal building (e.g., porte cochere). 
B.  Duplexes 
Garages associated with duplex (two-household) dwellings in RD-7.5 and RM-9 districts may not exceed five hundred twenty-eight (528) square feet in area.  
6.10.5. - Dog Runs 
A.  Dog runs and other animal enclosures are allowed only in rear yards and must be set back at least ten (10) feet from all lot lines. 
B.  Fencing for dog runs and animal enclosures may not exceed six (6) feet in height if solid or eight (8) feet in height if open. Dog runs and enclosures in R districts may not exceed fifty (50) feet in length or eight (8) feet in width. 
C.  Only one such dog run or animal enclosure is allowed per R-zoned lot.  
6.10.6. - Home Occupations. 
A.  General 
1.  Home occupations are allowed as an accessory use to an allowed household living use, subject to the regulations of this section. 
2.  Day care homes are not regulated as home occupations and are exempt from the home occupation regulations of this section. Day care homes are allowed as indicated in Table 6-1. 
B.  Operator 
The operator of a home occupation must be a full-time resident of the dwelling unit, and no more than one non-resident may be employed on the premises. 
C.  Floor Area 
Floor area devoted to the home occupation may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling or seven hundred (700) square feet, whichever is less. 
D.  Location 
The home occupation must be conducted entirely within the dwelling and not from a detached or attached garage or other accessory structure. Equipment, materials, samples and vehicles incidental to the home occupation may be stored in a detached or attached garage or other accessory structure, provided that the business activity is confined to the dwelling. 
E.  Sales 
The home occupation may not involve the sale of goods that are stored and delivered to the buyer on the lot, except as incidental to a permitted service. Pick-ups of previously made orders are allowed. 
F.  Operation and Appearance 
1.  There may be no visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation when viewed from the street or right-of-way or from an adjacent lot. 
2.  There may be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit that houses a home occupation or site upon which it is conducted that will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function. Examples of such prohibited alterations include parking lots, or adding commercial-like exterior lighting. 
3.  No outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in connection with the home occupation are allowed. 
4.  No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process may be used that creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
5.  Home occupations may not generate refuse or recyclable material in excess of the amount allowable for regular residential pickup. 
6.  Home occupations may not cause or create any nuisance, or cause or create any substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property or the character of the area, or threaten the public health, safety or welfare. 
G.  Vehicle Traffic and Parking 
1.  The home occupation may not involve regular receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by any motor vehicle bearing a Division of Motor Vehicles License Class "C" or higher. 
2.  The home occupation may not result in the simultaneous presence on the subject lot and the adjoining street of more than 3 motor vehicles in excess of the number of vehicles attributable to the residential use of the premises. 
3.  Visitors in conjunction with the home occupation (clients, patrons, pupils, sales persons, etc.) are prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
H.  Multiple Home Occupations 
If there is more than one home occupation within the dwelling, the regulations of this section apply to the sum total of the activity related to such home occupations. 
I.  Expressly Prohibited Activities 
All of the following uses are expressly prohibited as home occupations: 
1.  Animal service uses; 
2.  Eating and drinking establishments; 
3.  Religious assembly; 
4.  Retail sales uses; 
5.  Lodging; 
6.  Business or commercial storage of recreational vehicles, mobile homes, vehicles or mechanical equipment; 
7.  Funeral and mortuary services; 
8.  All industrial, manufacturing and recycling uses; 
9.  Medical services; 
10.  Vehicle sales and service; 
11.  Consumer repair services and appliance repair services; and 
12.  Any use or activity that does not comply with all applicable regulations of this ordinance.  
6.10.7. - Electric Vehicle Charging Stations 
A.  General 
1.  Private (restricted-access) electric-vehicle (EV) charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to lawfully established principal uses in all zoning districts. 
2.  Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to lawfully established principal nonresidential uses in all zoning districts. 
B.  Parking 
1.  Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying minimum off-street parking space requirements. 
2.  Public electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for parking and charging electric vehicles. 
C.  Equipment 
Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located so as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety hazards on sidewalks. 
D.  Signage 
Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted with signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment.  
6.10.8. - Satellite Dish Antennas 
A.  Where Allowed 
1.  Satellite dish antennas up to forty (40) inches in diameter are permitted as of right as an accessory use to all lawfully established principal uses in all zoning districts. They are subject to all applicable accessory structure setback regulations. 
2.  Satellite dish antennas over forty (40) inches in diameter, up to one hundred twenty (120) inches in diameter, are permitted as of right as an accessory use to all lawfully established principal uses in mixed-use and nonresidential zoning districts. They are subject to all applicable accessory structure setback regulations. 
B.  Location 
1.  In RM districts, satellite dish antennas may be located anywhere in the buildable area of the lot (outside of required building setbacks) or on an allowed principal or accessory building on the lot. 
2.  In RS and RD districts, satellite dish antennas may be located only to the rear of any principal structure. If usable communication signals cannot be obtained from a rear location, the satellite antenna may be located in the side yard. If usable satellite communication signals cannot be received by locating the antenna in the rear or to the side of the principal structure, the antenna may be placed in the street yard outside of the required building setback or on the roof in a location that is visible from the street, provided that the diameter of the satellite dish antenna does not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
3.  Ground-mounted satellite dish antennae must be visually screened to reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets.  
6.10.9. - Solar Energy Systems 
A.  General 
1.  Solar energy systems are permitted as of right as an accessory use to all lawfully established principal uses in all zoning districts. 
2.  Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable building and electrical code requirements. 
B.  Building-Mounted Solar Energy Systems 
1.  Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on principal and accessory structures. 
2.  Building-mounted solar energy systems may not encroach into required street setbacks or street yard areas. Systems mounted on principal structures may encroach into interior side and rear building setbacks in accordance with 14.1.9. 
3.  Only building-integrated or flush-mounted solar energy systems may be in-stalled on street-facing building elevations. 
4.  Solar energy systems may not extend more than 3 feet above the applicable maximum building height limit for the subject building type or more than 5 feet above the highest point of the roof line, whichever is less. 
C.  Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems 
1.  In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy systems may not be located in a required street setback or street yard area. 
2.  Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be located within required interior side and rear setbacks. 
3.  Ground-mounted solar energy systems are subject to applicable accessory structure height and lot coverage regulations.  
6.10.10. - Amateur Radio Facilities 
A.  Amateur radio facilities are subject to a maximum overall height limit of sixty-five (65) feet. Special use approval to exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height may be granted in accordance with the special use procedures of Section 11.4 if the village board determines, based on evidence provided by the applicant, that the additional height is the minimum needed to engage in amateur radio communications under a license issued by the FCC. 
B.  Antennas and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely matching the color of the supporting structure, in order to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.  
6.10.11. - Apiaries 
Bees may be kept in apiaries in accordance with the regulations of this section. 
A.  Permits 
Before erecting or placing an apiary, an applicant must provide written notice to all abutting property owners and obtain a permit from the community development director. Apiary permits must be renewed annually. 
B.  Registration 
Apiaries must be registered with the Illinois Department of Agriculture. Proof of registration must be submitted to the community development director. 
C.  Siting 
Apiaries are allowed only in the rear yard. 
D.  Setbacks 
Apiaries must be set back at least 10 feet from all lot lines and at least of 10 feet from the principal structure on the lot. 
E.  Number 
A maximum of two (2) hives are allowed per lot in R districts. A maximum of six (6) hives are allowed per lot in all other zoning districts. 
F.  Safety 
Beekeepers must requeen colonies that exhibit unusually aggressive behavior, such as stinging or swarming, and ensure that an on-site water source is available within twenty (25) feet of the apiary during the months of March through November. 
G.  Maintenance 
Apiaries must be maintained so as not to become a nuisance. Colonies must be maintained in movable-frame hives with adequate spacing and management techniques to avoid overcrowding and swarming. 
H.  Screening 
Apiaries must be screened to provide a flyway barrier. Such screening shall be at least six (6) feet in height and consist of a solid fence, vegetative barrier, or combination of such materials. The entrance to the apiary must include a latched gate that must remain closed at all times that a beekeeper is not present. 
I.  Sales 
On-site retail sales activities are prohibited unless retail sales is permitted in the subject zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 6.11. - Temporary Uses  
6.11.1. - General Regulations 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, temporary uses and structures are subject to the lot and building regulations of the zoning district in which they are located.  
6.11.2. - Permitted Uses 
The following uses and structures are permitted, subject to the specific regulations established in this section: 
A.  Tents or similar temporary covering used for weather protection of goods that must be stored out-of-doors because of emergency conditions, provided that such use may continue only during the duration of the emergency. 
B.  Except in RS districts, Christmas tree sales for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. All display and storage must comply with the minimum setbacks of the subject zoning district. 
C.  Contractor's office and equipment shed (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction project, and to continue only during the duration of such project. 
D.  Real estate office (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit) incident to a new housing development, provided that such use must be terminated upon sale or lease of all dwelling units in the development. 
E.  In all C districts, the display for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days of seasonal items such as garden and patio equipment and supplies. 
F.  Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, parades and block parties, when operated, conducted, or sponsored by a local bona fide educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, not-for-profit corporation, not-for-profit association, not-for-profit organization, municipality, park district, school or other unit of local government. Such uses are subject to the following supplemental regulations: 
1.  Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, parades and block parties are permitted for a period not to exceed one week. The lot and building regulations of the subject zoning district do not apply to such temporary uses. 
2.  Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, parades, and block parties may be located: 
a.  In any nonresidential district; and/or 
b.  In any residential district provided the temporary use takes place on property used principally for religious assembly, park property, school property, lands owned by the village, county or any unit of local government, or lands, whether public or private that are impressed with a public purpose; or street, provided that the governing jurisdiction consents to such use of the street, and then only with the express written approval of the police department and the village board. 
3.  Before conduct of a carnival, circus, fair, festival, parade, or block party, all necessary permits and/or licenses and/or approvals must be secured from the applicable governmental agencies. 
G.  Outdoor seating accessory to a eating or drinking establishment subject to the following supplemental regulations: 
1.  The outdoor seating area must be open to the sky with the exception that it may have a retractable awning, umbrella, or be placed under a building canopy and may contain furniture, including tables, chairs, railings, planters, and other features that are readily movable. 
2.  The seating may be located on public property or a public right-of-way provided that at least four (4) feet of the public sidewalk remains obstruction-free. If seating is provided on public sidewalk a certificate of insurance with the Village of Villa Park listed as an additional non-contributory insured and a certificate holder is required. The seating may be located on private sidewalks or pedestrian walkways provided that at least foru (4) feet of the walkway remains obstruction-free. If alcohol is to be served, a fence or similar barrier must be constructed around the outdoor seating area where liquor is served. 
3.  The outdoor seating area may be located in a yard or required building setback. 
4.  The seating may not occupy or interfere with the use of required parking spaces, aisles, driveways, fire lanes or fire exits. 
5.  The seating may not occupy or interfere with the use of building entrances, exits and pedestrian walkways. 
6.  Lighting related to the operation of the outdoor seating area must be directed away from adjacent properties to avoid creation of a public nuisance. 
7.  No entertainment, whether live, recorded or otherwise, is permitted in the outdoor seating area. 
8.  The outdoor seating area must be immediately adjacent to the principal building. If the outdoor seating area only includes tables and/or seating immediately adjacent to the exterior wall of the principal building, no fencing is required. If the outdoor seating includes tables and/or seating not immediately adjacent to the exterior wall of the principal building, fencing is required. 
9.  The outdoor seating area must conform to the approved site plan and be landscaped and/or screened as determined necessary by the community development director. 
10.  All outdoor seating must be placed on an all-weather hard surface area. 
11.  All outdoor seating areas must comply with life safety and exit code requirements. 
12.  An occupancy permit is required prior to the opening of the outdoor seating area. The occupancy permit is valid from March 1 through November 30 and must be renewed annually. All outdoor furniture must be removed within twenty-five (24) hours of permit expiration. 
13.  Picnic tables located at a park, golf course, or recreation center are not deemed to be "outdoor seating" and are exempt from the regulations of this section. 
H.  Temporary outdoor storage containers subject to the following supplemental regulations: 
1.  There may be no more than one temporary outdoor storage container per property. 
2.  Stacking of temporary outdoor storage containers is prohibited. 
3.  The subject property must be occupied by a principal building. 
4.  No temporary outdoor storage container may remain on the subject property for more than sixty (60) consecutive days per year. 
5.  Temporary outdoor storage containers may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or cover an area of more than one hundred thrity (130) square feet. 
6.  Temporary outdoor storage containers must be placed only on a driveway or other hard surface. 
7.  When placed on the driveway within a front or corner side yard, the container must be located so that pedestrian and vehicular traffic is not obstructed and so that the view of an operator of a motor vehicle entering or exiting a right-of-way is not obstructed. 
8.  Temporary outdoor storage containers may not be placed on public property or in a location that obstructs traffic visibility. 
9.  Temporary outdoor storage containers may display no signs other than the name, address and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the business of renting or otherwise placing the temporary outdoor storage containers. 
10.  A permit is required for any temporary outdoor storage container. 
11.  Temporary outdoor storage containers must be maintained in a good state of repair, free from rust, peeling paint and other forms of visible deterioration. 
12.  Temporary outdoor storage containers may not be used for the storage of hazardous, flammable or toxic materials. 
13.  Temporary outdoor storage containers may not be used for the purpose of conducting business or selling merchandise. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 7. - PARKING 
 
SEC. 7.1. - GENERAL  
7.1.1. - Purpose 
A.  The parking regulations of this article are intended to help ensure that off-street parking facilities are provided to meet the typical day-to-day needs of shoppers, employees, visitors and residents while also avoiding the negative impacts that can result from requiring excessive quantities of offstreet parking. 
B.  The provisions of this article are also intended to help protect the public health, safety and general welfare by: 
1.  Promoting economically viable and beneficial use of land; and 
2.  Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the village.  
7.1.2. - Applicability 
A.  General 
Off-street parking must be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations apply to all zoning districts and uses. 
B.  New Uses and Development 
The parking regulations of this article apply to all new buildings constructed and all new uses established in all zoning districts. 
C.  Change of Use 
If a new use of a building or structure requires more off-street parking than the use that most recently occupied the building or structure, additional off-street parking is required in an amount equal to the difference between the parking required for the new use and the parking that would have been required for the previous use if current parking requirements had been applicable, provided that the total number of required spaces for the change of use need not exceed the number that would be required for establishment of a new use. 
D.  Enlargements and Expansions 
1.  The parking regulations of this article apply whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to include additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement used for establishing off-street parking requirements. 
2.  In the case of enlargements or expansions that trigger requirements for additional parking, additional spaces are required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use. There is no requirement to address parking space deficits associated with existing, lawfully established buildings or uses. 
E.  Maintenance 
Off-street parking spaces required by this zoning ordinance must be maintained for the life of the principal use. 
F.  Damage or Destruction 
When a use that has been damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause is re-established, off-street parking or loading facilities must also be re-established or continued in operation in an amount equal to the number maintained at the time of such damage or destruction. It is not necessary, however, to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this zoning ordinance.  
Sec. 7.2. - MINIMUM PARKING RATIOS 
Off-street motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the minimum ratios established in Table 7-1. See Sec. 7.4 for an explanation of exemptions and allowed reductions of minimum motor vehicle parking requirements. See Sec. 7.5 For additional information about bicycle parking requirements. 
Table 7-1: Minimum Parking Ratios 
USE CATEGORY 	Unit of Measure 
(spaces per) 	Minimum Parking Ratio 	Additional
Requirements
Subcategory 			
Specific Use 			
RESIDENTIAL 
Household Living 			
Detached house 	Dwelling unit 	2.0 	Required spaces must be in garage 
Attached house 	Dwelling unit 	2.0 	Required spaces must be in garage 
Duplex 	Dwelling unit 	2.0 	Required spaces must be in garage 
Multi-unit building 	Dwelling unit 	1.0 	Or 1.0 per bedroom whichever is greater 
Live-above unit (mixed-use building) 			
Group Living 	Bed 	0.5 	
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL 
College or University 	Established per 7.3.7 	
Community Center 	Established per 7.3.7 	
Fraternal Organization 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3.0 	
Governmental Facility 	Established per 7.3.7 	
Hospital 	Bed 	1.0 	Plus spaces required for medical services 
Library 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.5 	
Museum or Cultural Facility 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.5 	
Religious Assembly 	Seat 	0.25 	
Safety Service 	Established per 7.3.7 	
School 			
Elementary or junior high 	Employee 	1.0 	
Senior high 	Student 	0.15 	
Utilities and Public Service Facility 	Established per 7.3.7 	
Wireless Telecommunications 	None required 		
COMMERCIAL 
Animal Service 			
Boarding or shelter 	1,000 sq. ft. 	1.0 	
Grooming 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3.0 	
Veterinary care 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3.0 	
Assembly and Entertainment 	Person (capacity) 	0.25 	
Commercial Service 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3.0 	
Day Care 			
Day care home 	None required 	
Day care center 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.0 	
Eating and Drinking Establishment 	Seat 	0.33 	Plus stacking spaces for drive-through 
Financial Service (except the following) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3.0 	
Personal credit establishment 	1,000 sq. ft. 	5.0 	
Funeral or Mortuary Service 	Seat 	0.25 	
Lodging 	Guest room 	1.0 	
Medical Service 	1,000 sq. ft. 	4.0 	Plus 1.0 per staff 
Office 	1,000 sq. ft. 	3.0 	
Retail Sales 			
Convenience goods 	1,000 sq. ft. 	4.0 	
Consumer shopping goods 			
Furniture, appliances and similar large items 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.5 	
All other consumer shopping goods 	1,000 sq. ft. 	4.0 	
Building supplies and equipment 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.5 	
Tobacco products 	1,000 sq. ft. 	5.0 	
Self-service Storage Facility 	1,000 sq. ft. 	0.2 	
Sexually Oriented Business 	1,000 sq. ft. 	5.0 	
Trade School 	Students 	0.25 	
Vehicle Sales and Service 			
Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance 	Service bay 	2.0 	
Commercial vehicle sales and rentals 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.5 	
Fueling station 	pump 	2.0 	
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance 	Service bay 	2.0 	
Personal vehicle sales and rentals 	1,000 sq. ft. 	2.5 	
Vehicle body and paint finishing shop 	Service bay 	1.0 	
WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION & STORAGE 
All 	Employee 	0.5 	
INDUSTRIAL 
All 	Employee 	0.5 	
RECYCLING 
Recyclable Material Drop-off Facility 	None required 	
Recyclable Material Processing 	Employee 	0.5 	
OTHER 
Drive-in or Drive-through Facility 	See 	
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center 	Employee 	0.5 	
Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization 	1,000 sq. ft. 	4.0 	
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 7.3. - CALCULATION OF REQUIRED PARKING 
In determining the number of parking spaces required, the following calculation rules apply:  
7.3.1. - Multiple Uses 
Lots containing more than one (1) use or tenant must provide parking in an amount equal to the total aggregate number of spaces required for each use or tenant on the lot except when a shared parking arrangement is approved in accordance with 7.4.2.  
7.3.2. - Calculations 
In calculating the number of parking spaces required for uses subject to a minimum parking ratio of "x" spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet, first divide the floor area of the subject use by one thousand (1,000) and then multiply the result by "x." If, for example, a minimum parking ratio of 3.33 spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet is applied to a use occupying five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, the minimum parking requirement for that use would be calculated as follows: (500 sq. ft. ÷ 1,000) x 3.33 = 0.5 x 3.33 = 1.665, which is rounded up to two (2) spaces (See 14.1.1).  
7.3.3. - Occupancy- or Capacity-based Standards 
For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on employees, students, members, residents or occupants, calculations must be based on the average number of persons working on any single shift, the average enrollment or membership or the building code-rated capacity, whichever is applicable.  
7.3.4. - Bench Seating 
For the purpose of calculating parking requirements based on seating, each 22 linear inches of bench or pew length is equivalent to one seat.  
7.3.5. - Outdoor Customer Seating/Dining Areas 
Any outdoor customer seating/dining area exceeding ten (10) percent of a bar, restaurant or other use's indoor floor area must be counted as floor area for purposes of determining off-street parking requirements.  
7.3.6. - Unlisted Uses 
Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the community development director is authorized to apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or establish a minimum off-street parking requirement for the proposed use in accordance with 7.3.7.  
7.3.7. - Establishment of Other Parking Ratios 
The community development director is authorized to establish required minimum parking ratios for unlisted uses and in those instances where authority to establish a requirement is expressly provided. Such ratios must be established on the basis of (1) a similar use/parking determination (as described in 7.3.6), (2) on parking data provided by the applicant or (3) other information available to the community development director. Parking data and studies must include estimates of parking demand based on reliable data collected from comparable local uses or on external data from credible research organizations, such as the Urban Land Institute (ULI) and the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location. Parking studies must document the source of all data used to develop recommended requirements. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 7.4. - PARKING EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS  
7.4.1. - On-street Parking 
Nonresidential uses may count on-street parking spaces on public street rights-of-way abutting the subject property towards satisfying off-street motor vehicle parking requirements. One (1) on-street parking space credit may be taken for each twenty (20) linear feet of abutting right-of-way where on-street parking is allowed. Only space on the same side of the street as the subject use may be counted, except that the opposite side of the street may be counted if the property on that side of the street does not have the potential for future development. In calculating credit for on-street parking, all fractional spaces are rounded down.  
7.4.2. - Shared Parking 
A.  General 
Shared parking refers to the practice of two (2) or more users who have need for parking at different times voluntarily agreeing to make use of the same motor vehicle parking spaces. Shared parking is encouraged as a means of conserving scarce land resources, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing the heat island effect caused by large paved areas and improving community appearance. 
B.  Approval 
The community development director is authorized to approve shared parking arrangements among property owners who propose shared parking. 
C.  Eligibility 
Shared parking may be approved for nonresidential uses that have different periods of parking demand. Required residential parking and accessible parking spaces (for people with disabilities) may not be shared, provided that this provision is not intended to prohibit shared driveways serving such uses. 
D.  Calculation 
The number of parking spaces required under a shared parking arrangement must be determined in accordance with the following: 
1.  Multiply the minimum parking required for each individual use, as set forth in Table 7-1 by the percentage identified in Table 7-2 for each of the 6 designated time periods. 
2.  Add the resulting sums for each of the 6 columns in Table 7-2. 
3.  Select the time period with the highest total parking requirement and use that total as the shared parking requirement. 
Table 7-2: Shared Parking Factors 
Land Use 	Time 
	Weekday 	Weekend 
	Midnight - 
7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m. - 
6:00 p.m. 	6:00 p.m. - 
Midnight 	Midnight - 
7:00 a.m. 	7:00 a.m. - 
6:00 p.m. 	6 p.m. - 
Midnight 
Office and Industrial 	5% 	100% 	10% 	0% 	60% 	5% 
Lodging 	100% 	60% 	90% 	100% 	65% 	80% 
Restaurants and Bars 	50% 	70% 	100% 	45% 	70% 	100% 
Religious Assembly 	0% 	10% 	30% 	0% 	100% 	30% 
Assembly & Entertainment 	10% 	50% 	100% 	5% 	80% 	100% 
Retail Sales & Community Service 	5% 	70% 	90% 	0% 	100% 	60% 
 
E.  Other Uses 
If one or more of the land uses proposing to make use of a shared parking arrangement do not conform to the land use classifications in Table 7-2, as determined by community development director, then the applicant must submit sufficient data to indicate the principal operating hours of the uses. Based upon this information, the community development director is authorized to determine the appropriate shared parking requirement, if any, for such uses. 
F.  Location 
Shared parking may be located on-site or off-site. Off-site parking is subject to the regulations of 7.6.2. 
G.  Agreement 
Before final approval of a shared parking arrangement, a shared parking agreement must be provided guaranteeing the long-term availability of the shared parking, commensurate with the uses served. Shared parking privileges will continue in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If a shared parking agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as otherwise required by this article.  
7.4.3. - Long-term Bicycle Parking 
Each four (4) long-term bicycle parking spaces provided in accordance with Sec. 7.5 is credited as one motor vehicle space, provided that this long-term bicycle parking space credit may not be used to reduce a use's minimum off-street motor vehicle parking requirement by more than one (1) space or ten (10) percent, whichever results in a greater reduction.  
7.4.4. - Alternative Compliance 
The required parking ratios of this article are not intended to prevent development and redevelopment or to make development and redevelopment economically impractical. In order to allow for flexibility in addressing the actual expected parking demand of specific uses, alternative compliance parking ratios may be approved through the special use approval procedures of Sec. 11.4 only if: 
A.  The applicant submits a parking study demonstrating that the motor vehicle parking ratios of Table 7-1 do not accurately reflect the actual day-to-day parking demand that can reasonably be anticipated for the proposed use based on field surveys of observed parking demand for similar use within the city or on external data from credible research organizations, such as the Urban Land Institute (ULI) or the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE); 
B.  The planning and zoning commission determines that the other allowed parking reduction alternatives of Sec. 7.4 are infeasible or do not apply; and 
C.  The planning and zoning commission determines that the reduced parking ratios proposed are not likely to cause material adverse impacts on traffic circulation and safety or on the general welfare of property owners and residents in the surrounding area. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 7.5. - BICYCLE PARKING  
7.5.1. - Purposes 
A.  Short-term Bicycle Parking 
Short-term bicycle parking is generally intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for short time periods, including customers, clients, students and other short-term visitors. 
B.  Long-term Bicycle Parking 
Long-term bicycle parking is generally intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for long time periods, primarily employees and residents.  
7.5.2. - Spaces Required 
A.  Short-term Bicycle Parking 
Short-term bicycle parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the minimum ratios established in Table 7-3. 
Table 7-3: Bicycle Parking Ratios 
USE CATEGORY 	MINIMUM NUMBER OF BICYCLE SPACES 
(% of Motor Vehicle 
Parking Spaces Provided) 
Subcategory 	
Specific Use 	
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL 
Community Center 	None for first 5 vehicle spaces, then 10% or 2 spaces, whichever is greater 
Library 	
School 	
COMMERCIAL 
Assembly and Entertainment 	None for first 5 vehicle spaces, then 10% 
or 2 spaces, whichever is greater 
Commercial Service 
Personal improvement service 	None for first 5 vehicle spaces, then 10% or 
2 spaces, whichever is greater 
Eating and Drinking Establishment 	
Financial Service 	
Retail Sales 	
 
B.  Long-term Bicycle Parking 
Long-term bicycle parking and storage is not required, but as a means of encouraging the provision of long-term bicycle parking spaces for employees and bicycle commuters, motor vehicle parking credit is offered in accordance with 7.4.3. @@@  
7.5.3. - Location 
1.  Short-Term Bicycle Parking 
Required short-term bicycle parking must be located in highly visible areas that do not interfere with pedestrian movements. At least fifty (50) percent of required short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located within one hundred (100) feet of a customer entrance, with the remainder located no more than three hundred (300) feet from any entrance. Short-term bicycle parking must be located on the subject lot, unless a license agreement has been approved by the village to allow private bicycle parking facilities to be located in the right-of-way. Public bicycle parking spaces may be credited toward meeting short-term bicycle parking requirements if such bicycle parking spaces comply with the location requirements of this paragraph. 
2.  Long-Term Bicycle Parking 
Required long-term bicycle parking provided to receive parking credit in accordance with 7.4.3 must be provided in the building or in a weather-protected area. Long-term bicycle parking spaces must be protected from access by unauthorized persons.  
7.5.4. - Design 
All required short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces must: 
A.  Consist of bike racks or lockers that are anchored so that they cannot be easily removed; 
B.  Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion, hammers, and saws; 
C.  Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock; 
D.  Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle; 
E.  Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to adjacent bicycles; and 
F.  Have minimum dimensions of two (2) feet in width by 6 feet in length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven (7) feet.  
7.5.5. - Administrative Adjustments 
The community development director is authorized to approve an administrative adjustment (see Sec. 11.6) reducing the number of bicycle spaces required under this section or modifying the bicycle parking design and location requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 7.6. - LOCATION AND USE OF PARKING AREAS  
7.6.1. - Location 
A.  All required off-street parking spaces must be located on the same lot as the use to be served by such parking, except as otherwise expressly stated in this article. 
B.  Parking is prohibited in front and street side yards, except that his provision is not intended to prohibit parking on permitted residential driveways.  
7.6.2. - Off-Site Parking 
A.  When Allowed 
All or a portion of required off-street parking for nonresidential uses may be provided off-site in accordance with the regulations of this section. Required accessible parking spaces and required parking for residential uses may not be located off site. 
B.  Location 
Off-site parking areas must be located within a 650-foot radius of the use served by such parking, measured between the nearest pubic entrance door of the use to be served and the outer perimeter of the furthest parking space within the off-site parking lot. Off-site parking lots are allowed only in zoning districts that permit non-accessory parking or in districts that allow the principal use to be served by the off-site parking spaces, unless otherwise approved as a special use. 
C.  Design 
Off-site parking areas must comply with all applicable parking area design regulations of Sec. 7.9. 
D.  Control of Off-Site Parking Area 
The property to be occupied by the off-site parking facilities must be under the same ownership as the lot containing the use to be served by the parking. The off-site parking area may be under separate ownership only if an agreement is provided guaranteeing the long-term availability of the parking, commensurate with the use served by the parking. Off-site parking privileges will continue in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If an offsite parking agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as otherwise required by this article.  
7.6.3. - Use 
A.  Required off-street parking facilities may be used only for the temporary parking of licensed passenger motor vehicles by residents, tenants, patrons, employees, or guests of the principal use. Off-street parking spaces required by this zoning ordinance must be maintained for the life of the principal use. 
B.  Off-street parking spaces may not be leased to uses not on-site, including but not limited to schools and commuter parking, unless approved by a special use or shared parking agreement. 
C.  No vehicle repair or service of any kind is permitted in an off-street parking space except in a completely enclosed garage. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 7.7. - PARKING IN R DISTRICTS  
7.7.1. - Applicability 
Except as otherwise expressly stated, the regulations of this section apply to residential uses in all R districts.  
7.7.2. - Parking in Street Yards 
Only private passenger motor vehicles may be parked in street yards in R districts, provided that parking in rear yards of corner lots is allowed in accordance with the rear yard parking provisions of this section. No more than 4 vehicles may be parked or stored in street yards, except for occasional guests.  
7.7.3. - Parking in Rear Yards 
The following vehicles may be parked in rear yards in R districts: 
A.  Private passenger motor vehicles; 
B.  Recreational vehicles; 
C.  Boats, whether mounted on a boat trailer or unmounted; 
D.  Boat trailers; and 
E.  Pickup trucks and vans.  
7.7.4. - Parking in Side Yards 
The following vehicles may be parked in side yards in R districts if they do not exceed 27 feet in length: 
A.  Private passenger motor vehicles 
B.  Recreational vehicles other than slide-in, truck-mounted campers; 
C.  Boats when mounted on a boat trailer and only from May 1 to October 31; 
D.  Boat trailers; and 
E.  Pickup trucks and vans.  
7.7.5. - Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parking 
A.  In R districts, no more than two (2) recreational vehicles may be parked outside of a completely enclosed garage. When RVs are mounted on trailers, the trailer and all mounted RVs will be counted as a single recreational vehicle. Trailers that are not mounted with one or more recreational vehicles are counted as a separate RV. 
B.  Recreational vehicles parked or stored in R districts may not be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. 
C.  Notwithstanding the other parking regulations of this section, recreational vehicles may be parked anywhere on the premises for active loading or unloading purposes for up to forty-eight (48) hours during any one continuous period.  
7.7.6. - Inoperable Vehicles and Repairs 
A.  Inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles may not be parked or stored in an R district unless located within a completely enclosed garage. 
B.  All vehicle repairs must be conducted within an completely enclosed garage.  
7.7.7. - Trucks and Large Vehicles 
A.  Except for vehicles expressly allowed to be parked or stored in R districts pursuant to the R district parking regulations of this section, it is unlawful for any motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds to be parked or stored in any R zoning district, including on any public or private street or alley. 
B.  Except for vehicles expressly allowed to be parked or stored in R districts pursuant to the R district parking regulations of this section, the parking or storage of any second division motor vehicle, as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, displaying a license plate containing other than a Class B designation constitutes prima facie evidence of a violation of truck and large vehicle parking restrictions of this section. 
C.  Notwithstanding the other parking regulations of this section, trucks and other service vehicles may be parked in R district temporarily while making deliveries or actively rendering service to a property owner. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 7.8. - DRIVEWAYS IN RS AND RD DISTRICTS  
7.8.1. - Applicability 
A.  Except as otherwise expressly stated, the regulations of this section apply to residential uses in all RS and RD districts.  
7.8.2. - Number 
A.  No more than one driveway is allowed per lot, except as otherwise expressly stated for duplex dwellings and circular drives. 
B.  Lots occupied by duplex dwellings may have up to one driveway per dwelling unit. 
C.  Circular drives are subject to the regulations of 7.8.5.  
7.8.3. - Location 
A.  Required off-street parking spaces for residential dwelling units in RS and RD districts must be located in a garage that is served by a driveway that complies with the regulations of this section. 
B.  Driveways located in street yards may not terminate in front of any portion of the dwelling unit, except as follows: 
1.  Driveways leading to an attached garage may extend into the street yard in front of the main (living) portion of the dwelling unit by a distance of up to three (3) feet. 
2.  A driveway extension may be located in a street yard to accommodate a maximum of two (2) vehicles side-by-side in the street yard. The driveway extension is limited to a maximum area of nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length, excluding any angled or flared portions of the extension. This driveway extension is permitted only on lots that cannot accommodate side or rear yard parking under the applicable regulations of this section and of the configuration of the subject property.  
7.8.4. - Width 
A.  Driveways must be at least eight (8) feet in width measured at the property line and may not exceed the maximum driveway width specified in 7.9.6. 
B.  Except as otherwise expressly stated in this section, driveways in street yards may not exceed the width of the garage to which the driveway leads or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less. Driveways in street yards leading to off-street parking areas in rear yards may not exceed twelve twelve (12) feet in width when leading to one parking space or twenty-two (22) feet in width when leading to two (2) or more spaces.  
7.8.5. - Circular Drives 
A.  Circular drives are permitted only on lots with at least seventy-five (75) feet of street frontage. 
B.  Circular drives may not exceed ten (10) feet in width, excluding flares, except for that portion of the drive leading to a required off-street parking area. 
C.  The interior radius of a circular drive must be at least thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Low-growing shrubs or evergreens must be installed and maintained along at least twenty-five (25) percent of the length of the circular drive.  
7.8.6. - Driveway Turnarounds 
Driveway turnarounds are prohibited in street yards except when the lot has frontage on a major street (as designated by the village) and the lot cannot accommodate a turnaround area outside of the street yard because of the applicable regulations of this section and the configuration of the subject property. Street yard driveway turnarounds may not exceed fourteen (14) feet in length or the width of the existing driveway, excluding flares.  
7.8.7. - Driveway Design 
A.  Adequate provisions must be made for the disposal of stormwater so that water will not flow into adjacent property. To keep water runoff on site and prevent runoff towards adjacent properties, new or replacement driveways must meet existing grades along the property line and then slope 1/8-inch to 1/4-inch per foot away from the property line and toward the center of the driveway. Any curbs along driveway must be constructed so as to not dam water on adjacent properties. 
B.  On lots of less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in area, the total of all impervious surfaces on the lots, including driveways, may not exceed fifty-six (56) percent of the lot area. On all other lots, the total of all impervious surfaces, including driveways, may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the lot area. 
C.  Residential driveways and parking areas must comply with the surfacing requirements of 7.9.4. 
D.  All new off-street parking facilities, including driveways, must meet the requirements of this section. Except as otherwise expressly stated in this section, all existing driveways not in conformance with this section must come into conformance at any time that 50% or more of a driveway is surfaced or resurfaced. 
E.  Attached garages may not be converted into a living area unless the required off-street parking spaces are being provided for elsewhere on the lot and the existing driveway in front of the converted area is removed. 
F.  Driveways may not be designed or constructed in any manner that will interfere with planned or existing parkway or right-of-way improvements or in a way that will create traffic hazards.  
SEC. 7.9. - PARKING AREA DESIGN  
7.9.1. - General 
Parking areas must be designed and constructed to allow unobstructed movement into and out of required parking spaces without interfering with fixed objects or vehicles except in the case of allowed tandem and valet parking. 
A.  Tandem Parking 
Tandem parking spaces may be used to satisfy residential parking requirements if the tandem spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit. 
B.  Valet Parking 
Valet parking may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements for nonresidential uses if an attendant is present during all hours of operation. Valet parking lots may be laid out in such a way that one or more vehicles must be moved to obtain access to other parked vehicles.  
7.9.2. - Parking Stall Sizes and Parking Lot Geometrics 
Off-street parking areas are subject to the dimensional requirements of Table 7-4 (see also Figure 7-1). The community development director is authorized to establish dimensions for parking configurations not shown. 
Table 7-4: Parking Area Dimensions 
Minimum Dimension (feet) 	Angle of Parking 
	0 (Parallel) 	45 	60 	90 
Stall Width 	7 	9 	9 	9 
Stall Length 	21 (middle); 24 (ends) 	18 	19 	18 
Aisle Width 	1-way=14 / 2-way=24 	14 	15 	24 
Module Width 	NA 	50 	53 	60 
 
Note: Dimensions are measured from the centerline of the stripe. 
Figure 7-1. Parking Area Dimensions
  
7.9.3. - Striping 
In parking lots containing eight (8) or more parking spaces, striping consisting of parallel lines, four (4) inches in width must be provided for each parking stall. Striping must be yellow or white.  
7.9.4. - Surfacing 
All open off-street parking areas and driveways must be improved with all-weather, hard surface pavement consisting of the following minimum specifications: 
A.  A 2.5-inch bituminous concrete surface course on a six-inch compacted crushed stone base. For replacement driveways, the base material must be inspected for adequate compaction and subsurface drainage. 
B.  A four-inch Portland cement concrete (P.C.C.) surface on a four-inch thick compacted crushed stone base. For replacement driveways, the base material must be inspected for adequate compaction and subsurface drainage. 
C.  Concrete ribbon strips are permitted only if constructed of concrete in accordance with all applicable village regulations. 
D.  Brick paver or block driveways and parking areas are permitted if construction is done in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
E.  The placement of granular fill or other non all-weather parking surface is prohibited. This provision is not intended to prohibit the continued use and maintenance of any existing non all-weather surface.  
7.9.5. - Wheel Stops 
In all parking lots containing eight (8) or more parking spaces, wheel stops or bumper guards must be installed when necessary to prohibit vehicle overhang onto adjacent pedestrian ways or landscape areas.  
7.9.6. - Access 
A.  Each required off-street parking space must open directly upon an aisle or driveway with a width and design that provides safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space. 
B.  All off-street parking must be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with motorized and non-motorized traffic. 
C.  Driveways across public property and curb cuts may not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width, as measured at the lot line.  
7.9.7. - Landscaping and Screening 
See Sec. 9.1.  
7.9.8. - Lighting 
Parking areas must be illuminated to provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian movements. All lighting must be arranged to prevent glare on abutting properties and public rights-of-way (see also Sec. 9.4).  
7.9.9. - Drainage 
All open off-street parking areas must be provided with adequate drainage and stormwater management improvements, in accordance with plan submitted to and approved by the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 7.10. - ACCESSIBLE PARKING 
7.10.1. The number, location and design of accessible parking spaces for persons with disabilities must be provided in accordance with this section and the Illinois Accessibility Code. 
7.10.2. Accessible spaces must be provided in accordance with the Table 7-5. 
Table 7-5: Accessible Parking Spaces 
Total Off-Street Parking Spaces Provided 	Accessible Parking Spaces Required 
1 to 25 	1 
26 to 50 	2 
51 to 75 	3 
76 to 100 	4 
101 to 150 	5 
151 to 200 	6 
201 to 300 	7 
301 to 400 	8 
401 to 500 	9 
501 to 1,000 	2% of total 
over 1,000 	20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000 
Medical facilities specializing in treatment of persons with mobility impairments 	20% of total 
Outpatient medical facilities 	10% of total 
 
7.10.3. Accessible parking spaces count towards the satisfying minimum off-street parking requirements. 
7.10.4. Each accessible parking space, except on-street spaces, must be at least sixteen (16) feet in width, with either an eight-foot or five-foot wide diagonally striped access aisle. The access aisle may be located on either side of the vehicle portion of the accessible space. Abutting accessible parking spaces may not share a common access aisle. 
7.10.5. Accessible parking spaces must be posted with signs in accordance with applicable state law. Signs must identify the current fine amount for violations. The sign must be fabricated to be two (2) separate panels; one for the disability symbol and one for the current fine amount as established by village board. Accessible parking spaces must also be painted with the standard ADA white symbol on blue background. 
7.10.6. Accessible parking spaces and accessible passenger loading zones that serve a particular building must be the spaces or zones located closest to the nearest accessible entrance on an accessible route. In separate parking structures or lots that do not serve a particular building, parking spaces for disabled persons must be located on the shortest possible circulation route to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility. 
7.10.7. The regulations of this section apply to required spaces and to spaces that are voluntarily designated for accessible parking. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 7.11. - DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES  
7.11.1. - Purpose 
The regulations of this section are intended to help ensure that 
A.  There is adequate on-site maneuvering and circulation area for vehicles and pedestrians; 
B.  Vehicles awaiting service do not impede traffic on abutting streets; and 
C.  Impacts on surrounding uses are minimized.  
7.11.2. - Applicability 
The regulations of this section apply to new developments, the addition of drive-through facilities to existing developments and the relocation of existing drive-through facilities.  
7.11.3. - Stacking Spaces Required 
In addition to the parking required for each use, establishments with drive-through facilities must provide stacking spaces for each drive-through station as indicated in Table 7-6, unless otherwise expressly approved through the special use permit procedures of Sec. 11.4. 
Table 7-6: Stacking Spaces Required 
Use 	Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces Required 
Automatic teller machine 	2 (measured from ATM) 
Bank/financial institution 	3 (measured from teller or service area) 
Car wash 	3 (measured from vehicle entrance) 
Vehicle repair/maintenance 	2 (measured from vehicle entrance) 
Gasoline pump 	2 spaces per pump per side 
Restaurant 	3 (measured from order board) 
Other 	2 (measured from pick-up window) 
  
7.11.4. - Stacking Lane Dimensions, Design and Layout 
A.  Stacking lanes must be designed so that they do not interfere with parking movements or safe pedestrian circulation. 
B.  Each stacking space must be at least eight (8) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. 
C.  All stacking lanes must be clearly identified through such means as striping, landscaping, pavement design, curbing and/or signs.  
7.11.5. - Setbacks 
Stacking lanes must be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the lot line of any R-zoned lot.  
7.11.6. - Noise 
Sound attenuation walls, landscaping or other mitigation measures may be required to ensure that drive-through facilities will not have adverse noise-related impacts on nearby residential uses.  
7.11.7. - Site Plans 
Site plans must show the location of drive-through windows and associated facilities (for example: communications systems and access aisles), as well as adjacent residential uses. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 7.12. - LOADING  
7.12.1. - Required 
A.  Off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas must be provided for any new proposed public/civic, commercial or industrial use or expansion of such a use that would result in a building with a floor area of 20,000 square feet or more. 
B.  Off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas must be provided for any building containing 50 or more dwelling units.  
7.12.2. - Plans Required 
Off-street loading plans must be submitted with site plans, conditional use permits and building permits involving any use required or proposing to provide off-street loading facilities. Plans must accurately designate the proposed off-street loading spaces, dimensions and clearance and access to the loading spaces. Plans for the design of loading areas are subject to approval by the village.  
7.12.3. - Location and Design 
The following location and design regulations apply to all off-street loading facilities regardless of whether they are required to be provided by this zoning ordinance. 
A.  Off-street loading facilities must be located on the same lot as the use served. 
B.  All loading areas adjacent to residential zoning districts must be screened from view of the residential zoning district. 
C.  Loading spaces may not be located in a required front or side setback. 
D.  Loading areas and access drives must be paved and maintained with concrete, asphalt, or similar material of sufficient thickness and consistency to support anticipated traffic volumes and weights. 
E.  Each off-street loading space must be designed to provide a safe means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with traffic movement, as approved by the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 8. - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 8.1. - General  
8.1.1. - Purpose 
The sign regulations of this article are intended to balance the following differing, and at times, competing goals: 
A.  To support the desired character of the village, as expressed in adopted plans, policies and regulations; 
B.  To promote an attractive visual environment; 
C.  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication for businesses, organizations and individuals; 
D.  To provide a means of way-finding for visitors and residents; 
E.  To provide for reasonable business identification and communication; 
F.  To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they obscure one another to the detriment of the economic and social well-being of the village and its residents, property owners and visitors; 
G.  To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing hazards for motorized and nonmotorized traffic; 
H.  To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; and 
I.  To provide broadly for the expression of individual opinions through the use of signs on private property.  
8.1.2. - Scope; Permit Required 
A.  All signs are subject to the regulations of this article and all other applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  All signs shall require a permit other than Nameplates, Commemorative Wall Plaques and Inscriptions as provided in Sec. 8.3.1. 
C.  Sandwich signs as provided in Sec. 8.3.2. 
D.  Certain temporary signs as listed in 8.3.6.A, 8.3.6.B, 8.3.6.C and 8.3.6.E(4). 
E.  Sign exceptions as listed in Sec. 8.3.7.  
8.1.3. - Content Neutrality 
Any sign allowed under this article may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, as long as the sign complies with all size, height, location and other applicable requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4105 , § 1, 9-9-19)  
Sec. 8.2. - PROHIBITED SIGNS AND SIGN CHARACTERISTICS 
The following signs and sign characteristics are prohibited except as otherwise expressly stated: 
8.2.1.  Signs for which a required permit has not been issued; 
8.2.2.  Signs located in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance as provided in the village code; 
8.2.3.  Search lights, strobe lights, rotating beacon lights, flashing lights that are visible from public right-of-way, except as otherwise expressly allowed by this article or required by law; 
8.2.4.  Permanent signs located in or obstructing a required parking or loading space, or that otherwise obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access or circulation, or that pose any other hazard to motorized or nonmotorized travel; 
8.2.5.  Signs located in or that project into the right-of-way of a public street unless otherwise expressly stated in this article or a right-of-way permit or license agreement has been approved by the village; 
8.2.6.  Signs that obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means of egress; 
8.2.7.  Signs that interfere with an opening required for ventilation, except that signs may cover transom windows when not in violation of applicable building and fire safety codes; 
8.2.8.  Signs affixed directly to a tree, utility pole or traffic control device; 
8.2.9.  Signs that obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or that may be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device; 
8.2.10.  Sign displays with a brightness of such intensity or brilliance that they impair the vision or endanger the safety and welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle; 
8.2.11.  Signs that violate the intersection visibility triangle regulations of Sec. 9.3: 
8.2.12.  Pole signs; 
8.2.13.  Off-premise advertising signs; 
8.2.14.  Signs attached to or painted on an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle (motorized or non-motorized) located in view of the right-of-way; and 
8.2.15.  Signs attached to or painted on a licensed motor vehicle if the sign: (1) directs attention to a business, service, commodity, or activity offered or sold on the premises and (2) if the vehicle is parked closer to the street than the nearest building wall (does not apply to vehicles parked for the purpose of immediate loading and unloading).  
Sec. 8.3. - SIGN EXCEPTIONS 
The following signs are not counted as signs for purposes of determining the number of signs or total area of signs on a lot and do not require a sign permit unless the sign is illuminated or the regulations of this section otherwise state that a permit is required.  
8.3.1. - Nameplates, Commemorative Wall Plaques and Inscriptions 
Nameplates, commemorative wall plaques and commemorative wall inscriptions are allowed in all zoning districts. Nameplates may not exceed two (2) square feet in area. Commemorative wall plaques and commemorative wall inscriptions may not be illuminated and may not exceed four (4) square feet in area.  
8.3.2. - Sandwich Board Signs 
A.  Eligible Area 
Sandwich board signs are permitted only in commercial zoning districts located in the Villa Avenue Business District, Ardmore Avenue Business District and the train station area, as shown on the maps adopted as part of Ordinance No. 3673, which are on file in the office of the community development director. 
B.  Number 
A maximum of one sandwich board sign is allowed per business. 
C.  Size 
Sandwich board signs may not exceed six (6) square feet in area or more than four (4) feet in height. 
D.  Removal 
Sandwich board signs must be removed when: 
1.  The business is not open; 
2.  The National Weather Service issues a high-wind warning, a tornado or severe thunderstorm watch or warning; or 
3.  There is an accumulating snowfall event. 
E.  Construction 
Sandwich board signs must be professionally constructed of wood, metal or durable plastic, and maintained in good condition. 
F.  Location 
Sandwich board signs must be: 
1.  Located in front of the business and allow at least four (4) feet of sidewalk clearance to allow safe passage. 
2.  Set back at least two (2) feet from back of curb abutting on-street parking spaces. 
3.  Located on the ground and not be attached to any structure or person.  
8.3.3. - Special Event/Recognitions Signs 
Special event/recognition signs are subject to village board approval. Village board-approved special event/recognition signs are not subject to the sign regulations of this article unless otherwise expressly stated at the time of approval.  
8.3.4. - Driveway Signs 
A.  One driveway sign may be installed at each vehicle entrance and exit to any lot occupied by an allowed nonresidential use or multi-unit (residential) building. Such signs must be located within ten (10) feet of the intersection of the driveway and the street right-of-way. Driveway signs may be illuminated but may not exceed four (4) square feet in area or three (3) feet in height. 
B.  Off-street parking areas with a capacity of more than four (4) vehicles, multi-tenant developments and uses on lots exceeding eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area may display internal site driveway signs. Such signs must be located within 10 feet of an internal site driveway, drive aisle or parking space and may not exceed eight (8) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height.  
8.3.5. - Drive-through Signs 
Drive-through signs are permitted in conjunction with allowed drive-through uses, in accordance with the following regulations: 
A.  Location 
Drive-through signs must be located within ten (10) feet of a drive-through lane. 
B.  Number and Dimensions 
One primary drive-through sign not to exceed 36 square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height is allowed per order station up to a maximum of two (2) primary drive-through signs per lot. One secondary drive-through sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height is allowed per order station, up to a maximum of two (2) secondary drive-through signs. 
Figure 8-1. Drive-through Signs
 
C.  Residential Separation 
Drive-through signs must be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from residential zoning districts. 
D.  Visibility 
Drive-through signs must be oriented to be visible by motorists in allowed drive-through lanes.  
8.3.6. - Temporary Signs 
A.  Real Estate Signs 
One real estate sign is allowed per street frontage in all zoning districts, subject to the maximum sign area regulations of Table 8-1: 
Table 8-1: Maximum Area of Real Estate Signs 
Street Frontage of Lot 	Maximum Sign Area (sq. ft.) 
	R Districts 	All Other Districts 
50 feet or less 	8 	8 
More than 50 feet 	8 	8 + 1 sq. ft. for each add'l foot of street frontage over 50; not to exceed sign area of 100 sq. ft. 
 
B.  Construction Signs 
One construction sign is allowed per street frontage in all zoning districts. Construction signs are subject to the maximum sign area regulations that apply to real estate signs. 
C.  Campaign Signs 
Campaign signs are allowed in all zoning districts, subject to the following regulations. 
1.  Campaign signs are allowed only on private property (not in the public right-of-way) and require the consent of the subject property owner. 
2.  There is no set limit on the number of campaign signs allowed on a lot, provided that the total allowed sign area of campaign signs may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per lot in residential districts or thirty-two (32) square feet per lot in nonresidential zoning districts. 
3.  Individual campaign signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in area in residential districts or nine (9) square feet in area in nonresidential districts. 
4.  Campaign signs located on nonresidentially zoned properties must be removed within seven (7) days after the voting event. There is no limit on the duration of display of campaign signs located on R-zoned lots. 
5.  Campaign signs may not be illuminated in any manner. 
D.  Grand Opening Signs 
Grand opening signs are allowed in any nonresidential district, subject to the following regulations. 
1.  Grand opening signs are allowed for no more than thirty (30) consecutive days during the grand opening period, which is six-month period immediately following the opening of a new business, not previously located on the premises or the reopening of an established business that has been closed for at least sixty (60) consecutive days for renovation or change of business or ownership. 
2.  A grand opening permit must be obtained before the grand opening. 
3.  No more than three (3) of the following types of grand opening signs are allowed: 
a.  One cold air inflatable device no more than twenty (20) feet in height measured from grade level. The device must comply with zoning district setback requirements. Any commercial message area attached to the device may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
b.  One non-flashing portable sign no more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. The sign must comply with zoning district setback requirements. 
c.  One banner sign affixed flush to the building, no more than ten (10) feet in length or four (4) feet in height. 
d.  Banners or streamers projecting out from the building, subject to zoning district setback requirements. 
e.  Searchlights or beacons provided that such light may only be operated between dusk and 10:00 p.m. or closing, whichever is earlier. 
4.  All grand opening signs must be removed by the permittee within twenty-four (24) hours after the expiration of the grand opening permit. 
E.  Promotional Signs 
The following types of promotional signs are allowed as sign exceptions on lots occupied by allowed nonresidential uses, subject to the following regulations. 
1.  Promotional Banner Signs 
One promotional banner sign affixed flush with the building wall and secured at all four (4) corners, not exceeding ten (10) feet in length or four (4) feet in height, is allowed per zoning lot. Promotional banners may be displayed no more than four (4) times in any calendar year, for not more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. For multi-tenant buildings consisting of three (3) or more tenants, two (2) promotional banner signs are allowed. 
2.  Promotional Pole Banners 
Promotional pole banners are allowed when secured to permanently mounted standards such as light poles. Promotional pole banners may not exceed eight (8) feet high by 2.5 feet in width and must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of nine (9) feet. No more than two (2) promotional pole banners are allowed per pole. Ornamental banners with no commercial message are allowed without a permit when meeting the requirements as stated above. 
3.  Promotional Placard Signs 
Promotional placard signs are allowed, subject to a maximum area of six (6) square feet and a maximum height of four (4) feet. Promotional placard signs must be located adjacent to the principal structure and must be placed inside the principal structure before the close of the business day. A permit is not required for promotional placard that comply with the regulations in this section. 
4.  Promotional Window Signs 
Promotional window signs are allowed as sign exceptions for allowed nonresidential uses for a maximum period of sixty (60) days in any calendar year, provided they do not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of the area of the window to which they are affixed.  
8.3.7. - Other Sign Exceptions 
The following additional signs are also allowed as sign exceptions: 
A.  Signs of notice, warning, directive, or instructional nature erected by or on behalf of a government or agency; 
B.  Flags, emblems or insignia of any nation or political subdivision; 
C.  Signs located completely within enclosed buildings, provided that such signs are oriented to be primarily visible from inside the subject building; and 
D.  Labels and notices on equipment or structures, provided the label or notice does not exceed fifteen (15) square inches in area. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.4. - SIGN REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY  
8.4.1. - Location 
Unless otherwise expressly stated in this article, signs must be located on the same zoning lot as the business, profession or activity to which the sign directs attention or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered on such zoning lot.  
8.4.2. - Sign Construction 
All signs that are applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall are prohibited. Any sign made of plywood or similar material must contain a trim border along the entire perimeter of the sign. Painted signs on plywood or similar material must utilize stenciling or similar methods to achieve a neat and uniform appearance.  
8.4.3. - Placement 
New signs must be placed in a manner as to create a minimum of interference with the visibility of existing signs. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.5. - SIGNS IN R ZONING DISTRICTS  
8.5.1. - Applicability 
The regulations of this section apply to signs in R districts.  
8.5.2. - Signs Allowed 
The following signs are permitted in R districts on lots occupied by allowed nonresidential uses or allowed multi-unit (residential) buildings: 
1.  Wall Signs 
Allowed nonresidential uses and allowed multi-unit (residential) buildings in R districts are allowed a maximum of one (1) wall sign per public building entrance leading to a lobby or other common area. Such signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
2.  Monument Signs 
Allowed nonresidential uses and allowed multi-unit (residential) buildings in R districts are allowed a maximum of one monument sign per street frontage. Allowed monument signs are subject to a maximum height limit of six (6) feet and may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
3.  Electronic Message Display Panels 
Electronic message display panels are prohibited in R districts, provided that on a lot occupied by an allowed public, civic or institutional use, the village board is authorized to approve a special use for one of the allowed signs to include a electronic message display panel. If approved, the electronic message display panel is subject to the regulations of Sec. 8.7 as well as any additional regulations imposed by the village board. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.6. - SIGNS IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS  
8.6.1. - Applicability 
The regulations of this section apply to signs in all nonresidential zoning districts.  
8.6.2. - Freestanding Signs 
Freestanding signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following regulations. 
A.  Number 
A maximum of one freestanding sign is allowed per lot, provided that lots with more than three hundred fifty (350) feet of lot frontage are allowed a maximum of two (2) freestanding signs. One (1) additional freestanding sign is allowed for vehicle sales establishments (auto dealers) if they sell both new and used vehicles or if they sell more than one (1) make of vehicle. 
B.  Area 
1.  The maximum area of allowed freestanding signs is based on the subject lot's street frontage, as indicated in Table 8-2. 
Table 8-2: Maximum Area of Freestanding Signs 
Street Frontage (feet) 	Maximum Sign Area (square feet) 
0-50 	50 
51-100 	100 
101-200 	150 
201-350 	200 
350 or more 	200 for each of the 2 allowed signs 
 
2.  For fueling stations, an additional fifteen (15) square feet of sign area is allowed for those fueling stations listing fuel prices directly on the freestanding sign, but not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet for any single sign. Also, for fueling station canopies, one sign is allowed on each canopy face with the sign area for each canopy sign not to exceed ten (10) percent of the area of each canopy face. 
C.  Height 
Freestanding signs on nonresidentially zoned lots may not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
D.  Setbacks 
Freestanding signs on nonresidentially zoned lots must be set back at least ten (10) feet from all street rights-of-way. This required setback applies to all components of the sign, including the sign structure and sign face. 
E.  Landscaping 
Landscaping must be installed and maintained around the base of all freestanding signs. The landscape area must extend a minimum of three (3) feet from the outer edge of the sign base on all sides. Where the area around the base of a sign will not accommodate landscaping, the community development director is authorized to allow installation of all or a portion of the required landscaping at an alternate location on the site. 
F.  Location 
Freestanding signs may not be located in yards abutting R-zoned lots.  
8.6.3. - Wall Signs 
Wall signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following regulations. 
A.  Sign Area 
1.  Interior Lots 
The maximum area of all wall signs on a building occupying an interior lot may not exceed 1.5 square feet per linear foot of the building's street-facing building frontage, except that if the street-facing building wall is located more than two hundred (200) feet from the street right-of-way, up to two two (2) square feet of wall sign area is allowed per linear foot of street-facing building frontage. 
2.  Corner Lots 
The maximum area of all wall signs on a building occupying a corner lot may not exceed the wall sign area allowed for interior lots, plus an additional 0.75 square feet of sign area per linear foot of side street-facing building frontage. 
B.  Location 
Wall signs may be located on any exterior wall of a building except that wall signs are prohibited on building walls facing an abutting R-zoned lot. 
C.  Sign Type 
Box signs are prohibited as wall signs.  
8.6.4. - Projecting Signs 
Projecting signs are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the following regulations. 
A.  Maximum Sign Area 
1.  Number 
A maximum of one projecting sign is allowed per building or tenant space. 
2.  Sign Area 
The area of all projecting signs on a building is counted against the building's maximum allowed wall sign area. The area of any individual projecting sign may not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
B.  Height 
1.  Projecting signs must be mounted to provide a minimum vertical clearance of at least nine (9) feet when mounted above sidewalks or pedestrian ways or at least fifteen (15) feet when mounted above driveways or vehicular circulation areas. 
2.  The maximum height of a projecting sign may not exceed twenty (20) feet above the mean grade of the centerline of the abutting street. 
C.  Location 
Projecting signs may be located on any exterior wall of a building except that projecting signs are prohibited on building walls facing an abutting R-zoned lot. 
D.  Sign Type 
Box signs are prohibited as projecting signs.  
8.6.5. - Roof Signs 
Roof signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.  
8.6.6. - Window Signs 
The area of all permanent window signs is counted against the building's maximum allowed wall sign area. Permanent window signs may not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window area.  
8.6.7. - Awning and Canopy Signs 
A.  Non-illuminated awnings or canopies are allowed and are not counted as wall signs, unless the sign copy area on the awning or canopy exceeds 6 square feet in area. Copy area in excess of 6 square feet in area is counted against the building's maximum allowed wall sign area. 
B.  Awnings and canopies must be mounted to provide a minimum vertical clearance of at least nine (9) feet when mounted above sidewalks or pedestrian ways or at least fifteen (15) feet when mounted above driveways or vehicular circulation areas. 
C.  Awnings and canopies may not be located above the building's ground floor. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.7. - ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY PANELS  
8.7.1. - Where Allowed 
Electronic message display panels are allowed in any of the commercial and industrial zoning districts with the exception of the Ardmore Avenue Business District, Villa Avenue Business District, St. Charles Road and the train station area as shown on the maps adopted as part of Ordinance No. 3673, which are on file in the office of the community development director. Electronic message display panels are subject to the regulations of this section.  
8.7.2. - Maximum Number and Sign Area 
No more than one of the allowed signs on a lot may contain an electronic message display panel. The sign area of the electronic message display panel is counted in calculating the overall area of the subject sign. An electronic message display panel may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the allowed sign area of the subject sign.  
8.7.3. - Message Hold Time 
An electronic message display may not change more frequently than every three (3) seconds. Background colors or displays are allowed to change only when the message changes.  
8.7.4. - Graphics and Animation 
Graphics are allowed only as static displays. The use of animation, dissolve, fade, scrolling, traveling, flashing, or blinking characters on electronic message display panel signs is prohibited. Animation, live feeds, video or any off-site advertising is prohibited on electronic message display panels.  
8.7.5. - Brightness 
All electronic message display panels must be equipped with automatic dimming devices, sun screens or otherwise be designed to operate in a manner that is appropriate for ambient light levels and include no external illumination. The brightness of the electronic message display panel may not exceed five thousand (5,000) nits in the daytime or more than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) nits in the nighttime (after sunset).  
8.7.6. - Operating Hours 
All electronic message display panels within 100 feet of any R zoning district must be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the business is open and operating during such hours, in which case the sign may be operated only during the hours of business operation. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.8. - ADMINISTRATION 
8.8.1.  Any person proposing to erect any sign requiring a sign permit must submit a sign permit application to the community development director. Applications for a sign permit must be accompanied by detailed plans, including scaled drawings of the proposed sign, a detailed site plan and other information deemed necessary by the community development director to determine compliance with applicable regulations. 
8.8.2.  Sign permit fees must be paid before the issuance of a sign permit. 
8.8.3.  If the work associated with a sign permit has not been completed within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the permit, such permit will lapse and become null and void. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.9. - MASTER SIGN PLANS  
8.9.1. - Applicability 
A master sign plan is required for all shopping centers and other multi-tenant developments. No sign permit may be issued for a new multi-tenant development until a master sign plan has been reviewed and approved. A master sign plan is not required for existing multi-tenant developments except when the development is being rehabilitated or expanded and the value of such rehabilitation or expansion exceeds three (3) times the equalized assessed valuation of the development for the most recent tax year.  
8.9.2. - Contents of Master Sign Plans 
Master sign plans must indicate the number, location, materials, colors and dimensions of all freestanding, wall and projecting signs in the multi-tenant development. The master sign plan must also include other information necessary to determine whether the proposed signs comply with the sign regulations of this article.  
8.9.3. - Design 
Master sign plans must describe and illustrate a consistent pattern of signage in the multi-tenant development. All signs within the development must have at least three (3) of the following design elements in common: 
A.  Common colors on the background or text; 
B.  Common lettering style; 
C.  Common size (e.g., a height or wall location common to each sign); 
D.  Common materials.  
8.9.4. - Sign Structure Color 
All sign cabinets, trim caps, returns and all sign supports such as poles and braces must be of a common color.  
8.9.5. - Plan Approval and Amendments 
The community development director is authorized to approve master sign plans and amendments to master sign plans. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.10. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS  
8.10.1. - Description 
A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully established but that no longer complies with applicable zoning ordinance regulations because of the adoption or amendment of regulations after the sign was established.  
8.10.2. - General Regulations 
Nonconforming signs may continue subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Nonconforming signs must be maintained in good repair and safe condition. No permits may be issued for enlargements, structural upgrades or other modifications that would prolong the life of nonconforming signs. 
2.  If a sign is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on its brightness or illumination or its use of electronic display panel, strobe or beacon lights, the sign must be immediately removed or made to conform. 
3.  A window sign that is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on its sign area must be immediately removed or made to conform. 
4.  If a nonconforming sign is damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of damage, the sign must be removed or made to conform to all applicable regulations within 90 days of the date of the date of damage or destruction.. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.11. - ABANDONED SIGNS 
Any sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of six (6) months or more, or pertains to a time, event, or purpose that has passed or that no longer applies, is conclusively deemed to have been abandoned. Abandoned signs are prohibited, and the sign face must be removed or replaced with clear or blank panels. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 8.12. - SIGN-RELATED DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF MEASUREMENT  
8.12.1. - Definitions 
A.  Sign: Any writing (including letters, words or numerals), pictorial representation (including illustrations or decorations), emblem (including devices, symbols or trademarks), flag, banner, streamer, pennant, string of lights, or display calculated to attract the attention of the public or any other figure of similar character that: 
1.  Is a structure or any part thereof, or a portable display, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure or on the ground; and 
2.  Is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and 
3.  Is located outside of a building, or if inside a building, is designed primarily to be visible from outside the building. 
B.  Sign area: See sign measurement rules in Sec. 8.12 
C.  Sign, off-premise advertising: A sign that directs attention to a business, product or activity available or conducted, at a location other than the zoning lot upon which such sign is located or that directs attention to a noncommercial message or idea not directly related to an activity conducted on such zoning lot. 
D.  Sign, awning: A sign located on a structure, made of cloth, metal, or other material attached to a building, such structure being erected so as to permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
E.  Sign, billboard: Same as "off-premise advertising sign." 
F.  Sign, box (or cabinet): A sign that is printed on a plastic, acrylic or similar surface that is mounted on a cabinet or box-type frame that houses the light source and electrical equipment. 
G.  Sign, business: A sign that directs attention to a business or profession conducted upon, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon, the zoning lot upon which such sign is located. 
H.  Sign, campaign: A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state, or local voting event. 
I.  Sign, canopy: A sign located on a structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other material with frames attached to a building, and supported by a frame or other device placed upon or affixed to the ground or sidewalk. 
J.  Sign, construction: A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction. 
K.  Sign, flashing: A sign that emits a sudden or transient outburst of bright light; a flood of light briefly appearing and disappearing; as a flash; or one that repeats an unchanging light pattern of words, numerals or designs of constant brightness. For purposes of this ordinance, an electronic message display panel is not considered a flashing sign as long as it complies with the regulations of Sec. 8.7I. 
L.  Sign, freestanding (or ground): A sign that is completely or principally self-supported, independent of any building, and anchored in or upon the ground. 
M.  Sign, ground: Same as "sign, freestanding." 
N.  Sign, illuminated: A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign. 
O.  Sign, monument: Signs mounted on or supported by a decorative masonry, metal or natural stone base or alternative material approved by the community development director. Monument signs have a base that is flush with the ground or no more than 12 inches above the ground and a width (at the base) that is at least seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign face. 
P.  Sign, nameplate: A small wall sign. 
Q.  Sign, pole: a freestanding sign over four (4) feet in height that is not a monument sign. 
R.  Sign, portable: A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. 
S.  Sign, projecting: A sign that is attached to or supported by a building wall by more than twelve (12) inches, with the sign faces perpendicular to such wall. 
T.  Sign, public hearing notice: A sign posed by the village that is intended to provide notice of a public hearing or meeting concerning a proposed rezoning, planned development or subdivision for the property on which the sign is posted. 
U.  Sign, real estate: A temporary sign displayed on property that is being actively marketed for sale or lease. 
V.  Sign, roof: A sign erected, constructed, or maintained in whole or in part upon the roof of a building or structure. 
W.  Sign, temporary: A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood, or other light material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
X.  Sign, wall: A sign attached directly to the front wall, side wall or corner (exterior side) wall of a building with the sign face being effectively parallel to the wall and projecting not more than twelve (12) inches from such wall. 
Y.  Sign, window: A sign that is visible from the exterior of a building or structure and that is permanently painted on a window or located within twelve (12) inches of a window.  
8.12.2. - Measurements 
A.  Sign Area 
1.  Signs Enclosed in Frames or Cabinets 
The area of a sign enclosed in a frame or cabinet is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the sign face. 
2.  Channel (individual) Letter Signs 
a.  The area of a sign comprised of individual letters or elements attached to a building wall is determined by calculating the area of the smallest geometric figure (e.g. square, rectangle, circle, polygon, etc.) that can be drawn around the letters and/or elements. 
b.  Signs consisting of individual letters and/or elements will be measured as one sign when the distance between the letters and/or elements is less than the largest dimension of the largest sign letter. 
3.  Multi-Sided Signs 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the sign faces of a multi-sided sign are parallel or within thirty (30) degrees of parallel, only one side is counted for the purpose of determining the area and number of signs. If the sign faces are not parallel or within thirty (30) degrees of parallel, all sign faces are counted. 
4.  Non-planar Signs 
Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-planar sign area is measured as fifty (50) percent of the sum of the areas using only the four (4) vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure. Signs with greater than four (4) polyhedron faces are prohibited. 
B.  Sign Height 
The height of a sign is measured as the vertical distance from curb level to the highest point of the sign. 
C.  Nits (Brightness) 
For the purpose of verifying compliance with maximum brightness level limits expressed in "nits," brightness levels must be measured with the electronic message display panel set to run full white copy with a luminance meter positioned at a location perpendicular to the sign face center. When taking the luminance reading, the sign face must be the only subject visible in the viewfinder. 
D.  Window Area 
The area of a window includes only the glass or glazed elements of the window. Frames, mullions and similar features are not counted as part of the window area. 
Figure 8-2. Area of Sign in Frame or Cabinet
 
Figure 8-3. Area of Individual Letter Signs
 
Figure 8-4. Multi-sided Sign
 
Figure 8-5. Non-planar Signs
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 9. - SITE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 9.1. - Landscaping and screening  
9.1.1. - Purpose 
The landscaping and screening regulations of this section are intended to: 
A.  Create and maintain an aesthetically appealing community character that minimizes the negative impacts of vehicular traffic, parking lots, etc., and that incorporates human-scale into the visual perception of the village; 
B.  Beautify the public way and mitigate the adverse effects on public streets and adjacent properties of noise, blowing dust and debris, water runoff and glare from motor vehicle headlights and parking area lighting; 
C.  Mitigate the impacts of high-intensity uses locating near lower intensity uses; and 
D.  Reduce topsoil erosion and stormwater runoff.  
9.1.2. - Applicability 
A.  The landscaping and screening regulations of this section apply to all new nonresidential (including mixed-use) developments and all multi-family developments (three (3) or more units per lot). 
B.  Detached houses and duplexes are exempt from the landscaping and screening regulations of this section. 
C.  Existing developments are exempt from the landscaping and screening regulations of this section, provided that a landscape plan showing the required landscape improvements for all areas of the site to be disturbed by proposed construction are required whenever one or more of the following occurs: 
1.  When any new principal building is constructed on the site. 
2.  When any addition to a principal building is constructed that increases its gross floor area by twenty-five (25) percent or more. 
3.  When an existing parking lot or drive-in facility is reconstructed, such that the reconstructed area exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the initial paved surface area, including access driveways. Resurfacing, sealing or restriping of an existing parking lot or drive-in that does not entail reconstruction of existing asphalt or concrete is not subject to this requirement. If meeting the landscape requirements reduces the number of parking spaces that can be accommodated. The community development director is authorized to reduce the subject use's off-street parking requirements in order to accommodate the required landscaping. 
4.  When remodeling, redevelopment or reconstruction is proposed on nonresidential property that would expand existing gross floor area of the lot's structure by less than twenty-five (25) percent, only the portion of the site where the expansion is located is subject to the landscaping and screening regulations of this section.  
9.1.3. - General Landscape Standards 
A.  General Guide 
Required landscaping and screening must be selected, measured, installed, and maintained in accordance with the American Standards for Nursery Stock, ANZI Z60.1, published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (www.anla.org). 
B.  Tree Mix 
If more than eight (8) trees are required, no more than forty (40) percent may be of a single species. If more than twenty-five (25) trees are required, no more than twenty-five (25) percent may be of a single species. This requirement applies to trees being planted, but not to existing trees. 
C.  Existing Vegetation 
1.  Existing vegetation may be used to satisfy the landscaping and screening requirements of this ordinance if protected and maintained during site development and construction phases of work and if such trees or plants are not otherwise prohibited. 
2.  Preserved trees will be credited toward satisfying the tree planting requirements of this ordinance if they meet applicable size requirements. Trees up to six (6) inches in diameter at breast height will be credited on a 1:1 basis. In order to encourage the preservation of existing mature trees, existing trees larger than 6 inches in diameter at breast height, up to 12 inches in diameter at breast height will be credited at a ratio of 2:1. Trees that are more than 12 inches in diameter at breast height will be credited at a ratio of 3:1. 
D.  Plant Selection 
Plants must be healthy, free of insects and diseases and physical damage (e.g., bark bruises, cracked branches). The use of native or naturalized species (to northeastern Illinois) is encouraged. The community development director is authorized to prepare and make available to the public a list of prohibited and preferred trees and plants. Additionally, plant selection should be based on all of the following factors: 
1.  Climate hardiness of plant material; 
2.  Disease and pest resistance and stress tolerance; 
3.  Year-round screening ability, particularly in those areas where plants will be used to provide visual screening for residential uses. 
E.  Minimum Plant Size 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, plants must comply with the following minimum size requirements at the time of installation: 
1.  Canopy trees in a parkway: 1.5-inch caliper. 
2.  Canopy trees not in a parkway: 2.5-inch caliper. 
3.  Evergreen trees: Eight (8) feet in height. 
4.  Ornamental trees, single trunk: Two-inch caliper. 
5.  Ornamental trees, multi-trunk: Six (6) feet in height. 
6.  Large shrubs: Twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
7.  Small shrubs: Eighteen (18) inches in height. 
F.  Sod, Topsoil, and Seeding 
Parkway landscaping must be installed in topsoil with a minimum depth of 4 inches and include sod or ground cover plants. All seeded area must be Class 1A seeding mixture. 
G.  Energy Conservation 
1.  Deciduous trees that are sun-tolerant should be placed on the south and west sides of buildings to provide shade. 
2.  Evergreens and other shade-tolerant plants should be concentrated on the north side of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds. 
H.  Installation 
1.  When necessary, trees must be staked to ensure they will be straight. 
2.  The species identifying labels must remain on the tree until species verification is completed by the village. Other tags wires, plastic ties and wire baskets must be removed from trees. 
3.  Wrapping of trees must be done immediately after they are planted. 
I.  Mulching 
All trees and shrubs must be mulched with a minimum of a three (3) inches of shredded bark, wood chips, or other organic mulch. All perennial, annual, or groundcover beds must be mulched with a minimum of a two (2) inches of shredded bark, wood chips, or other organic mulch. 
J.  Nonliving Landscaping Materials 
Nonliving landscaping materials (e.g., sand, stone, rock or bark) may be substituted for living cover over up to thirty (30) percent of the landscaped area. Artificial plants and artificial turf may not be used to satisfy landscaping and screening requirements. 
K.  Fire Hydrant Clearance 
A minimum four-foot clear area around all fire hydrants is required and there must be unobstructed access to the large "steamer" port side of any fire hydrant. 
L.  Fire Department Connections 
All fire department connections must remain free from obstruction. 
M.  Fire Alarm Warning Device 
No obstructions to the sight lines of any exterior fire alarm warning device (bells, strobes, etc.) are permitted. 
N.  Rejection of Materials 
The community development director is authorized to reject plant material that does not comply with the specification, and all rejected plant material shall be immediately removed from the site by the contractor. The village will not assume any responsibility for such rejected material.  
9.1.4. - Landscape Plan 
A.  Landscape Plan Required 
A landscape plan must be submitted and approved for all projects requiring site plan review. No permit for work, including site plan approval, may be issued until a landscape plan has been approved by the community development director. 
B.  Content of Landscape Plan 
Unless waived by the community development director, all landscape plans must be sealed by a state-registered landscape architect and include the following information: 
1.  Title block including the name and street address of the project; 
2.  North arrow, scale, date of plan and any subsequent revisions, name and address of owner and site plan designer; 
3.  Property lines; 
4.  Zoning and use of all abutting properties; 
5.  Dimensions of landscaped areas; 
6.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking lots and driveways, roadways and rights-of-way, loading areas, sidewalks, bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse disposal areas, fences, free-standing electrical equipment, light fixtures, other surface utility structures, and other free-standing structural features as determined by the community development department, tot lots and other recreational facilities, setbacks and easements; 
7.  Proposed locations of stormwater inlets, valve vaults, hose bibs, manholes, hydrants, fire department Siamese connections, and other structural features as determined necessary by the community development director; 
8.  Existing and proposed contours at one-foot contour intervals; 
9.  The location, extent and general elevations of all detention and retention areas and drainageways; 
10.  The location, quantity, size, root ball condition (e.g., B/B or potted) and both scientific and common names of all proposed plant materials, the on-center spacing for hedges; 
11.  Specification of the type, boundaries, size and spacing of all proposed ground cover, turf and method of installation including grass seed mixes; 
12.  Typical planting details for trees, shrubs, ground covers, etc; 
13.  The designation, location, type and size of all existing trees with a diameter at breast height of four (4) inches or more, including all trees to be preserved or removed; 
14.  Details of all proposed fences and walls;. 
15.  Elevations, cross-sections and other construction details required by the community development department; and 
16.  Existing and proposed stormwater management ponds and areas.  
9.1.5. - Landscape and Screening Requirements 
A.  General 
All areas of the site that are not paved must be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, ground cover and/or grass to control water runoff, restrict blowing trash and litter, and deter improper or unsafe site access. 
B.  Parkway Trees 
Parkway trees must be provided in accordance with Chapter 21, Article III of the village code. 
C.  Perimeter Landscaping 
Perimeter landscape buffers must be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Abutting RS or RD Zoning 
When nonresidential or multi-family residential development occurs on property abutting any RS or RD district, a landscape buffer with a minimum width of ten (10) feet must be provided within the required setback. Landscaping must be provided within the required buffer as follows: 
a.  A solid screen at least six (6) feet in height must be provided along the entire length of the abutting property line. Such screen must consist of a solid wood fence, berm, trees, evergreens, shrubbery, or other live plant materials that provide complete (one hundred (100) percent) visual screening. 
b.  Shade trees must be provided at the rate of at least one tree per fifty (50) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
c.  Ornamental trees must be provided at the rate of at least one tree per twenty-five (25) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
d.  Shrubs must be provided at the rate of at least one shrub per twenty (20) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
2.  Abutting Nonresidential or RM Zoning 
When nonresidential or multi-family residential development occurs on property abutting any nonresidential or RM district, landscaping must be provided as follows: 
a.  Shade trees must be provided at the rate of at least one tree per fifty (50) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
b.  Other landscaping materials, including berms, ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, or other live plant materials must be provided along at least thirty (30) percent of the abutting property line. 
3.  Foundation Landscaping 
No foundation landscaping is required for buildings built on a lot line; buildings in MX-1, MX-2, and MX-3 districts, or for areas where there is no public access. Otherwise, foundation landscaping is required as follows: 
a.  Foundation landscaping must be provided in the form of a continuous five-foot (minimum) landscape area around the full perimeter of the building, excluding pedestrian and vehicle access points. The foundation landscape area may not be reduced by more than fifty (50) percent to accommodate pedestrian and vehicle access points. 
b.  Foundation landscape areas must be one hundred (100) percent planted along the front, fifty (50) percent planted along each side and twenty-five (25) percent planted in the rear. 
c.  Plantings must include a combination of trees, shrubs, perennials and ground covers that enhance the building's architecture, soften its mass and break up blank walls. Turf grass may not be counted as part of the required foundation planted area. Remaining areas not planted must be vegetated with sod or seed and blanket. 
D.  Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping 
The perimeter of all parking lots containing six (6) or more vehicle parking spaces must comply with the parking lot perimeter landscaping regulations of this section. 
1.  Street Yards 
All open off-street parking areas must be separated from a public right-of-way with a minimum seven-foot wide buffer area, planted as follows: 
a.  When a parking lot is located in or abutting a street yard in an RS or RD district, continuous landscaping must be provided across one hundred (100) percent of the parking lot frontage to a minimum height of three (3) feet. Such landscaping must consist of hedges, or other live plant material. At least fifty (50) percent of plantings must be evergreens. 
b.  When a parking lot is located in or abutting a street yard in a RM or nonresidential district, continuous landscaping must be provided across sixty (60) percent of the parking lot frontage to a minimum height of three (3) feet. Such landscaping must consist of berms, shade or ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges or other live plant material. At least fifty (50) percent of plantings must be evergreens. 
2.  Rear and Side Yards 
a.  When a parking lot is located in an interior yard abutting an RS or RD district, a minimum ten-foot landscape buffer must be provided within the required setback. Landscaping must be provided within the buffer as follows: 
i.  A solid screen at least six feet in height must be provided along the entire length of the abutting property line. Such screen must consist of a solid wood fence, berms, trees, evergreens, shrubbery, or other live plant materials, necessary to provide complete (one hundred (100) percent) visual screening. 
ii.  Shade trees must be provided at the rate of at least one tree per fifty (50) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
iii.  Ornamental trees must be provided at the rate of at least one tree per twenty-five (25) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
iv.  Shrubs must be provided at the rate of at least one shrub per twenty (20) feet of frontage along the abutting property line. 
b.  Where a parking lot is located in a yard adjacent to an RM or nonresidential district, a minimum five-foot landscape buffer must be provided within the required setback. Landscaping must be provided across at least fifty (50) percent of that portion of the parking lot abutting the property line to a minimum height of three (3) feet. Such landscaping must consist of a combination of berms, shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, or other live plant materials. 
E.  Interior Parking Lot Landscaping 
All parking lots containing tenty (20) or more spaces must comply with the interior parking lot landscaping regulations of this section 
1.  Parking lots must contain at least one landscape island for every tenty (20) parking spaces. 
2.  Landscape islands must be located at the end of every row of parking and include a plantable area with dimensions of at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet for single rows and at least nine (9) feet by thirty-six (36) feet for double rows. 
3.  In addition to landscape islands at the end of parking rows, at east one additional in-row landscape island must be provided for every twenty (20) parking spaces within a parking row. 
4.  Landscape islands must contain at least one deciduous shade tree for single-row islands and two (2) deciduous shade trees for double islands. 
5.  In addition to required shade trees, all islands must be fully sodded, seeded (with erosion blanket) or planted with low shrubs, perennials or ground cover and maintained at a maximum height of thirty (30) inches. 
F.  Loading Areas 
All outside loading or storage areas visible from any abutting property or public right-of-way must be permanently screened. Screening must be provided by a minimum six-foot tall solid, commercial-grade wood fence or wall, or a combination berm and dense evergreen tree planting at least eight (8) feet in height at the time of planting. 
G.  Alternative Parking Lot Landscaping 
As an alternative to traditional parking lot design, lots that use low-impact design (green infrastructure) techniques to slow water runoff, increase infiltration and improve water quality are permitted and encouraged. These parking lots must be properly designed, graded and planted utilizing "best management practices" outlined in the DuPage County Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance. Vegetation must be established using a combination of seeding and plugs. 
H.  Refuse Enclosures and Other Accessory Uses/Structures 
1.  Refuse Disposal and Recycling Areas 
a.  No refuse or recycling containers may be located between any principal structure and its street lot line. All refuse disposal, recycling and grease storage containers must be screened on three (3) sides by a masonry or concrete wall constructed with materials that are similar to the principal building to a height of at least six (6) feet and with a solid, single or double access gate on one side only and situated so that, to the greatest extent possible, it does not face an abutting property or public right-of-way. The enclosure must be used solely for the confinement of refuse, recycling and grease containers and may not be used for the outside storage of any other materials or equipment. No material is permitted to accumulate so that it is visible above the height of the enclosure. 
b.  The community development director is authorized to permit refuse or recycling containers screening to be constructed of a minimum six-foot tall solid wood fence combined with landscape screening that will grow to a height of at least four (4) feet in cases where the director determines that the screening required by paragraph "a" would be impossible or impractical due to site-specific constraints. 
2.  Utility Equipment and Ground-Level Mechanical Equipment 
All equipment visible from any abutting lot or public right-of-way must be permanently screened by dense deciduous or evergreen plantings that are at least the height of the equipment being screened. Plant material must be carefully arranged to provide maintenance and meter access while maintaining the required opacity. 
3.  Rooftop Mechanical Equipment 
Except for antennas mounted on roofs pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, all mechanical equipment located on the roof must be completely (one hundred (100) percent) screened by a parapet wall or other screening structure constructed of the same materials as, or materials architecturally and aesthetically compatible with, the principal building facade to at least the height of such equipment. 
I.  Outdoor Storage Screening Requirements 
Where outdoor storage is permitted, the following regulations apply: 
1.  Outside storage may not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
2.  Outdoor storage must be screened by a solid, commercial-grade fence or wall with a height of at least six (6) feet. The outdoor storage area must be located so that, to the greatest extent possible, it is not visible from abutting property or public right-of-way. 
3.  Outdoor storage is not permitted in street yards and must be at least ten (10) feet from the nearest property line, except abutting a residential district in which case it must be at least thirty (30) feet from the nearest property line.  
9.1.6. - Completion Guarantee 
All required landscaping and screening materials shown on the approved landscape plan must be installed before the issuance of an occupancy permit. In periods of weather conditions adverse to planting the landscaping materials, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued prior to installation of landscaping and screening if a cash security of at least fifty (50) percent of the value of the landscaping is provided to the village, which must be returned upon completion and final inspection and approval of the required landscaping and screening improvements.  
9.1.7. - Maintenance 
A.  Responsibility 
The owner of the premises, and any lessee, are jointly and severally responsible for maintaining, repairing and replacing all landscape materials and other improvements shown on the approved landscape plan over the entire life of the development. Any plant materials such as shrubs, trees and ground covers that die, are in decline, or supporting less than fifty (50) percent healthy leaf growth must be replaced in compliance with the approved landscape plan. The same maintenance requirements apply to those properties without an approved landscape plan on file. 
B.  Watering Plant Material 
A permanent means to water plant material, such as hose bibs or an underground irrigation system, must be provided. 
C.  Screening 
All screening, including fences, walls and landscaping must be protected from damage by motor vehicles, pedestrians, snow, or salt that could reduce the effectiveness of the screening.  
9.1.8. - Plant List: 
The community development director is authorized to establish a permitted, preferred and prohibited plant list. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 9.2. - FENCES  
9.2.1. - General 
A.  Applicability 
The fence regulations of this section apply to all fences unless otherwise expressly stated. 
B.  Exemptions 
Open mesh-type fences enclosing school sites, park and recreation uses, utility and public service uses or industrial uses are exempt from the fence regulations of this section. 
C.  Permits Required 
A fence permit is required from the community development department before the construction or erection of any fence or required screening. 
D.  Installation 
The finished side of all fences (i.e., the side of the fence without posts or visual structural support elements) must face outward, toward the abutting lot or right-of-way. 
E.  Fences in Easements 
Fences may be constructed in utility easements and easements granted to the village if the property owner acknowledges in a form approved by the village attorney that the village and its agents have the right to remove the fence at any time in order to repair, maintain or inspect the easement. The village is authorized to remove fences in easements without notifying the property owner, but the village must attempt to provide advance notice to the property owner if practical. The property owner is solely responsible for all expenses for repair, replacement, or damage to the fence within the easement as a result of either the fence removal or the repair, maintenance or inspection of improvements. The village has no liability whatsoever in connection with fences placed in easements. No fence permit may be issued if construction of the proposed fence will create an obstruction to the natural flow of water within any drainage easement. 
F.  Barbed Wire 
No fence may contain any barbed wire or be designed, constructed, or installed to cause injury to any person, except in industrial districts or as approved through the special use process. Barbed wire may be installed in M zoning districts, provided that the lowest portion is at least 8 feet above grade. The barbed wire regulations of this paragraph do not apply to village-owned property.  
9.2.2. - Allowed Fence Heights and Locations 
Maximum allowed fence heights depend on the type offence and its location, as indicated in Table 9-1. 
Table 9-1: Allowed Fence Heights and Locations 
Yard Type Fence Type 	Maximum Fence Height (feet) [1] 
	Interior Lots 	Corner Lots 	Through Lots 	Corner Through Lots 
Front 
Solid Fence 	3 	3 	3 	3 
Open Fence 	4 	4 	4 [2] 	4 [2] 
Exterior Side 				
Solid Fence 	NA 	6 [See 9.3.2] 	NA 	6 [See 9.3.2] 
Open Fence 	NA 	4 	NA 	4 
Interior Side [3] 
Solid or Open Fence 	6 	6 	6 	6 
Rear 
Solid or Open Fence 	6 	6 	6 	6 
 
[1] Fence posts and ornamental post caps may extend above the maximum fence height by up to six (6) inches. 
[2] Fences up to six (6) feet in height area allowed in yards abutting Route 83, between Park Avenue and Madison Ave. 
[3] Fences in interior side yards may not extend closer to any street than the front of the principal structure. 
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 9.3. - VISIBILITY TRIANGLES  
9.3.1. - Intersections 
On corner lots in all zoning districts, except C-1, C-2, MX-1, MX-2, and MX-3, nothing may be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow between a height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above grade within the required intersection visibility triangle, which is formed by two (2) lines that begin at the point of intersection of the subject lot's street lots lines and extend for a distance of twenty (20) feet along each street lot line and a third connecting line that forms the triangle (see Figure 9-5). Any plantings or other vegetation located within or overhanging this intersection visibility triangle must be at all times trimmed, maintained or removed to maintain clear visibility between a height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above grade. 
Figure 9-5. Intersection Visibility Triangle
  
9.3.2. - Driveways 
Solid fences and other visual obstructions exceeding three (3) feet in height are prohibited within driveway visibility triangles. Driveway visibility triangles are required along both sides of driveways. The triangles are formed as follows: 
A.  One side of the triangle extends from the intersection of the street and the driveway edge for a distance of ten (10) feet along the lot line abutting the street. 
B.  The second side of the triangle extends from the intersection of the street and the property line for a distance of ten (10) feet inward from the lot line along the driveway edge. 
C.  The third side of the triangle connects the other two (2) sides (see Figure 9-6). 
Figure 9-6. Driveway Visibility Triangle
 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 9.4. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING  
9.4.1. - Applicability 
Except as otherwise expressly stated, the outdoor lighting regulations of this section apply to all new installations and all replacements of existing outdoor lighting in the village.  
9.4.2. - Exceptions 
A.  Because of their unique requirement for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation, municipal facilities, ball diamonds, playing fields, tennis courts, and other outdoor recreational facilities are exempt from the outdoor lighting regulations of this section. Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities must be shielded to minimize light and glare from spilling onto adjacent residential properties. 
B.  Traditional holiday lighting is exempt from outdoor lighting regulations of this section, provided the lighting is reasonable, limited to a power rating of no more than 75 watts and does not constitute a public safety hazard or nuisance. 
C.  Transportation facilities are exempt from the outdoor lighting regulations of this section. 
D.  When site characteristics are unique and the outdoor lighting regulations of this section cannot be met, the community development director is authorized to approve alternative lighting designs if the illumination levels and/or uniformity ratios are within 20% of the values set forth in this section. 
E.  A higher intensity of illumination in a safety or security problem area as defined by the chief of police may be authorized by the community development director. 
F.  Lighting installed and maintained within a public right-of-way, lighting used in conjunction with public safety operations, or hazard or warning lights required by a governmental agency are exempt from the outdoor lighting regulations of this section. 
G.  Sign illumination is exempt from the outdoor lighting regulations of this section.  
9.4.3. - General Regulations 
A.  The style of the light and light standard must be consistent with the architectural style of the principal building. 
B.  Security lighting must be placed at building entranceways and building access areas. 
C.  All building lighting for security or aesthetics must include glare controls and be shielded. 
D.  Floodlighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent glare for drivers or pedestrians, light trespass beyond the property line, and light above a 90 degree horizontal plane. 
E.  Wallpack type fixtures are prohibited. 
F.  All parking area lighting must include glare controls and be shielded. 
G.  Light poles must be located where they do not create hazards for pedestrians or vehicles. 
H.  The illuminated face of all fixtures must be parallel to the ground. Tilted fixtures are prohibited. 
I.  The maximum height of a luminaire may not exceed twenty-five (25) feet, as measured from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the top of the pole or luminaire, whichever is higher.  
9.4.4. - Glare 
No exterior lighting may be maintained on a lot so as to shine into, or upon, any other lot or any rightof-way with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, or to cause momentary blindness or to create a nuisance on adjacent property. Sources of light (the bulb) must be directed, shaded, shielded, or otherwise located to minimize perceived glare on adjacent properties and streets. 
Table 9-2: Maximum Illumination 
Use/Location/Adjacency 	Maximum Footcandles at Property Line 
Residential to Residential 	0.2 
Nonresidential to Residential 	0.2 
Nonresidential to Nonresidential 	0.5 
Abutting ROW 	0.5 
M District 	0.5 
  
9.4.5. - Prohibited 
The following are expressly prohibited: 
A.  Exterior lighting used in a manner that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public streets and alleys. 
B.  Any light that could be confused with, or construed as, a traffic control device, unless authorized by state, federal, city or county government. 
C.  High-pressure sodium lamps are prohibited. 
D.  Blinking, flashing, moving, revolving, fluttering, flickering, oscillating, scintillating, changing light intensity, brightness and changing color lights shall be prohibited, except for temporary holiday displays, lighting for public safety or traffic control, or lighting required by the FAA or other governmental agency for air traffic control and warning purposes.  
9.4.6. - Parking Lot Standards 
Not withstanding the other outdoor lighting regulations of this section, all uses required by this zoning ordinance to provide six (6) or more parking spaces or one or more loading spaces, must provide lighting facilities to illuminate all parking spaces, aisles and loading spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Parking lot lighting must be provided to a minimum intensity of 2.0 footcandles during all times that the parking lot is open for general use. 
B.  The horizontal illumination at the property line adjacent to or across from detached or attached single-family residential zoned properties may not exceed 0.2 footcandles.  
9.4.7. - Measuring Light Levels 
Footcandle horizontal measurements must be taken at a height of 3.5 feet above ground. Light level measurement must be made at the property line of the property upon which the light to be measured is being generated. If measurement on private property is not possible or impractical, light level measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street right-of-way that adjoins the property of the complainant or at any other location on the property of the complainant. Measurements must be made after dark with the light sources in question on, then with the same light sources off. The difference between the two (2) readings must then be compared to the maximum permitted illumination. This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and other ambient light. Light levels are specified, calculated and measured in footcandles (fc). All fc values are maintained footcandles unless specified otherwise.  
9.4.8. - Exterior Lighting Plans 
A lighting plan must be prepared any time exterior lighting is proposed, or modified, that is associated with a multi-family residential use or with any commercial, office, industrial or other nonresidential use. The lighting plan must be submitted with the site plan or independently if a site plan is not required. All lighting plans are subject to approval by the community development director. The lighting plan must include: 
A.  A site plan indicating location of light fixtures by style on the site. 
B.  Identification of all proposed light fixtures, including those used for site lighting, canopy lighting and exterior building lighting. 
C.  Cut sheet of each proposed light style. All styles (ground, sign, wall, pole, recessed can, bollard) of lights proposed on the building and site must be identified. Catalog cut sheets for the proposed light poles, fixtures and any exterior control equipment. 
D.  The type of refractor, louver, or side shield to cut off direct light to adjacent properties. On all nonresidential and multifamily uses, the shield must cover the top and sides to completely block passage of light and must extend downward vertically below the lowest point of the illumination source. 
E.  Lamp type. Incandescent, quartz-halogen, fluorescent, low-pressure sodium, mercury vapor, metal halide, or approved equal. 
F.  Lamp wattage. 
G.  Pole height. 
H.  Photometric plan prepared by a professional lighting consultant. The photometric plan must show a grid of individual illumination values and accurately indicate the level of illumination at all property lines and five (5) feet beyond the property line, based on all proposed light fixtures. 
I.  A summary table containing average footcandles, minimum footcandles, maximum footcandles, uniformity ratio (average/minimum), footcandles at the property line, pole height, and light loss factor (LLF). 
J.  The lighting plan must also contain a certification by the property owner and the preparer of the plan that the exterior lighting depicted on the plan complies with the outdoor lighting regulations of this section. 
K.  Once the plan is approved, the exterior lighting of the property must conform to the plan. If the outdoor lighting as installed does not comply with this section, the owner must make those revisions necessary to bring the lighting plan into conformance. 
L.  Identification of all proposed control equipment, conduit and wiring, including material, size and location. 
M.  Construction details of the pole, pole foundation, electrical trench with warning tape and pole wiring. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 9.5. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS  
9.5.1. - Applicability 
All buildings, structures and uses are subject to the performance standards of this section.  
9.5.2. - Noise 
A.  Any use established in an M district must be operated to comply with the noise standards of this section. 
B.  Existing uses may not be altered or modified in a way that would conflict with, or be in greater conflict with, the noise standards of this section. 
C.  All sounds of an intermittent nature must be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent use. 
D.  Sound levels must be measured with a sound-level meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured in compliance with standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
E.  At no point on the boundary of an R, O, C or MX district may the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in Table 9-3. 
Table 9-3: Maximum Permitted Sound Levels 
Octave Band 	Maximum Permitted Sound Level (decibels) 
Frequency 
(cycles per second) 	Along R
District Boundary 	Along Nonresidential District Boundary 
0 to 75 	72 	79 
76 to 150 	67 	74 
151 to 300 	59 	66 
301 to 600 	52 	59 
601 to 1,200 	46 	53 
1,201 to 2,400 	40 	47 
2,401 to 4,800 	34 	41 
4,801 and above 	32 	39 
  
9.5.3. - Smoke and Emissions 
A.  Any use established must be operated to comply with smoke and emission standards of this section. 
B.  Existing uses may not be altered or modified in a way that would conflict with, or be in greater conflict with, the smoke and emission standards of this section. 
C.  In addition to smoke and emission standards of this section, the emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful. 
D.  For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines must be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times except as otherwise expressly stated. 
E.  The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate matter containing more than ten (10) percent by weight of particles having a particle diameter larger than forty-four (44) microns is prohibited. 
F.  Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within lot boundaries must be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing or acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of the weight limitations specified in this section is prohibited. 
G.  The emission of more than ten (10) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 1. However, during a single one-hour period in each 24-hour day, each stack may emit up to twenty (20) smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire-cleaning periods, however, is smoke of Ringelmann No. 3 permitted, and then for not more than four (4) minutes. 
H.  The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot may not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of lot area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factors set forth in Table 9-4, Table 9-5 and Table 9-6. Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot must be made as follows: 
1.  Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area-thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre. 
2.  From each gross hourly rate of emission, deduct the appropriate correction factor for height, velocity and temperature, as forth in Table 9-4, Table 9-5 and Table 9-6, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission. 
3.  Add together the individual net rates of emission, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total may not exceed one pound per acre of lot area during any one (1) hour. 
Table 9-4: Height of Emissions 
Exit Velocity (feet per second) 	Correction (lbs per hour per acre) 
50 	0.01 
100 	0.06 
150 	0.10 
200 	0.16 
300 	0.30 
400 	0.50 
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table 
 
Table 9-5: Velocity of Emissions 
Exit Velocity (feet per second) 	Correction (lbs per hour per acre) 
0 	0 
20 	0.03 
40 	0.09 
60 	0.16 
80 	0.24 
100 	0.50 
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table 
 
Table 9-6: Temperature of Emissions 
Exit Velocity (feet per second) 	Correction (lbs per hour per acre) 
200 	0 
300 	0.001 
400 	0.002 
500 	0.003 
1,000 	0.010 
1,500 	0.040 
2,000 	0.100 
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table 
  
9.5.4. - Vibrations 
No operation or activity may cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits established in this section and may not in any event create earth-shaking vibrations beyond the property line of a magnitude such as to be a nuisance or hazard to any person or other property. Vibration (the periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth) must be measured at any point along a R, O, C or MX district boundary line with a three-component measuring instrument and must be expressed as displacement in inches, and may not exceed the maximumvibration limits established in Table 9-7. 
Table 9-7: Maximum Vibration 
Frequency (cycles per second) 	Maximum Dispalcement Beyond Property Line 
0 to 10 	0.0008 
10.01 to 20 	0.0005 
20.01 to 30 	0.0002 
30.01 to 40 	0.0002 
over 40 	0.0001 
  
9.5.5. - Glare and Heat 
All operations or illumination producing intense glare or heat must be performed within a completely enclosed building and in a manner that does not create a public nuisance or hazard at any location beyond lot lines of the subject property.  
9.5.6. - Stormwater 
Adequate provisions must be made for the disposal of stormwater consistent with Section 18-104 Changing Lot Elevation and Grades; Obstructing Drainage, and Appendix D of the Village of Villa Park Municipal Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 10. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
 
SEC. 10.1. - APPLICABILITY 
The provisions of this article apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities located outside of the public right-of-way unless otherwise expressly indicated. See village code section 13-1125 for regulations governing small cell wireless communications facilities within the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 10.2. - WHERE ALLOWED 
Wireless telecommunications facilities and services are allowed in those zoning districts and locations indicated in Table 10-1. 
Table 10-1: Zoning for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
Facility Type 	Zoning District 
	RS-10 	RS-7.5 	RD-7.5 	RM-9 	O-R 	C-1 	C-2 	C-3 	MX-1 	MX-2 	MX-3 	MX-T 	MX-R 	M-1 	M-2 	PI-1 	PI-2 
New tower 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Initial placement/installation of transmission equipment on wireless support structure 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Modification of existing tower/base station that constitutes a substantial change 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Construction/placement of transmission equipment that does not constitute an eligible facilities request 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Siting of small wireless facility on RS-zoned property occupied by a single household 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Installation of new wireless support structure on RS-zoned property occupied by a single household 	? 	? 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Eligible facilities request 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Installation of new wireless support structure not on RS-zoned property occupied by single household 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Siting of small wireless facility that is not on RS-zoned property occupied by single household 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
Siting of small wireless facility on a village-owned structure 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	?- 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 	? 
 
Facilities identified with a "?" are permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district. 
Facilities identified with an "?" may be allowed in the subject zoning district only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use procedures of Sec. 11.4. 
Facilities identified with an "-" are prohibited  
SEC. 10.3. - APPLICATIONS GENERALLY 
10.3.1. Every applicant shall file a completed application with the community development director, in a number and form specified by the community development director. 
10.3.2. Applications shall not require or be evaluated based upon: 
A.  Except as provided in Sec. 10.4, information about an applicant's business decisions with respect to the applicant's designed service, customer demand for service, or quality of the applicant's service to or from a particular area or site; 
B.  Availability of other potential locations for the placement or construction of a tower or transmission equipment; 
C.  Except as provided in Sec. 10.4, other options for collocation instead of the construction of a new tower or modification of an existing tower or existing base station that constitutes a substantial change to an existing tower or existing base station; however, applicants are encouraged to consider collocation options prior to submitting an application; 
D.  The requirement for removal of existing towers, base stations, or transmission equipment, wherever located, other than requirements stated in policy approved by village board resolution for removal of abandoned towers or transmission equipment; 
E.  Surety requirements, including bonds, escrow deposits, letters of credit, or any other type of financial surety, to ensure that abandoned or unused towers or transmission equipment can be removed, other than requirements stated in policy approved by village board resolution that are competitively neutral, nondiscriminatory, reasonable in amount, and commensurate with the historical record for local facilities and structures that are abandoned; 
F.  Applicant's agreement to provide space on or near the tower, base station, or wireless support structure for the village or for other local governmental or nongovernmental services at less than the market rate for such space or to provide other services via the structure or facilities at less than the market rate for such services; 
G.  Environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring requirements, or other compliance measures, for radio frequency emissions from transmission equipment that are categorically excluded under FCC rules for radio frequency emissions pursuant to 47 CFR 1.1307(b)(1); 
H.  Regulations or procedures for radio frequency signal strength or the adequacy of service quality; or 
I.  Perceived or alleged environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, as provided in 47 USC 332(c)(7)(B)(iv). 
10.3.3. The village shall not deny an application due to the type of transmission equipment or technology to be used by the applicant, or preference for type of infrastructure or technology; and shall not prohibit the placement of emergency power systems that comply with federal and state environmental requirements. 
10.3.4. Applications shall remain valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of final approval, including disposition of any appeals. Construction of approved structures or facilities shall be commenced withintwo (2) years of final application approval and diligently pursued to completion.  
SEC. 10.4. - APPLICATIONS FOR NEW TOWERS 
In addition to the general application requirements of Sec. 10.3, applications for new towers must include the following: 
10.4.1. An explanation of the reason for choosing the proposed location and why collocation was not selected, including a sworn statement from an individual with responsibility over placement of the tower attesting that collocation within the area determined by the applicant to meet the applicant's radio frequency engineering requirements for the placement of a site would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity, is technically infeasible, or is economically burdensome to the applicant; and 
10.4.2. Propagation maps, to be used solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the coverage or capacity gap or need for applications for new towers in an area zoned for residential use. Such maps are to be used for no other purpose.  
SEC. 10.5. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES  
10.5.1. - Small Wireless Facilities 
Applications for small wireless facilities shall be processed as follows: 
A.  Within ninety (90) days following the submission of a completed application, the community development director shall approve or disapprove the application, by written notice provided to the applicant, and documenting the basis for denial if applicable including the specific code provisions or standards on which the denial is based. 
B.  An applicant whose application is denied shall have an opportunity to cure any deficiencies identified by the village as the basis for the denial and to submit a revised application within thirty (30) days following the date of denial without paying an additional fee. The village shall approve or deny a revised application within thirty days following submission.  
10.5.2. - Other Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
Applications for any wireless telecommunications service use other than for small wireless facilities shall be processed as follows: 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of acceptance of an application, village staff shall provide written notice to the applicant of all deficiencies in the application relating to the village's applicable zoning regulations and building permit requirements, setting forth the village code sections and village policies for reference. The applicant shall provide all required information or necessary revisions as set forth in such notice. 
B.  Within ten (10) days of the date that the applicant supplements its submission in accordance with the village's notice, village staff shall provide written notice to the applicant of any continued deficiencies in the application, setting forth the village code sections and village policies for reference as also provided in the original notice. The applicant may supplement its submission, and the village may provide notice of deficiencies, until such time as the applicant provides all required information and/or makes all necessary revisions to its plans. 
C.  No application shall be deemed complete until all deficiencies stated in such notices, if any, have been cured. 
D.  Unless extended due to notices and responses as described in paragraphs A or B of this subsection, the community development department director shall approve or disapprove the application, by written notice provided to the applicant: 
1.  Within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days of the date of submission for applications for new towers, 
2.  Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of submission for applications for eligible facilities requests, and 
3.  Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date of submission for applications for (i) initial placement or installation of base stations and/or transmission equipment on wireless support structures, (ii) modification of an existing tower or existing base station that constitutes a substantial change, or (iii) a request for construction or placement of transmission equipment that does not constitute an eligible facilities request.  
10.5.3. - Notice to Applicant 
If the community development director finds that an application submitted under this section does not meet the definition of an eligible facilities request, the village shall notify the applicant in writing that the application shall be processed as an application for a new tower, or as an application for initial placement or installation of a base station and/or transmission equipment on wireless support structures, and/or for modification of an existing tower or existing base station that constitutes a substantial change, and/or for a request for construction or placement of transmission equipment that does not constitute an eligible facilities request, or as a small wireless facility application or wireless support structure for the siting of a small wireless facility, accordingly, and the applicable time-frame for review shall commence on the date stated on said notice. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 10.6. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS  
10.6.1. - New and Modified Towers 
The following requirements and criteria are applicable to new towers and modifications of existing towers that constitute a substantial change: 
A.  A tower shall be set back from the property line of any adjoining residentially zoned property a distance equal to the height of the tower and its related equipment, unless a lesser setback is required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant, and the tower and related equipment shall be adequately screened from adjoining residential uses. 
B.  A tower and any related equipment thereon shall be painted a color compatible with the surrounding area. 
C.  Except for the minimum lighting, if any, necessary to comply with FAA regulations. 
D.  The height of a tower, inclusive of any related equipment thereon, shall not exceed 180 feet unless additional height is required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant. 
E.  Any service building or equipment located at grade shall be adequately screened from adjoining residential uses. 
F.  The adverse visual impact of a tower shall be minimized through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques. Unless otherwise required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant, at a tower site, the design of the buildings and related equipment shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the facilities with the natural setting and the built environment. If the built environment is anticipated to change significantly during the usable life of the tower, such as within an urban renewal district or recently annexed areas, the tower or structure shall be compatible with the anticipated future built environment. 
G.  Modifications to existing towers shall not defeat existing concealment elements of the tower, and shall comply with all conditions associated with the prior approval of construction or modification of the tower, including but not limited to building code, zoning ordinance, and permit conditions, unless required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant. 
H.  Modifications shall not increase the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4) cabinets, and shall not cause excavation or deployment to occur outside the current site of the tower, unless required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant.  
10.6.2. - Other Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
The following requirements and criteria shall apply to all wireless telecommunication service uses other than new towers or modifications of existing towers that constitute a substantial change. For purposes of this subsection only, unless otherwise specified, "transmission equipment" includes "transmission equipment," "base station," and "small wireless facility."  
10.6.3. - [Transmission Equipment] 
Transmission equipment shall be placed upon or within a wireless support structure such as to minimize visibility of the transmission equipment to the fullest extent technologically possible, unless visible placement is required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Wall mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted in a configuration that is as flush to the wall as technically possible to ensure both the functionality of the antenna and to minimize visual impact and shall not project above the wall on which it is mounted. 
B.  Transmission equipment mounted on roof appurtenances, such as mechanical equipment, must be as flush mounted to the existing mechanical equipment or roof appurtenance as technically possible to ensure both the functionality of the antenna and to minimize visual impact. 
10.6.4.  Transmission equipment shall be designed and located so as to be architecturally compatible with the wireless support structure upon which the transmission equipment is mounted and to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact, unless otherwise required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant. 
10.6.5.  Except for the minimum lighting, if any, necessary to comply with FAA regulations. 
10.6.6.  Transmission equipment upon a wireless support structure, and any related equipment located at grade, shall be adequately screened from adjoining residential uses. 
10.6.7.  The height of a wireless support structure, inclusive of the transmission equipment, shall not exceed the maximum height allowed by the applicable zoning district unless additional height is required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant. 
10.6.8.  A wireless support structure, and transmission equipment, shall be set back from the property line of any adjoining residentially zoned property as required by the bulk regulations of the applicable zoning district. 
10.6.9.  The number of new wireless support structures may be reasonably limited, consistent with the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, and provided that such limitation does not have the effect of prohibiting or significantly impairing a wireless service provider's ability to provide wireless service within the area of a proposed new structure. 
10.6.10.  Modifications to an existing base station shall not defeat existing concealment elements of the base station, and shall comply with all conditions associated with the prior approval of construction or modification of the base station, including but not limited to building code, zoning code, or permit conditions, unless required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant. 
10.6.11.  Modifications to an existing base station shall not increase the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed 4 cabinets, and shall not cause excavation or deployment to occur outside the current site of the base station, unless required due to the type of transmission equipment or technology proposed by the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 10.7. - VARIATIONS, APPEALS AND REGULATORY RELIEF 
If the denial of any appeal for a variation of relief will result in denial of wireless telecommunications services, or if approval of a variation or an appeal for relief is necessary due to the type of technology proposed by an applicant, then the planning and zoning commission shall grant the relief sought, which may be subject to conditions allowed by village, state, and federal law. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 10.8. - DEFINITIONS 
The definitions of this section apply solely in administering and interpreting the wireless telecommunications regulations of this article. The following words, terms and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
A.  Applicant 
Any person, and/or any person acting on behalf of another person, engaged in the business of providing wireless telecommunications services or the wireless telecommunications infrastructure required for wireless telecommunications services and who submits an application. This definition of "applicant" shall apply specifically to this article. 
B.  Application 
A request submitted by an applicant to the community development department for any wireless telecommunications service use requiring conditional use approval and/or zoning compliance and siting review as set forth in this article. This definition of "application" shall apply specifically to this article. 
C.  Base Station 
Equipment not associated with a tower or a supporting structure that is not a tower, at a fixed location, that, at the time that the application is filed, supports or houses an antenna, transceiver, distributed antenna system (DAS) equipment, small cell equipment, or other associated equipment that enables FCC-licensed or FCC-authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network and that has been previously reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process or under another state or local regulatory review process. "Base station" includes but is not limited to equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services and unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul; radio transceivers; antennas; coaxial or fiberoptic cable; regular and backup power supplies; and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. 
D.  Collocation 
The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an existing tower or base station for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
E.  Distributed Antenna System (DAS) 
A network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. 
F.  Eligible Facilities Request 
A request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base station, including legal non-conforming structures, that involves collocation, removal, or replacement of transmission equipment, and that does not constitute a substantial change to the tower or base station. "Eligible facilities request" applies only to towers or base stations for which the state or local government has approved the construction of the structure with the sole or primary purpose of supporting covered transmission equipment (i.e. existing wireless towers), or where the state or local government has previously decided that the site is suitable for wireless facility deployed and approved the siting of transmission equipment that is part of a base station on that structure (i.e. other existing support structures). "Eligible facilities request" includes hardening through structural enhancement where such hardening is necessary for a covered collocation, replacement, or removal of transmission equipment and structural enhancement so long as the modification of the underlying tower or base station is performed in connection with and is necessary to support a collocation, removal, or replacement of transmission equipment, but does not include replacement of the structure upon which the transmission equipment is located. 
G.  Equipment Cabinet 
A cabinet mounted on the ground or on a wireless support structure used to support equipment associated with a wireless telecommunication facility. 
H.  Existing 
Previously reviewed and approved under applicable zoning or siting processes, or under another form of affirmative state or local regulatory review process. "Existing" includes a wireless tower that does not have a permit or other zoning approval because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was otherwise lawfully constructed; and a structure that, at the time of the application, supports or houses a base station, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. "Existing" does not include a tower or base station that was constructed or deployed without proper review; was not required to undergo siting review; does not support transmission equipment that received another form of affirmative state or local regulatory approval; or any structure that is merely capable of supporting wireless transmission equipment whether or not it is providing such support at the time of the application. This definition of "existing" shall apply specifically to this article. 
I.  FCC 
Federal Communications Commission 
J.  Increase in Height 
Any of the following: 
1.  For towers not within public rights-of-way, a cumulative increase in the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measuring the change in height from the dimensions of the tower as originally approved or as of the most recent modification that received local zoning or similar regulatory approval prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act, whichever is greater. 
2.  For towers within public rights-of-way, a cumulative increase in the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater, measuring the change in height from the dimensions of the tower as originally approved or as of the most recent modification that received local zoning or similar regulatory approval prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act, whichever is greater. 
3.  For all base stations, an increase in height of the base station by more than ten (10) percent or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater, measuring the change in height from the height of the original structure, rather than the height of the previously approved antenna. 
K.  Increase in Width 
Any of the following: 
1.  For towers not within public rights-of-way, an increase in width from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater. 
2.  For towers within public rights-of-way, and for all base stations, an increase in width from the edge of the structure more than six (6) feet. 
L.  Site 
All of the following: 
1.  For towers, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. This definition of "site" shall apply specifically to this article. 
2.  For base stations, the area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment deployed on the ground at the time of the application. This definition of "site" shall apply specifically to this article. 
M.  Small Wireless Facility 
Operator-controlled, low-powered radio access nodes, including those that operate in licensed spectrum and unlicensed carrier-grade Wi-Fi, with a range from ten (10) meters to several hundred meters, and further defined as follows: 
1.  Each antenna is no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume. 
2.  All other equipment associated with the small wireless facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume. 
3.  For purposes of this "small wireless facility" definition, volume shall be measured by the external displacement of the primary equipment enclosure, not the internal volume of such enclosure. An associated electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cutoff switch, cable, conduit, and any equipment that is concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment may be located outside of the primary equipment enclosure and shall not be included in the calculation of the equipment volume. "Small wireless facility" does not include any structure that supports or houses equipment described in this definition. 
N.  Spectrum Act 
The federal Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-22, codified at 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 ("Section 6409 Wireless Facilities Deployment"), approved February 22, 2012. 
O.  Substantial Change 
Any of the following: 
1.  The installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, and not to exceed four (4) cabinets. 
2.  Any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the tower or base station. 
3.  Modifications that defeat the existing concealment elements of the tower or base station. 
4.  Modifications that do not comply with conditions associated with the prior approval of construction or modification of the tower or base station, including but not limited to building code, zoning code, or permit conditions, and that exceed one or more of the "substantial change" thresholds identified in this definition. 
5.  An "increase in height," as that phrase is defined in this article. 
6.  An "increase in width," as that phrase is defined in this section. 
P.  Tower (or Communication Tower or Wireless Tower) 
A structure constructed with the sole or primary purpose of supporting FCC-licensed or authorized transmission equipment, including transmission of personal wireless service, broadband service, and mobile and fixed broadband service. 
Q.  Transmission Equipment 
Any equipment, other than equipment related to a "small wireless facility" as defined in this subsection, that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or FCC-authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply used in any technological configuration associated with any FCC-authorized wireless transmission, licensed or unlicensed, terrestrial or satellite, including commercial mobile, private mobile, broadcast service, and public safety services, as well as fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul or fixed broadband. The term "related equipment", when used in this chapter in reference to a tower or a base station, includes but is not limited to "transmission equipment." 
R.  Wireless Support Structure (or Structure) 
A structure that exists at the time an application is submitted and is capable of supporting the attachment or installation of transmission equipment in compliance with applicable codes, including but not limited to water towers, buildings, and other structures. "Wireless support structure" or "structure" does not include a tower or existing base station. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 11. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
SEC. 11.1. - COMMON PROVISIONS  
11.1.1. - Applicability 
The "common provisions" of this section apply to all of the procedures in this article unless otherwise expressly stated.  
11.1.2. - Review and Decision-making Authority 
The following table provides a summary of the review and approval procedures of this article. In the event of conflict between this table and the detailed procedures contained elsewhere in this article, the detailed procedures govern. 
Procedure 	Community Development
Director 	Planning and Zoning Commission 	Village Board 
Ordinance Text/Map Amendment 	R 	<R> 	DM 
Special Use 	R 	<R> 	DM 
Planned Unit Development (PUD) 			
Development Plan 	R 	<R> 	DM 
Site Plan 	DM 	A 	A 
Variation 	R 	<R> 	DM 
Administrative Adjustment 	DM 	<A> 	- 
Appeal of Administrative Decision 	- 	<DM> 	- 
R = Review/Recommendation   DM = Decision-Making   A = Appeal of Decision   <> = Public Hearing 
  
11.1.3. - Applications and Fees 
A.  Form of Application 
Applications required under this zoning ordinance must be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the community development director. Applications must include materials and information as may be required by the community development director to establish that the proposed activity complies with all applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Application Filing Fees 
All applications must be accompanied by the fee amount that has been established by the village board. 
C.  Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency 
1.  An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required information and is accompanied by the required filing fee. 
2.  The community development director must make a determination of application completeness within ten (10) business days of application filing. 
3.  If an application is determined to be incomplete, the community development director must provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the application will occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within sixty (60) days, the application will be considered withdrawn. 
4.  No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next processing cycle. 
5.  Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance. 
6.  The community development director may require that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an agenda for action if the community development director determines that: 
a.  The application or plan contains one or more inaccuracies or omissions that will hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other regulations; or 
b.  The decision-making body does not have legal authority to approve the application or plan as submitted. 
D.  Amended Applications 
Applications may be amended at any time before final action upon such terms and conditions as the community development director (if amended before any required hearing), the planning and zoning commission (if amended before final action by the commission), or the village board, directs. Examples of such terms and conditions include requiring republication of the notice, rehearing of the application and/or extension of any time-frames required for village action. 
E.  Application Processing Cycles 
The community development director, after consulting with the planning and zoning commission, is authorized to promulgate reasonable cycles and timelines for processing applications, including deadlines for receipt of complete applications.  
11.1.4. - Public Hearing Notices 
A.  Required Public Hearing Notice-Publication in Newspaper 
Published notice is required for public hearings required under this zoning ordinance. This required notice must be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Villa Park at least fifteen (15) days before and no more than thirty (30) days before the public hearing. Required notices must include at least the following information: 
1.  An address or legal description of the property that is the subject of the hearing; 
2.  A summary of the nature of the application; and 
3.  The time and place of the hearing. 
B.  Courtesy Public Hearing Notices 
1.  In addition to providing the required published notice, the village must endeavor to provide or require that applicants provide the following forms of additional courtesy notice of required public hearings: 
a.  Posting of a public hearing notice sign on the subject property; 
b.  Mailing notices to the taxpayer of record; and 
c.  Mailing notices to taxpayers of record within 250 feet of the subject property. 
2.  Failure to provide any form of courtesy notice that is not required by state law or any defect in such courtesy notice does not invalidate, impair, or otherwise affect any application, public hearing or decision rendered in respect to the matter under consideration.  
11.1.5. - Public Hearing Procedures 
A.  Open Meetings Act 
All public hearings are subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et. Seq.). 
B.  General Procedure 
Public hearings required by this zoning ordinance must be conducted by the designated hearing body. At the hearing, interested persons must be permitted to submit information and comments, verbally or in writing. The designated hearing body is authorized to establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the presentation of information and comments such as, the limitation of redundant or irrelevant materials and testimony, the order and length of statements or testimony and time limitations. 
C.  Continued Public Hearings 
1.  Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing body. No re-notification is required if the continuance is set for specified date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the continuance. 
2.  If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new public hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing. 
3.  If the applicant requests and is granted a postponement, the applicant must pay any costs of renotification.  
11.1.6. - Action by Review and Decision-Making Bodies 
A.  Review and decision-making bodies may take any action that is consistent with: 
1.  The regulations of this zoning ordinance; 
2.  Any rules or by-laws that apply to the review or decision-making body; and 
3.  The notice that was given. 
B.  Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to continue a public hearing or defer action in order to receive additional information or further deliberate. 
C.  When decision-making bodies approve applications with conditions, the conditions must relate to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed use or development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use or development.  
11.1.7. - Decision-Making Criteria; Burden of Proof or Persuasion 
Applications must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application complies with all applicable review or approval criteria.  
11.1.8. - Required Time-frames for Action 
Any time limit specified in this zoning ordinance for any decision or action on behalf of a review or decision-making body may be extended if the applicant agrees to an extension. If a review or decision-making body does not render a decision or take action within any time period required under this zoning ordinance and the applicant has not agreed to an extension of that time limit, the application is deemed denied. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 11.2. - ORDINANCE TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS  
11.2.1. - Purpose 
The text of this zoning ordinance and the zoning map may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures of this section. Zoning ordinance text and map amendments are intended to allow modifications in response to changed conditions or changes in village policy.  
11.2.2. - Authority to File 
A.  Amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance may be initiated by the village board, the planning and zoning commission, or the community development director. 
B.  Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated only by the village board, the community development director or by the owner of the property that is the subject of the proposed zoning map amendment or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.  
11.2.3. - Application Filing 
Complete applications for zoning map amendments must be filed with the community development director.  
11.2.4. - Review and Report—Community Development Director 
Upon initiation of a zoning text amendment or receipt of a complete application for a zoning map amendment, the community development director must prepare a report and recommendation on the proposal. The report must be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission before their public hearing on the proposed ordinance text or zoning map amendment.  
11.2.5. - Notice of Hearing 
Notice of the planning and zoning commission's required public hearing on a zoning ordinance text or zoning map amendment must be published in the newspaper in accordance with 11.1.4-A. Additional notice may also be provided in accordance with 11.1.4-B. 
  
11.2.6. - Hearing and Recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission 
The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed text amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its recommendation to the village board.  
11.2.7. - Final Action—Village Board 
A.  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the village board must act to approve the proposed zoning ordinance text or map amendment, approve the proposed amendment with modifications or deny the proposed amendment. The village board may also remand the proposed amendment back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. 
B.  If the zoning ordinance text or map amendment application is remanded, the village board must specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the planning and zoning commission must be limited to those identified items. The planning and zoning commission must conduct further proceedings as may be appropriate and return a recommendation on the amendment to the village board within sixty (60) days of the date that the matter is remanded to the planning and zoning commission. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the village board must take final action on the amendment. 
C.  Approval of a zoning ordinance text amendment requires a by simple majority vote of a quorum of the village board. Approval of a zoning map amendment also requires a by simple majority vote of a quorum, unless a valid protest petition has been filed by opponents of the zoning map amendment (see 11.2.8).  
11.2.8. - Protest Petitions 
A.  If a valid protest petition is filed against any proposed zoning map amendment, passage of the map amendment requires a favorable vote of two-thirds of the entire village board. 
B.  A protest petition will be deemed valid if it is signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately abutting or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of the twenty (20) percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage included within the proposed zoning map amendment area. 
C.  A written protest petition opposing a zoning map amendment must be submitted to the village clerk at least five (5) business days before the village board's vote. 
D.  When a written protest petition has been submitted, the protest petition must be served by the protesters upon the applicant and upon the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the applicant's and attorney's addresses, as shown on the application.  
11.2.9. - Review and Approval Criteria 
A.  Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments 
The decision to amend the zoning ordinance text is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any one standard. In making recommendations and decisions about zoning ordinance text amendments, the planning and zoning commission and village board must consider at least the following factors: 
1.  Whether the proposed text amendment is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; and 
2.  Whether the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment corrects an error or inconsistency in the zoning ordinance, meets the challenge of a changing condition or is necessary to implement established village policy. 
B.  Zoning Map Amendments 
The decision to amend the zoning map is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any single standard. In making recommendations and decisions about zoning map amendments, the planning and zoning commission and village board must consider at least the following factors: 
1.  The existing use and zoning of nearby property; 
2.  The extent to which the particular zoning restrictions affect property values; 
3.  The extent to which any diminution in property value is offset by an increase in the public health, safety and welfare; 
4.  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
5.  The length of time that the subject property has been vacant as zoned, considering the context of land development in the vicinity; 
6.  The value to the community of the proposed use; and 
7.  The comprehensive plan.  
11.2.10. - Successive Applications 
If a zoning map amendment application is denied, no application may be accepted that proposes reclassification of any portion of the same property for the same zoning classification for twelve (12) months from the date of the village board decision to deny, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the community development director.  
11.2.11. - Pending Rezonings 
No permit or license for any building, structure or use may be issued for a period of three (3) months after zoning ordinance text or map amendment has been initiated by village board or the planning and zoning commission in a public meeting, provided that if final action by the village board is not taken on proposed amendment within three (3) months of initiation, the permit may be issued, if otherwise lawful. If within such three-month period, the village board approves zoning ordinance text or map amendment has that prohibits such building, structure or use, no such permit may be issued. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 11.3. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS  
11.3.1. - Overview 
A.  Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay zoning districts are established through the concurrent approval of: 
1.  A PUD district map amendment, in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of Sec. 11.2; and 
2.  A PUD development plan application in accordance with the procedures of this section. 
B.  PUD site plan approval is required after approval of the PUD zoning map amendment and PUD development plan. This section describes the required review and approval procedures for PUD development plans and PUD site plans.  
11.3.2. - Development Plan Approval Required 
Approval of a PUD development plan and a PUD site plan must occur before any building permit is issued and before any development takes place in a PUD district. Permits may be issued for a phase of development within a section of an approved PUD district if a development plan has been approved for the entire PUD and a PUD site plan has been approved for the subject property.  
11.3.3. - PUD Development Plans 
PUD development plans serve to establish the overall zoning plan for the proposed development and provide the regulatory framework (e.g., allowed uses, densities, floor area, building heights, and overall site design) for future development of the property. While, detailed engineering and technical specifications are not required as part of PUD development plans, such development plans must include information necessary to establish the basic zoning parameters for what is allowed on the property. At the option of the applicant, the PUD development plan may serve also as the preliminary subdivision plat if such intention is declared before the planning and zoning commission's hearing and if the plans include all information required for preliminary plats and PUD development plans. 
A.  Preapplication Meeting 
Before submitting an application for a PUD district rezoning, the applicant must schedule a meeting with the community development director to discuss the proposed project and the required process. The community development director is responsible for coordinating the involvement of other relevant village departments in the preapplication meeting. 
B.  Application Contents 
An application for a PUD district rezoning and PUD development plan must contain all items of information specified in the preapplication meeting. 
C.  Application Filing 
Complete applications for PUD development plan approval must be filed with the community development director at the same time that the PUD zoning map amendment application is filed. The zoning map amendment procedures of Sec. 11.2 apply to PUD zoning map amendments except as expressly modified by the PUD approval procedures of this section. 
D.  Hearing and Recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission 
The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed PUD development plan and PUD zoning map amendment within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete application. Within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed plan and map amendment be approved, approved with modifications or conditions, or denied and transmit its recommendations to the village board. 
E.  Final Action—Village Board 
1.  Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the village board may act to approve the proposed PUD development plan and PUD zoning map amendment, approve the proposed plan and amendment with modifications or conditions or deny the proposed plan and map amendment. The village board may also remand the matter back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. 
2.  If the PUD development plan and PUD zoning map amendment application are remanded, the village board must specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the planning and zoning commission must be limited to those identified items. The planning and zoning commission must conduct further proceedings as may be appropriate and return a recommendation on the plan and zoning map amendment to the village board within sixty (60) days of the date that the matter is remanded to the planning and zoning commission. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the village board must take final action on the PUD development plan and PUD zoning map amendment. 
3.  PUD zoning map amendments may be approved by simple majority vote of a quorum, of the village board except as stated in 11.2.8. 
F.  Review and Approval Criteria 
The decision to amend the zoning map to approve a PUD development plan and to establish a PUD district are matters of legislative discretion that are not controlled by any single standard. In making recommendations and decisions regarding approval of planned unit developments, review and decision-making bodies must consider at least the following factors: 
1.  The zoning map amendment review and approval criteria of 11.2.9.; 
2.  Whether the proposed PUD development plan and map amendment would be consistent with the comprehensive plan and any other adopted plans for the subject area; 
3.  Whether PUD development plan complies with the PUD district provisions of Sec. 5.1; 
4.  Whether the proposed development will result in public benefits that are greater than or at least equal to those that would have resulted from development under conventional zoning regulations; and 
5.  Whether appropriate terms and conditions have been imposed on the approval to protect the interests of surrounding property owners and residents, existing and future residents of the PUD and the general public. 
G.  Lapse of Approval 
1.  Unless a longer time period or a phasing plan is approved at the time of approval of a PUD development plan, a complete application for PUD site plan approval must be filed within one (1) year of the date of PUD development plan approval. If an application for PUD site plan approval is not filed within the required time period, no further PUD site plans may be approved for the project until the subject property owner has filed the original or amended PUD development plan for re-review and reconsideration by the planning and zoning commission and village board. Such re-review and reconsideration must follow the PUD development plan review procedures of this zoning ordinance. Following re-review and reconsideration, the planning and zoning commission is authorized to recommend and the village board is authorized to approve any of the following actions based on surrounding land use patterns and other relevant information presented at the time of reconsideration by the planning and zoning commission and village board: 
 
a.  An extension of time for filing a PUD site plan; 
b.  An amendment to the approved PUD development plan; or 
c.  Rezoning to another zoning district in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of Sec. 11.2. 
2.  For projects to be developed in phases, phase limits must be shown on the PUD development plan and approved by the village board. The village board may impose conditions upon the phasing plan as deemed necessary to ensure orderly development, including requirements for financial guarantees ensuring construction of all required improvements.  
11.3.4. - PUD Site Plans 
PUD site plans are detailed plans for building and site design for the subject property. PUD site plans may cover all or part of the property included within an approved PUD development plan. Such plans must include all information required to determine whether the proposed development and any permits requested are in compliance with the approved PUD development plan. 
A.  Application Filing 
PUD site plan applications must be filed with the community development director before the lapse of a PUD development plan (see 11.3.3-G). 
B.  Review and Action by Community Development Director; Appeals 
1.  The community development director must review and take action on the PUD site plan. The community development director must approve the PUD site plan if it complies with the approved PUD development plan, all conditions of PUD development plan approval and all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. If the submitted PUD site plan does not comply with the approved PUD development plan, any conditions imposed on that plan or any applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance, the community development director must deny the PUD site plan and advise the landowner in writing of the specific reasons for denial. 
2.  In acting on PUD site plans, the community development director is authorized to approve the following minor deviations from an approved PUD development plan: 
a.  Any deviation expressly authorized at the time of PUD development plan approval; 
b.  The addition of customary accessory uses and structures; and 
c.  Changes to the development site or to structures necessitated by engineering, architectural or physical limitations of the site that could not have been foreseen at the time the development plan was approved and that are not otherwise classified as amendments pursuant to 11.3.5. 
3.  No other changes or amendments may be approved as part of the community development director action on a PUD site plan. Any other changes will be considered amendments to an approved PUD development plan. Amendments are subject to 11.3.5. 
 
4.  If the community development director does not approve the PUD site plan, the landowner may either: (1) resubmit the PUD site plan to correct the plan's inconsistencies and deficiencies, or (2) within sixty (60) days of the date of notice of disapproval, appeal the decision of the community development director. If an appeal is filed, the PUD site plan must be processed in the same manner as a PUD development plan, with review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and a final decision by the village board. 
C.  Effect of Approval 
Approval of a PUD site plan must occur before any building permits are issued for the PUD. PUD site plan approval does not constitute effective dedication of rights-of-way or any other public improvements, nor will the filed plan be the equivalent of or an acceptable alternative for the final platting of land prior to the issuance of building permits in the PUD (if platting is required).  
11.3.5. - Amendments to Approved PUD Development Plans 
A.  The community development director is authorized to approve minor amendments to an approved PUD development plan, but major amendments must be processed as a new PUD development plan, including all requirements for fees, notices and hearings. All of the following constitute major amendments to an approved PUD development plan: 
1.  Elimination or relaxation of a condition of approval imposed by the village board at the time of PUD development plan approval; 
2.  An increase in overall building coverage by more than five (5) percent; 
3.  An increase in building height by more than ten (10) percent or five (5) feet, whichever is less; 
4.  An overall reduction in the amount of usable open space, common open space or landscaping; 
5.  A reduction in off-street parking by more than ten (10) percent or one space, whichever results in a greater reduction; 
6.  A change in the vehicle circulation pattern that would increase points of access, change access to another street or increase projected traffic volumes; and 
7.  Anything that the community development director determines a material change, likely to create adverse impacts that were not considered as part of the PUD development plan approval.  
11.3.6. - Abandonment of PUD 
If a PUD development plan expires or is abandoned, development is allowed only in compliance with the base zoning district regulations. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 11.4. - SPECIAL USES  
11.4.1. - Intent 
The special use approval procedures of this section are intended to provide a transparent, public review process for land uses that, because of their widely varying design and operational characteristics, require case-by-case review in order to determine whether they will be compatible with surrounding uses and development patterns.  
11.4.2. - Authority to File 
Special use applications may be filed by the owner of the property that is the subject of the special use application or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.  
11.4.3. - Application Filing 
Complete applications for special use approval must be filed with the community development director.  
11.4.4. - Review and Report—Community Development Director 
Upon receipt of a complete application for special use approval, the community development director must prepare a report and recommendation that evaluates the proposed special use in light of the standards and review criteria of 11.4.8. The report must be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission before their public hearing on the proposed special use.  
11.4.5. - Notice of Hearing 
Notice of the planning and zoning commission's required public hearing on a special use application must be published in the newspaper in accordance with 11.1.4-A. Additional notice may also be provided in accordance with 11.1.4-B.  
11.4.6. - Hearing and Recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission 
The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the special use application within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application. Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act by simple majority vote of a quorum to recommend that the proposed special use be approved, approved with modifications and/or conditions, or denied and transmit its findings and recommendations to the village board.  
11.4.7. - Final Action—Village Board 
A.  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's findings and recommendation, the village board may act to approve the proposed special use application, approve the special use with conditions and/or modifications or deny the special use. The village board may also remand the special use application back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. 
B.  If the special use application is remanded, the village board must specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the planning and zoning commission must be limited to those identified items. The planning and zoning commission must conduct further proceedings as may be appropriate and return a recommendation on the special use application to the village board within sixty (60) days of the date that the matter is remanded to the planning and zoning commission. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the village board must take final action on the special use application. 
C.  The village board is authorized to impose conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a special use as the board determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the approval criteria of 11.4.8, to reduce or minimize the effect of the special use upon other properties in the area, and to better carry out the general purpose and intent of this zoning ordinance. 
D.  The village board may act by simple majority vote of a quorum.  
11.4.8. - Review and Approval Criteria 
No special use may be recommended for approval or approved unless the respective review or decision-making body determines that the proposed special use is consistent with and in substantial compliance with all village board policies and plans and that the applicant has presented evidence to support each of the following conclusions: 
A.  That the proposed use or activity is expressly authorized as a special use; 
 
B.  That the proposed use at the proposed location is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community; 
C.  That the proposed use will not, in the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity or be injurious to property values or improvements in the vicinity. 
D.  That approval of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
E.  That the proposed special use will be served by adequate utilities, access roads, parking, drainage and other important and necessary facilities, infrastructure and community services; and 
F.  That the proposed special use complies with all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance except as expressly approved in accordance with the procedures of this zoning ordinance.  
11.4.9. - Lapse of Approval 
A.  The applicant may submit, and the village board may approve, as part of the ordinance authorizing the special use, a maximum two-year schedule for establishing the approved special use. If such a schedule is not approved by the village board, the approved special use will lapse and have no further effect one year after it is approved by the village board, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued (if required); 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or 
3.  The special use has been lawfully established. 
B.  The village board is authorized to extend the expiration period for good cause on up to two (2) separate occasions, by up to six (6) months each. Requests for extensions must be submitted to the community development director and forwarded to the village board for a final decision. 
C.  A special use also lapses upon revocation of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of approval or upon expiration of a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the special use. 
D.  If any special use is abandoned, or is discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months or more, the special use for such use is void, and such use may not be reestablished unless and until a new special use is obtained in accordance with the procedures of this section.  
11.4.10. - Transferability 
Special use approval runs with the land and is not affected by changes of tenancy or ownership.  
11.4.11. - Amendments 
Amendments to approved special uses may be approved in accordance with the following requirements. The special use amendment procedures may not be used to vary or modify zoning ordinance standards. 
A.  Minor Amendments 
1.  The community development director is authorized to approve the following minor amendments to approved special uses: 
a.  Any amendments expressly authorized as minor amendments at the time of special use approval; 
b.  The addition of customary accessory uses and structures; and 
c.  Changes to the development site or to structures necessitated by engineering, architectural or physical limitations of the site that could not have been foreseen at the time the special use permit was approved and that are not otherwise classified as major amendments pursuant to 11.4.11-B. 
2.  Applications for minor amendments to approved special uses must be filed in a form established by the community development director. If no action is taken on the minor amendment application within twenty (20) days of filing of a complete application, the minor amendment is deemed denied. 
B.  Major Amendments 
1.  All of the following constitute major amendments to approved special uses: 
a.  An increase in overall building coverage by more than five (5) percent; 
b.  An increase in building height by more than ten (10) percent or five (5) feet, whichever is less; 
c.  An overall reduction in the amount of common open space or landscaping; 
d.  A reduction in off-street parking by more than ten (10) percent; 
e.  A change in the vehicle circulation pattern that would increase points of access, change access to another street or increase projected traffic volumes; and 
f.  Any combination of three (3) or more minor changes that were not expressly authorized by the approved special use permit. 
2.  Major amendments to an approved special use must be processed as a new special use application, including all requirements for fees, notices and public hearings.  
11.4.12. - Successive Applications 
If a special use application is denied, no substantially similar application may be accepted for the same property for twelve (12) months from the date of denial by the village board, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 11.5. - VARIATIONS  
11.5.1. - Intent 
A variation is a grant of relief to a property owner from strict compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. The intent of a variation is not to simply remove an inconvenience or financial burden that may result from compliance with applicable zoning requirements. Variations are intended to help alleviate a practical difficulty or particular hardship that would be caused by the literal enforcement of the subject ordinance requirements. They are intended to provide site-specific relief when the requirements of this zoning ordinance render land difficult or impossible to use because of some unique or special characteristic of the property itself.  
11.5.2. - Authorized Variations 
The planning and zoning commission is authorized to recommend and the village board is authorized to grant a variation of any regulation in this zoning ordinance, except that the variation procedures may not be used to do any of the following: 
A.  Allow a principal use in a zoning district that is not otherwise allowed in that zoning district (i.e., "use variations" are prohibited); 
B.  Waive, modify or amend any definition or use classification; 
C.  Waive, modify or otherwise vary any of the review and approval procedures of this article; or 
D.  Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or requirement imposed by an authorized decision-making body or the state or federal government; or 
E.  Waive, vary or modify applicable residential density regulations, provided that this provision is not intended to prohibit variations to minimum lot area or width requirements that apply to lots occupied by a single dwelling unit.  
11.5.3. - Authority to File 
Variation applications may be filed by the subject property owner or by the property owner's authorized agent.  
11.5.4. - Application Filing 
Complete applications for variations must be filed with the community development director.  
11.5.5. - Notice of Hearing 
Notice of the planning and zoning commission's required public hearing on a variation application must be published in the newspaper in accordance with 11.1.4-A. Additional notice may also be provided in accordance with 11.1.4-B.  
11.5.6. - Hearing and Recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission 
A.  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, the planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the requested variation. Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act to: 
1.  Recommend approval of the variation request; 
2.  Recommend approval of the variation request with conditions or modifications; or 
3.  Recommend denial of the variation request. 
B.  The planning and zoning commission's recommendation must be accompanied by specific findings of fact regarding whether practical difficulties or particular hardships would result if a variation is not granted. 
C.  A simple majority vote of a quorum of the planning and zoning commission is required to recommend approval or denial of a variation request.  
11.5.7. - Final Action—Village Board 
A.  Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the village board may act to approve the variation request, approve the variation request with conditions and/or modifications or deny the requested variation. The village board may also may remand the variation request to the planning and zoning commission's for further consideration. 
B.  If the variation request is remanded, the village board must specify the reasons and scope of the remand, and further proceedings before the planning and zoning commission's must be limited to those identified items. The planning and zoning commission's must conduct further proceedings as may be appropriate and return a recommendation on the variation to the village board within sixty (60) days of the date that the matter is remanded to them. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the planning and zoning commission's findings and recommendation, the village board must take final action on the variation request. 
C.  The village board may act on requested variations by a simple majority vote except that when the planning and zoning commission has recommended denial of the variation, approval by the village board requires a two-thirds majority vote of a quorum. 
  
11.5.8. - Transferability 
Approved variations run with the land and are not affected by changes of tenancy or ownership  
11.5.9. - Amendments 
A request for changes in the specific nature of the approved variation or changes to any conditions attached to an approved variation must be processed as a new variation application, including all requirements for fees, notices and public hearings.  
11.5.10. - Lapse of Approval 
A.  An approved variation will lapse and have no further effect twelve (12) months after it is approved by the village board, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued (if required); or 
2.  The use or structure has been lawfully established. 
B.  The village board is authorized to extend the expiration period for good cause by up to twelve (12) additional months. Requests for extensions must be submitted to the community development director before the variation expires. No hearings, notices or fees are required for extensions. 
C.  A variation also lapses upon revocation of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of approval or upon expiration of a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the variation.  
11.5.11. - Successive Applications 
If a variation request is denied, no substantially similar application may be accepted for the same property for twelve (12) months from the date of denial by the planning and zoning commission, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the community development director. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 11.6. - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS  
11.6.1. - Intent 
These administrative adjustments procedures are intended to provide a streamlined approval procedure for very minor forms of zoning relief. While typical variations require final decision-making by the planning and zoning commission, the community development director is authorized to approve a select, limited number of administrative adjustments without a public hearing, as identified in this section.  
11.6.2. - Authorized Administrative Adjustments 
A.  The community development director is authorized to grant the following administrative adjustments: 
1.  A reduction of the minimum required lot area by up to ten (10) percent; 
2.  A reduction of the minimum required lot width by up to ten (10) percent; 
3.  A reduction of minimum required (interior) side setbacks by up to ten (10) percent or one (1) foot, whichever is less; 
4.  A reduction of minimum required rear setbacks by up to ten (10) percent of two (2) feet, whichever is less; 
5.  A reduction of minimum required motor vehicle off-street parking or loading requirements by up to ten (10) percent or one space, whichever is greater; and 
6.  A reduction of minimum bicycle parking space requirements by up to twenty-five (25) percent or two (2) spaces, whichever is greater. 
7.  Adjustments to MX district building types defined in Article 4. 
B.  The administrative adjustment provisions may not be used to vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or requirement imposed by an authorized village decision-making body or the state or federal government.  
11.6.3. - Authority to File 
Administrative adjustment applications may be filed by the subject property owner or by the property owner's authorized agent.  
11.6.4. - Application Filing 
Complete applications for administrative adjustments must be filed with the community development director.  
11.6.5. - Notice of Filing/Intent to Approve 
Within seven (7) business days of receipt of a complete application for an administrative adjustment, written notice of application filing must be delivered to all taxpayers of record abutting the subject parcel, excluding street rights-of-way. The notice must describe the nature of the requested administrative adjustment. It must also indicate the date on which the community development director will take action on the application and that the application will available for review and comment until that date. Any interested party may submit written comments concerning the application to the community development director.  
11.6.6. - Action by Community Development Director 
A.  The community development director must review each application for an administrative adjustment and act to approve the application, approve the application with conditions or deny the application. Alternatively, the community development director is authorized to refer the application to the planning and zoning commission for consideration as a variation. 
B.  The community development director may not take final action to approve or deny an administrative adjustment application until at least seven (7) days after the date that notices are deposited in the mail or the date of personal delivery of the required notices. 
C.  If a property owner who has received notice of the administrative adjustment application provides a written objection to the administrative adjustment before the date of allowed action indicated on the notice, the community development director must refer the application to the planning and zoning commission for consideration as a variation. No additional fees are required other than fees to cover the cost of required notice of the planning and zoning commission's public hearing. 
D.  The community development director's decision to approve or deny an administrative adjustment must be based on the approval criteria and standards of 11.6.7 and accompanied by written findings of fact. 
E.  The applicant may appeal a decision to deny an administrative adjustment to the planning and zoning commission. In the case of an appeal, the planning and zoning commission must consider the request as a variation. No additional fees are required other than fees to cover the cost of required notice of the planning and zoning commission's public hearing. 
F.  At least once per calendar year, the community development director must provide to the planning and zoning commission a listing of all administrative adjustment decisions. 
  
11.6.7. - Review and Approval Criteria 
Administrative adjustments may be approved only when the community development director determines that any specific standards associated with the authorized administrative adjustment and the following general approval criteria have been met: 
A.  The requested administrative adjustment is consistent with all relevant purpose and intent statements of this zoning ordinance; 
B.  The requested administrative adjustment will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the area or the public health, safety and general welfare; and 
C.  Any adverse impacts resulting from the administrative adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.  
11.6.8. - Conditions of Approval 
In granting an administrative adjustment, the community development director is authorized to impose conditions upon the subject property that are necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on other property in the surrounding area, and to carry out the stated purpose and intent of this zoning ordinance.  
11.6.9. - Transferability 
Approved administrative adjustments run with the land and are not affected by changes of tenancy or ownership.  
11.6.10. - Amendments 
A request for changes in the specific nature of the approved administrative adjustment or changes to any conditions attached to an approved administrative adjustment must be processed as a new administrative adjustment application, including the requirements for fees and notices.  
11.6.11. - Lapse of Approval 
A.  An approved administrative adjustment will lapse and have no further effect twelve (12) months after it is approved by the community development director, unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued (if required); or 
2.  The use or structure has been lawfully established. 
B.  An administrative adjustment also lapses upon revocation of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for violations of conditions of approval or upon expiration of a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the administrative adjustment.  
11.6.12. - Appeals 
The applicant or any interested party may appeal the decision of the community development director in accordance with Sec. 11.7. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 11.7. - APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS  
11.7.1. - Authority 
The planning and zoning commission is authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the community development director or any other administrative official in the administration or interpretation of this zoning ordinance.  
11.7.2. - Right to Appeal 
Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by any person aggrieved by the community development director's or other administrative official's decision or action. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to make determinations about whether individuals filing appeals are "aggrieved" by the decision or action.  
11.7.3. - Application Filing 
A.  Complete applications for appeals of administrative decisions must be filed with the community development director. 
B.  Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the decision being appealed.  
11.7.4. - Effect of Filing 
The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the community development director certifies to the planning and zoning commission, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings will not be stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the planning and zoning commission or by a court of record based on due cause shown.  
11.7.5. - Record of Decision 
Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the community development director or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed must transmit to the planning and zoning commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken. 
  
11.7.6. - Notice of Hearing 
Notice of the planning and zoning commission's required public hearing must be published in the newspaper in accordance with 11.1.4-A. Additional notice may also be provided in accordance with 11.1.4-B  
11.7.7. - Hearing and Final Decision 
A.  The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the appeal within sixty (60) days of the date that the appeal is filed. 
B.  Within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must take action on the appeal. The planning and zoning commission's decision must be in writing and be supported by written findings of fact. 
C.  In exercising the appeal power, the planning and zoning commission has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The planning and zoning commission may affirm or may reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision being appealed. Action by the planning and zoning commission requires a simple majority vote of a quorum of the planning and zoning commission. 
D.  In acting on the appeal, the planning and zoning commission must grant to the official's decision a presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant. 
E.  All decisions of the planning and zoning commission are final administrative determinations and are subject to judicial review only, in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.  
11.7.8. - Decision-Making Criterion 
An appeal may be sustained only if the planning and zoning commission finds that the community development director or other administrative official erred. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 12. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 12.1. - REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES  
12.1.1. - Community Development Director 
A.  General Powers and Duties 
The community development director has primary responsibility for administration of this zoning ordinance, including the following general powers and duties: 
1.  Conducting periodic inspections of structures and uses of land to determine compliance with this zoning ordinance; 
2.  Notifying in writing all persons responsible for violating this zoning ordinance; 
3.  Taking appropriate actions to ensure compliance with this zoning ordinance and remedying violations of its provisions, including: 
a.  Ordering discontinuance of any illegal use of land or structures; 
b.  Ordering removal of illegal structures and additions or alterations thereto; 
c.  Ordering discontinuation of work being done in violation of zoning ordinance provisions; 
4.  Maintaining permanent and current records of this zoning ordinance, including all zoning maps, amendments, planned unit developments, zoning exceptions, special uses, variations and administrative adjustments; 
5.  Maintaining records of permits, certificates, registers of pollutants, and copies of notices of violation and orders of discontinuances or removal for such time as necessary to ensure continuous compliance with zoning ordinance provisions; 
6.  Receiving and processing all applications for permits and development approvals under this zoning ordinance; 
7.  Providing technical assistance and support to the village board, staff, boards and commissions; and 
8.  Exercising other powers and performing other duties as specified or necessarily implied by the provisions of this zoning ordinance or as assigned by the village manager.  
12.1.2. - Promulgation of Administrative Rules 
The community development director is authorized to establish written rules and regulations implementing the provisions of this zoning ordinance, including rules related to the content and processing of any application and the interpretation and administration of this zoning ordinance.  
12.1.3. - Planning and Zoning Commission 
The planning and zoning commission has those powers and duties expressly identified in this zoning ordinance and in Chapter 2, Article XVI of the municipal code contains additional information regarding the planning and zoning commission's composition and their powers and duties. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
Sec. 12.2. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT  
12.2.1. - Responsibility for Enforcement 
The community development director has primary responsibility for enforcing this zoning ordinance.  
12.2.2. - Violations 
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this zoning ordinance or state law, any violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance-including but not limited to all of the following—may be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning ordinance. 
A.  To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
B.  To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
C.  To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance; 
D.  To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, the use or installation of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance without obtaining such required permits or approvals; 
E.  To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance in any way inconsistent with any such permit or approval or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval; 
F.  To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this zoning ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or approval; 
G.  To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or otherwise given under this zoning ordinance; 
H.  To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this zoning ordinance; or 
I.  To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.  
12.2.3. - Continuing Violations 
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the violation from the village constitutes a separate violation of this zoning ordinance.  
12.2.4. - Administrative Adjudication 
In lieu of the remedies, enforcement powers and procedures provided Sec. 12.2.5, the village may use the administrative adjudication procedures provided in Chapter 26 of the municipal code.  
12.2.5. - Remedies and Enforcement Powers 
The village has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law, including the following: 
A.  Fines 
Fines may be levied in accordance with the municipal code. 
B.  Liens 
The village may file liens against a property for failure to pay levied fines or fees and to cover any expenses incurred by the village for remedying violations of this zoning ordinance. 
C.  Withhold Permit 
1.  The community development director may deny or withhold permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the village. This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question. 
2.  The community development director may deny or withhold permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements owned by or being developed by a person who owns, developed or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the village. This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the property for which the permit or other approval is sought is the property in violation. 
3.  Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the community development director may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected. 
D.  Revoke Permits 
1.  Any permit, certificate or other form of authorization required under this zoning ordinance may be revoked by the community development director when the community development director determines: 
a.  That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit, 
b.  That the development permit was procured by false representation or was issued by mistake, or 
c.  That any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being violated. 
2.  Written notice of revocation must be served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or structure for which such permit was issued. If no persons can reasonably be served with notice, the notice must be posted in a prominent location. 
E.  Stop Work 
With or without revoking permits, the community development director may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a permit or other form of authorization issued under the zoning ordinance. 
F.  Revoke Plan or Other Approval 
Where a violation of this zoning ordinance involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to which the approval of such plans was made subject, the community development director may, upon notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits affected): 
1.  Revoke the plan or other approval; or 
2.  Condition continuance of the plan or permit on strict compliance with this zoning ordinance or the provision of security to ensure that construction is completed in compliance with approved plans, or such other conditions as the community development director may reasonably impose. 
G.  Injunctive Relief 
The village may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this zoning ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted under the zoning ordinance. 
H.  Forfeiture and Confiscation of Signs on Public Property 
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance will be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies and penalties of this section, the village has the right to recover from the sign owner or person who placed the sign, the full costs of sign removal and disposal. 
I.  Abatement 
The village may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the violation. 
J.  Other Penalties, Remedies and Powers 
The village may seek such other penalties as are provided by Illinois law.  
12.2.6. - Continuation of Previous Enforcement Actions 
Nothing in this zoning ordinance prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the village pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws.  
12.2.7. - Remedies Cumulative 
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this zoning ordinance are cumulative, and the village may exercise them in any combination or order.  
12.2.8. - Persons Subject to Penalties 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, or agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violations may each be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to penalties, remedies and enforcement actions.  
12.2.9. - Enforcement Procedures 
A.  Non-Emergency Matters 
In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention, the community development director must give notice of the nature of the violation to the taxpayer of record or to any other person who is party to the agreement or to any applicant for any relevant permit in the manner stated in this section, after which the persons receiving notice have 10 days to correct the violation before further enforcement action may be taken. Notice must be given in person, by US Mail, or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must state the nature of the violation and the time period for compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected. 
B.  Emergency Matters 
In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health or safety concerns or violations that will create increased problems or costs if not remedied immediately, the village may use the enforcement powers available under this zoning ordinance without prior notice, but the community development director must attempt to give notice simultaneously with beginning enforcement action. Notice may be provided to the taxpayer of record or to any other person who is party to the agreement and to applicants for any relevant permit. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 13. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
SEC. 13.1. - GENERAL  
13.1.1. - Scope 
The regulations of this article govern nonconformities, which are lots, uses, structures and other development features that were lawfully established but—because of the adoption of new or amended regulations—no longer comply with one or more requirements of this zoning ordinance.  
13.1.2. - Intent 
A.  Occasionally, lots, uses, structures and other development features that were lawfully established (i.e., in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time of their establishment) have been made nonconforming because of changes in the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property (e.g., through zoning map amendments or amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance). The regulations of this article are intended to clarify the effect of such nonconforming status and avoid confusion with "illegal" buildings and uses (those established in violation of applicable zoning regulations). The regulations are also intended to: 
1.  Recognize the interests of property owners in continuing to use their property for uses and activities that were lawfully established; 
2.  Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing nonconforming buildings; and 
3.  Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential to adversely affect surrounding properties. 
B.  The regulations recognize that buildings and structures have a long useful life and allowing their continued occupancy and modernization can be more desirable than requiring them to remain vacant if they cannot be made conforming. Consequently, this ordinance authorizes the planning and zoning commission to allow conversion of nonconforming uses and, under limited circumstances, expansions of nonconforming uses and structures.  
13.1.3. - Authority to Continue 
Any nonconformity that existed on the effective date specified in Sec. 1.3 or any situation that becomes nonconforming upon adoption of any amendment to this zoning ordinance may be continued in accordance with the regulations of this article unless otherwise expressly stated.  
13.1.4. - Determination of Nonconformity Status 
A.  The burden of proving that a nonconformity exists (as opposed to a violation of this zoning ordinance) rests entirely with the property owner. 
B.  The community development director is authorized to determine whether adequate proof of nonconforming status has been provided by the property owner. 
C.  Building permits, lawfully recorded plats, aerial photography owned by the government and other official government records that indicate lawful establishment of the nonconformity constitute conclusive evidence of nonconforming status. If such forms of conclusive evidence are not available, the community development director is authorized to consider whether other forms of evidence provided by the applicant are reliable and adequate to document nonconforming status. Common examples of evidence that may be determined to be reliable and adequate include: 
1.  Professional registrations or licenses associated with a street address; 
2.  Utility billing records; 
3.  Leasing records; 
4.  Advertisements in dated publications; 
5.  Listings in telephone or business directories; and 
6.  Notarized affidavits affirming the date of lawful establishment of the nonconformity. 
D.  The community development director's determination of nonconforming status may be appealed in accordance with Sec. 11.7.  
13.1.5. - Repairs and Maintenance 
A.  Nonconformities must be maintained to be safe and in good repair. 
B.  Repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a nonconformity in sound condition are permitted unless the work increases the extent of the nonconformity or is otherwise expressly prohibited by this zoning ordinance. 
C.  Nothing in this article is intended to prevent nonconformities from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance with an order from a duly authorized order of a public official.  
13.1.6. - Change of Tenancy or Ownership 
Nonconforming status runs with the land and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 13.2. - LOTS  
13.2.1. - Description 
A nonconforming lot is a lot that was lawfully created in accordance with lot area and lot width regulations in effect at the time of the lot's establishment but that does not comply with currently applicable lot area or lot width regulations.  
13.2.2. - Use of and Building on Nonconforming Lots 
A.  A nonconforming lot in an R district may be used as a building site for a single detached house. 
B.  A nonconforming lot in a nonresidential zoning district may be used as a building site and developed with a use allowed in the subject zoning district. If the zoning allows a variety of uses or a variety of intensities of uses and one or more uses or intensities would comply with applicable lot area and lot width regulations, while others would not, then only the uses or intensities that comply with applicable regulations are permitted. 
C.  Development on nonconforming lots must comply with the lot and building regulations of the subject zoning district unless otherwise expressly stated. 
D.  Nonconforming lots may not be adjusted in size or shape to create additional nonconformity or increase the degree of nonconformity for lot area, lot width, setbacks or other applicable lot and building regulations. Lot area or shape adjustments that do not increase the extent of nonconformity may be approved. 
E.  Lawfully established buildings and improvements on nonconforming lots may be used, maintained, repaired and replaced, provided that the amount, quantity or degree of any existing nonconformity is not increased and no new nonconformity is created. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 13.3. - USES  
13.3.1. - Description 
A nonconforming use is a land use that was lawfully established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in which the use is now located. Lawfully established uses that do not comply with any applicable separation (or spacing) distance requirements (e.g., those that require one land use to be located a certain minimum distance from another land use) are also deemed nonconforming uses.  
13.3.2. - Change of Use 
A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use that is allowed in the subject zoning district. Once changed to a conforming use, a nonconforming use may not be re-established.  
13.3.3. - Expansion of Use 
A.  A nonconforming use of land that does not involve a building or structure or that is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building may not be expanded or extended beyond the area the use occupied at the time the use became nonconforming. 
B.  Nonconforming uses within a building may not be expanded except as expressly stated below: 
1.  A nonconforming use within a building may be expanded into another part of the same building that was occupied by the subject nonconforming use at the time the use became nonconforming; 
2.  Other expansions of a nonconforming use may be approved in accordance with the special use procedures of Sec. 11.4. In order to approve such an expansion of a nonconforming use, the planning and zoning commission must find that all of the following criteria have been met: 
a.  In residential districts, the expansion will not result in an increase in the number of dwelling units; 
b.  The expansion will comply with all applicable lot and building regulations of the subject zoning district; 
c.  The appearance of the expansion will be compatible with the adjacent property and neighborhood; 
d.  Off-street parking is provided for the expansion in accordance with this zoning ordinance; 
e.  Rezoning the property would result in an inappropriate spot zoning; 
f.  The expansion will not be detrimental to the existing character of development in the immediate area or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare; and 
g.  The use is consistent with the comprehensive plan.  
13.3.4. - Remodeling and Improvements 
A building in which a nonconforming use is located may be remodeled or otherwise improved as long as the remodeling or improvements do not violate any other regulations of this zoning ordinance.  
13.3.5. - Moving 
A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not increase the extent of the nonconformity. A nonconforming use may be moved to another lot only if the use is allowed under the zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot.  
13.3.6. - Loss of Nonconforming Status 
A.  Abandonment 
1.  Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming status is lost and any new, replacement use must comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned when the use is discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or more, provided that a nonconforming open-air use of land is presumed abandoned when the use is discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of sixty (60) days or more. 
3.  Any period of discontinuance caused by acts of God or accidental fire are not counted in calculating the length of discontinuance. 
4.  The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve requests to re-establish an abandoned nonconforming use through the special use procedures of Sec. 11.4 
B.  Damage or Destruction 
1.  When a building containing a nonconforming use is destroyed or damaged by acts of God or accidental fire, the building may be restored or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of occurrence of such damage. 
2.  When a building containing a nonconforming use is demolished, damaged or destroyed by causes within the control of the owner and the extent of demolition, damage or destruction is more than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure, as determined by the property owner's certified appraiser, the use may not be reestablished except in compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located.  
13.3.7. - Accessory Uses 
No use that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use may continue after the principal nonconforming use has been abandoned. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 13.4. - STRUCTURES  
13.4.1. - Description 
A nonconforming structure is any structure, other than a sign, that was lawfully established but no longer complies with applicable lot and building regulations or other dimensional, siting or locational requirements of this zoning ordinance. Regulations governing nonconforming signs can be found in Sec. 8.10.  
13.4.2. - Use 
A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is located.  
13.4.3. - Alterations and Expansions 
A.  Nonconforming structures may be altered or expanded if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with all applicable lot, building, dimensional, siting and locational requirements and does not increase the extent of the structure's nonconformity. For example, a building with a nonconforming front street setback or a nonconforming build-to-zone frontage may be expanded to the rear as long as the rear expansion complies with applicable rear setback standards. 
B.  A structure with a nonconforming setback may not be expanded horizontally or vertically within the required setback area. However, if the setback is nonconforming by less than 10% or 6 inches, whichever is greater, the nonconforming structure may be expanded horizontally or vertically provided that the expansion does not extend further into the required setback area.  
13.4.4. - Moving 
A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to another location only if the movement or relocation eliminates or reduces the extent of nonconformity.  
13.4.5. - Loss of Nonconforming Status 
A.  Damage or Destruction 
1.  When a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by acts of God or accidental fire, the structure may be restored or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of occurrence of such damage. 
2.  When a nonconforming structure is demolished, damaged or destroyed by causes within the control of the owner and the extent of demolition, damage or destruction is more than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure, as determined by the property owner's certified appraiser, the structure may not be reestablished except in compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  Damage or Destruction after Right-of-Way Acquisition 
If a structure is rendered nonconforming or made more nonconforming by a public agency's acquisition of right-of-way and the structure is subsequently damaged or destroyed by any means, the structure may be reestablished, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of occurrence of such damage. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 13.5. - DEVELOPMENT FEATURES  
13.5.1. - Description 
A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a development-other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure, nonconforming use or nonconforming sign-that was lawfully established in accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that no longer complies with one or more regulations of this zoning code. Common examples are off-street parking areas that contain fewer spaces than required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current landscaping or screening regulations.  
13.5.2. - Regulations 
Nonconforming development features may remain except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning code, but the nature and extent of the nonconformity may not be increased. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 13.6. - SIGNS 
See Sec. 8.10. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
ARTICLE 14. - MEASUREMENTS AND DEFINITIONS 
 
SEC. 14.1. - MEASUREMENTS  
14.1.1. - Rounding 
When calculations required under this zoning ordinance result in fractions, the results must be rounded as follows: 
A.  Minimum Requirements 
1.  In the case of minimum off-street parking requirements, any fractional result of less than one-half is rounded down to the whole number and any fractional result of one-half or more is rounded up to the next whole number. 
2.  In all other cases, when a regulation of this zoning ordinance is expressed in terms of a minimum requirement, any fractional result must be rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. 
B.  Maximum Limits 
When a regulation of this zoning ordinance is expressed in terms of a maximum limit, any fractional result must be rounded down to the whole number. For example, if a maximum allowance of one dwelling unit for every two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet of lot area is applied to an ten thousand (10,000) square foot lot, the resulting fraction of 3.85 is rounded down to three (3) allowed dwelling units.  
14.1.2. - Lot Area 
Lot area is measured as the total ground-level surface area contained within the boundaries of a lot.  
14.1.3. - Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 
Lot area per dwelling unit is a measure of residential density. It governs the amount of lot area required for each dwelling unit on the subject lot. To determine the number of dwelling units allowed on a lot, divide the lot area by the minimum lot-area-per-unit requirement, and round any fractional result down to the whole number.  
14.1.4. - Building Footprint 
Building footprint is measured as the horizontal area on a lot that is covered by the subject building, excluding open steps and terraces, cornices and roof overhangs that do not project more than twenty-four (24) inches.  
14.1.5. - Floor Area 
The floor area of a building is measured as the area of all floor space within the outside line of walls of a building, including the total of all space on all floors of a building. It does not include porches, garages or space in a basement if the basement is used for storage or incidental uses. Any space devoted to offstreet parking or loading is not included in the calculation of floor area.  
14.1.6. - Lot Width 
Lot width is measured as the distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured along the required front street setback line.  
14.1.7. - Lot Depth 
Lot depth is measured as the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a lot.  
14.1.8. - Lot Coverage 
Lot coverage is measured as the total cumulative area of a lot that is covered by all principal and accessory buildings on the lot, as measured at the point where such buildings meet the ground (i.e., building footprint).  
14.1.9. - Setbacks 
A.  Measurement 
1.  Setbacks are measured from the referenced lot line (street front, street side, interior side or rear) to the closest point of the building or structure. 
2.  Street setbacks are measured from the lot line that abuts the street, except for lots that front on North Avenue, St. Charles Road or Roosevelt Road where the following special minimum setback regulations apply: 
a.  North Avenue: minimum one hundred (100) feet from centerline of right-of-way. 
b.  St. Charles Road: minimum forty (40) feet from centerline of right-of-way. 
c.  Roosevelt Road: minimum fifty (50) feet from centerline of right-of-way 
3.  Required front street setbacks extend from side lot line to side lot line. Required side street setbacks extend from front lot line to rear lot line. 
4.  Interior side setbacks are measured from side lot lines that do not abut a street. Required interior side setbacks extend from the point of the required front setback to the point of the required rear setback. 
5.  Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line. Required rear setbacks extend from side lot line to side lot line. 
6.  On double-frontage lots, front street setbacks apply from both opposing lot lines that abut the street. 
B.  Contextual Setbacks for Infill Development 
1.  Applicability 
Contextual front street setback requirements apply in R and O-R districts to any new building constructed on a lot that abuts one or more lots occupied by principal buildings that are set back a greater or lesser distance than required by the subject lot's zoning district. 
2.  Measurement 
a.  The minimum contextual setback is determined by calculating the mean street yard depth that exists on the nearest two (2) lots on either side of the subject lot. 
b.  If one or more of the lots required to be included in the minimum contextual setback calculation are vacant, the vacant lot will be deemed to have a street yard depth equal to the minimum street setback requirement of the subject zoning district. See [Figure] 13-1. 
Figure 13-1. Calculation of Contextual Setback (1)
 
c.  Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley are not used in computing the minimum contextual setback. See Figure 13-2. 
Figure 13-2. Calculating Contextual Setback (2)
 
d.  When the subject lot is a corner lot, the mean street yard depth will be computed on the basis of the nearest two (2) lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. See Figure 13-3. 
Figure 13-3. Calculating Contextual Setback (3)
 
e.  When the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the same street, the mean street yard depth will be computed on the basis of the abutting corner lot and the nearest two (2) lots with frontage on the same street as the subject lot. See Figure 13-4. 
f.  The contextual setback provisions of this section may not be used to reduce the required setback in an R district to less than twenty (20) feet or to require a building setback in an R district of more than forty (40) feet. 
g.  The contextual setback provisions of this section may not be used to reduce the required setback in an O-R district to less than fifteen (15) feet or to require a building setback in an O-R district of more than thirty-five (35) percent of the depth of the subject lot. 
Figure 13-4. Calculating Contextual Setback (4)
 
C.  Permitted Obstructions and Encroachments 
Setbacks in R zoning districts must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except as indicated in Table 13-1, which identifies features that are allowed to encroach into required setbacks in R zoning districts. "Yes" indicates that obstruction is permitted. "No" indicates that the identified structure is prohibiting from obstructing or encroaching into the respective setback area. Bracketed numbers refer to supplemental conditions immediately following the table. 
Table 13-1: Permitted Setback Obstructions/Encroachments 
	Street 
(Front or Side) 	Interior Side 	Rear 
Air conditioners, window 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Air conditioning condensers 	No 	Yes [1] 	Yes 
Arbors and trellises, detached 	No 	No 	Yes 
Arbors and trellises, attached 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Awnings and canopies, attached 	Yes [2] 	Yes [2] 	Yes [2] 
Balconies, open 	Yes 	No 	Yes 
Basketball goal and net 	Yes [3] 	No 	Yes 
Bay windows 	Yes [4] 	Yes [4] [5] 	Yes [4] 
Carports (See also 6.10.4) 	No 	No 	Yes 
Chimneys, attached 	Yes 	Yes [5] [6] 	Yes [6] 
Clotheslines 	No 	No 	Yes 
Compost container 	No 	No 	Yes 
Decks, open - no more than 4 feet above ground level 	No 	No 	Yes [2][7] 
Dog run or pet enclosure (See also 6.10.5) 	No 	No 	Yes 
Driveways 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Eaves, sills, cornices, gutters or downspout 	Yes [8] 	Yes [6] 	Yes [8] 
Fences, walls, or hedges (See also Sec. 9.2) 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Fireplace, fire pit or permanent grill/barbecue structure 	No 	No 	Yes 
Firewood 	No 	Yes [6] 	Yes 
Flagpole 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Garages, detached (See also 6.10.4) 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
Gardens (vegetable) and garden structures including cold frames, hoop houses and greenhouses 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
Geothermal heat pumps 	No 	No 	Yes 
Lawn furnishings, such as benches, sundials, porch swings, bird baths, and similar non-permanent architectural features 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Light standards, ornamental 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Parking, off-street (See also Article 7) 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Patios, terraces, open - no more than 4 feet above ground level 	No 	No [5] 	Yes 
Ponds and waterfalls 	No 	No 	Yes 
Porches, open 	Yes [2] 	No 	No 
Private service walks 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Rain barrel or rainwater collection device 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
Recreational, playground equipment and playhouses 	No 	No 	Yes 
Refuse containers 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
Satellite receiving antenna (See also 6.10.8) 	No 	No 	Yes 
Sheds (See also Sec. 6.10) 	No 	Yes 	Yes 
Solar energy equipment, building-mounted 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Solar energy equipment, ground-mounted 	No 	No 	Yes 
Stairways or steps, open 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Sump pump discharge pipe extensions 	Yes 	No 	Yes 
Swimming pools and sports courts 	No 	No 	Yes [5] 
Swing sets 	No 	No 	Yes 
Television or radio towers or antennas (See also 6.10.10) 	No 	No 	Yes 
Tennis courts, other paved recreational areas 	No 	No 	Yes 
Trees, shrubs, ground cover and flowers 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
Treehouse 	No 	No 	Yes 
Wheelchair ramp or accessibility feature 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 
 
Notes for Table 13-1: 
[1] Sound and visual screening required when located in interior side setback. 
[2] Maximum projection may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of required setback depth. 
[3] Permitted in driveway only when located in street setback. 
[4] May project (encroach) no more than three (3) feet. 
[5] Requires minimum five-foot setback in all cases (for swimming pools, includes decking and paved area). 
[6] May project (encroach) no more than two (2) feet. 
[7] Must be set back at least five (5) feet from side lot line. 
[8] May project (encroach) no more than four (4) feet.  
14.1.10. - Height 
A.  Buildings 
1.  Measurement 
Building height is measured as the vertical distance from the top of the curb in front the building (at the horizontal midpoint of the building) to the highest point of the roof surface for a flat roof, to the deck line for a mansard roof, to the mean level between the eaves and ridge for hip, gabled, and gambrel roofs. If no curb exists, the "curb" measurement must be taken from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade immediately abutting the building. 
Figure 13-5. Building Height Measurement
 
From top of curb (if no curb, then from mean finished grade abutting building) 
2.  Exceptions 
a.  Utility penthouses are not be included in the height of the building unless the aggregate area of such structure exceeds one-third of the area of the roof of the building. 
b.  Chimneys, cooking towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, church steeples, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may only be erected to the maximum height of the subject district, except as otherwise expressly stated. See also 9.1.5 for regulations governing screening of rooftop mechanical equipment. 
c.  Public, civic and institutional uses permitted by special use, may be erected to a height of up to 60 feet in all zoning districts and religious assembly uses permitted by special use may be erected to a height of up to 75 feet in all zoning districts if the building is set back from each lot line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise allowed in the subject zoning district. 
B.  Fences 
The height of a fence is measured from the ground at the point of measurement unless the elevation of the ground at the point of measurement has been artificially changed by installation of a berm, mound, or fill that was not approved as part of a subdivision grading plan. If the elevation at the point of measurement has been artificially changed, then fence height must be measured from the elevation of the ground prior to the change. 
C.  Telecommunication Towers 
The height of a telecommunication tower is measured from the finished grade of the parcel directly beneath the tower to the highest point on the tower, including the base pad and any antenna. 
D.  Antenna 
The height of an antenna is measured vertically from the highest point of the antenna when positioned for operation to the point at which the antenna is attached to the building or antenna-supporting structure, whichever is applicable. 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18)  
SEC. 14.2. - DEFINITIONS  
14.2.1. - General 
Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the specific meanings assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. General usage terms that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Specialized zoning and development-related terms have the meaning given in the latest edition of The Complete Illustrated Book of Development Definitions,  
14.2.2. - Use-Related Terms 
See Article 6 for an explanation of the use categorization system used in this zoning ordinance and for definitions of use types.  
14.2.3. - Sign-Related Terms 
See Sec. 8.12.  
14.2.4. - Measurements and Calculations 
See Sec. 14.1 for an explanation of various measurement-related concepts, such as how building height, lot width and contextual (average) setbacks are measured or calculated.  
14.2.5. - Words and Terms Beginning with "A" 
A.  Abut or Abutting: To touch or share a contiguous boundary or border, except that in the context of hearing notice and screening or enclosure requirements, "abutting" includes properties that are contiguous or separated therefrom only by a non-arterial street, alley or railroad right of way. 
B.  Accessory structure or use: A use or structure that meets the criteria established in 6.10.1. 
C.  Adjacent: Lying near or in the immediate vicinity. 
D.  Agent: A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the subject property. 
E.  Alley: A public or private street that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
F.  Amateur Radio Facility: Any tower or antenna used for non-commercial radio communications (transmission and reception) maintained by an FCC-licensed amateur radio operator. 
G.  Amusement ride: Any mechanized device, or combination of devices, including electrical equipment that is an integral part of the device or devices, that carries passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted course for the primary purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills, or excitement. 
H.  Annual (plant): A plant that completes its life cycle in one year or less. 
I.  Apiary: An enclosure used to house bees. 
J.  Applicant: The owner of the subject property or an agent authorized by the subject property owner to submit an application on the owner's behalf.  
14.2.6. - Words and Terms Beginning with "B" 
A.  Base (Zoning) District: Any zoning district that is not an overlay district. 
B.  Basement: A story having more than one-half its height below grade. A basement is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations expressed in stories. 
C.  Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide visual screening or a buffer. 
D.  Bioretention: The use of soil and plants to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff. 
E.  Blockface: Property abutting on one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, railroad right of ways, or other natural or human-made barriers. 
F.  Block party: Any gathering in, upon, or around a street or streets, of residents of a common block or street or group of connected blocks or streets, that requires blockading of streets. 
G.  Boat raft: Any vessel used for water travel or pleasure floating, 32 feet or less in overall length including any boat trailer used to transport it. 
H.  Buffer: A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen potentially incompatible land uses. 
I.  Building: A structure enclosed within a roof and exterior walls or fire walls, built, erected and framed of structural parts, designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, animals or property of any kind. 
J.  Building, principal: A nonaccessory building in which the principal of the property is conducted. 
K.  Build-to Zone: An area in which the front or corner side facade of a building shall be placed; it may or may not be located directly abutting a lot line. The zone dictates the minimum and maximum distance a structure may be placed from a lot line.  
14.2.7. - Words and Terms Beginning with "C" 
A.  Camper, truck: A portable RV unit, designed to be loaded onto or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck. The two (2) basic types are, as follows: 
1.  Slide-in camper: A truck camper designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck. 
2.  Chassis-mount camper: A truck camper permanently affixed to a truck chassis. 
B.  Canopy: Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving its support from framework or posts or other means independent of a connected structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the elements. 
C.  Carnival: Any theatrical, dramatic, musical, or spectacular performance or exhibition, including booths, midway games or shows, or amusement rides. 
D.  Carport: A roofed accessory structure that projects from the wall of the principal structure intended to shelter vehicles on a residential property, with at least one side permanently open to the weather. 
E.  Car-share Program: A system in which a fleet of cars (or other motor vehicles) is made available for use by members of the car-share program and that exhibit all of the following characteristics: 
1.  Members are permitted to use vehicles from the car-share program fleet on an hourly basis; 
2.  Car-share vehicles are generally available twenty-four (24) hours a day and seven (7) days a week to members in parking spaces at dispersed locations or facilities; and 
3.  No separate written agreement is required each time a member reserves and uses a car-share vehicle. 
F.  Car-share Vehicle: A motor vehicle from a car-share program fleet. 
G.  Courtyard: An outdoor area enclosed by a building on at least three sides and open to the sky.  
14.2.8. - Words and Terms Beginning with "D" 
A.  Deciduous: A plant with foliage that is shed annually. 
B.  Driveway: A private vehicular access-way necessary for providing access from a public street or alley to an approved off-street parking area. 
C.  Dwelling unit: A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, that are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one household. Dwelling units include a complete single kitchen permanently installed that serves the entire household.  
14.2.9. - Words and Terms Beginning with "E" 
A.  E-Cigarette (Electronic Cigarette): Any device that uses an atomizer or similar device that allows users to inhale nicotine vapor of other vapor without the use of fire, smoke or ash, including electronic cigars, electronic pipes and any cartridge or component of the device or related product and any liquid products that are manufactured for use with e-cigarettes. 
B.  Electric Vehicle: Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets; either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source, that is stored on-board via a battery. "Electric vehicle" includes: (1) battery electric vehicles; and (2) plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. 
C.  Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Station: A public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment. 
D.  Electric vehicle charging station, private (restricted-access): An EV charging station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet parking areas. 
E.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station, Public: An EV charging station that is accessible to and available for use by the general public. 
F.  Electric Vehicle Parking Space: Any parking space that is clearly identified to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle. 
G.  Evergreen: A plant with foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year. 
H.  Expression Line: An architectural feature consisting of a decorative, three-dimensional, linear element, horizontal or vertical, protruding or indented at least two (2) inches from the exterior facade of a building typically utilized to delineate the top or bottom of floors or stories of a building, intended to create a shadow line. Examples may include cast stone cornices, pilasters, or stepped brick coursing.  
14.2.10. - Words and Terms Beginning with "F" 
A.  Fair: An event for the exhibition and promotion of activities in the fields of agriculture, industry, labor, education and such other areas of activities as may be of interest to the public. 
B.  Fence: A freestanding structure of metal, masonry, composition or wood or any combination thereof, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement or screening. Any plantings, shrubbery, hedges or other vegetation, whether used individually or in combination with a freestanding structure of metal, masonry, composition or wood, that is installed to provide an effective visual barrier constitutes a "fence" under this ordinance if it is more than ten (10) feet in length. 
C.  Fence, Solid: Any fence that when viewed from an angle of ninety (90) degrees, is less than seventy-five (75) percent open. 
D.  Fence, Open: Any fence that when viewed from an angle of ninety (90) degrees, is at least seventy-five (75) percent open. 
E.  Fest or festival: An event that includes some or all of the following: amusement rides; carnivals circuses; fairs; parades; display and sale of arts, crafts, merchandise, food, or (alcoholic or nonalcoholic) beverages. 
F.  Flood base elevation: That elevation of the highest flood of record, determined by the village engineer's record of the elevations of the highest flood at locations as indicated on the zoning map. Flood base elevations at intermediate locations must be interpolated along the watercourse between the two (2) nearest base elevations, one upstream and downstream. The controlling flood base elevation for any building site is the same as the flood base elevation at the nearest point of the watercourse, as measured on a line perpendicular to the direction of the watercourse. 
G.  Floodplain: That continuous land area adjacent to a watercourse, whose elevation is equal to or below the flood base elevation, including any land that is surrounded on more than one-half its perimeter by land having an elevation equal to or lower than the flood base elevation. 
H.  Flood reservoir: A ponding area created for the purpose of impounding floodwaters and alleviating any flood damage that might result from human-made fills. 
I.  Foot-candle: A measure of illumination, the amount of light falling onto a surface. One lumen of light, shining evenly across one square foot of surface, illuminates that surface to one foot-candle. 
J.  Foundation area: The ground area immediately adjacent to a building on all sides. Foundation areas extend a minimum of five (5) feet in all directions from the foundation of the building.  
14.2.11. - Words and Terms Beginning with "G" 
A.  Garage, private residential: A detached, enclosed accessory structure or portion of the principal building designed, arranged, used or intended to use for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents of the subject property. 
B.  Geothermal Heat Exchange System: Equipment that exchanges thermal energy between the ground (or a water source) and a building. This includes vertical closed loop, horizontal closed loop, water body closed loop system and open loop systems. Also known as ground source heat pumps and geothermal heat pumps. 
C.  Greenhouse: A temporary or permanent structure that is primarily used for the cultivation of plants. 
D.  Green Roof: An extension of an above-grade building roof that includes at least a waterproof membrane, a root repellent system, a drainage system, a filtering layer, soil with a minimum depth of three (3) inches and native or naturalized plants. Also commonly referred to as a "vegetated roof." 
E.  Ground cover: A plant that grows near the ground densely and spreads. Generally an herbaceous perennial, sometimes a woody shrub or vine.  
14.2.12. - Words and Terms Beginning with "H" 
A.  Hedgerow: A row of shrubs and/or trees that occur in a row, like a hedge. Sometimes purposely planted for wind control in agricultural areas. More commonly an area along a road or field boundary that, left uncut, has grown up with various plants, seeded by wind, water, birds or other natural methods. 
B.  Home occupation: An accessory use of a dwelling for limited commercial purposes. Home occupations are subject to the regulations of 6.10.6. 
C.  Hoop House: A temporary or permanent structure typically made of flexible pipe or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a "half-round" or "hoop" shape, for the purposes of protecting and cultivating plants. A hoop house is considered more temporary than a greenhouse. 
D.  Household: One or more persons occupying a premises and living together as a single housekeeping unit, regardless of whether the persons are related to one other by blood, adoption or marriage; provided, however, that: 
1.  No housekeeping unit consisting of all unrelated persons may exceed four (4) persons; and 
2.  No housekeeping unit consisting of related and unrelated persons may consist of more than the related family and no more than two (2) other unrelated persons. 
For the purpose of this definition of "household," the phrase "living together as a single housekeeping unit" means that all members of the household share common meals, that all members have the equal right to use, in common with each other, the areas customarily considered to be common area in a dwelling unit, including ingress and egress, and that all members share customary household obligations in a manner typical of a traditional nuclear family.  
14.2.13. - Words and Terms Beginning with "I" 
A.  Impervious Site Coverage: The percentage of a lot developed with principal or accessory structures and impervious surfaces, such as driveways, sidewalks, and patios.  
14.2.14. - Words and Terms Beginning with "J" 
RESERVED  
14.2.14.5. - Words and Terms Beginning with "K" 
RESERVED  
14.2.15. - Words and Terms Beginning with "L" 
A.  Landscape architect: A person who, based on education, experience, or both in the field of landscape architecture, is eligible to register and has obtained a certificate to practice landscape architecture under 225 ILCS 15/1. 
B.  Landscape area, perimeter: An area around the perimeter of a property not facing a public street. The perimeter landscape area extends from the property line to the nearest building face, parking area, or access drive, exclusive of the foundation area and the interior parkway. 
C.  Lawfully Established: A use, structure, lot or sign (as the context indicates) that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning code regulations in effect at the time of its establishment. 
D.  Lot: A parcel of land that is designated by its owner or developer, at the time of applying for a building permit or other form of development approval required under this ordinance, as a tract all of which is to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership. So long as it satisfies the above requirements, such lot may consist of: 
1.  A single lot of record; or 
2.  A combination of contiguous complete lots of record. 
E.  Lot, corner: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets or a lot bounded on 2 sides by a curving street two (2) chords of which form an angle of 120 degrees or less measured on the lot side. 
F.  Lot, double-frontage: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Figure 13-6. Lot Types
 
G.  Lot, Interior: Any lot that is not a corner lot. 
H.  Lot line: The property boundary line of a lot. 
I.  Lot line, front (street): A street lot line forming the boundary of an interior lot or the shorter street lot line on a corner lot. 
J.  Lot line, rear: The lot line that is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line. If a rear lot line is less than fifteen (15) feet long, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line is an imaginary line at least fifteen (15) feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line. 
K.  Lot line, side (interior): A lot line that is neither a street lot line nor a rear lot line. 
L.  Lot line, side (street): A street lot line forming the longer boundary on a corner lot. 
M.  Lot line, street: Any lot line that abuts a street, including front (street) lot lines and side (street) lot lines. 
N.  Lot of record: A lot that is part of a real estate subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, pursuant to statute.  
14.2.16. - Words and Terms Beginning with "M" 
A.  Manufactured housing unit: A principal residential building that complies with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42U.S.C. §5401, et seq.). 
B.  Motor home: A vehicular RV unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis as an integral part of the chassis.  
14.2.17. - Words and Terms Beginning with "N" 
A.  Nonconforming/Nonconformity: See Article 13. 
B.  Noxious matter: Material that is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.  
14.2.18. - Words and Terms Beginning with "O" 
A.  Occupied building space: Interior building space regularly occupied by the building users; does not include storage areas, utility space, or parking. 
B.  Odor threshold: The lowest concentration of odorous substance in the air that will produce an odor sensation. 
C.  Open space, landscaped: Land covered by trees, shrubs, turf grasses or ground cover. Impervious surfaces, such as buildings, parking lots, walkways, or patios are not considered landscaped open space. 
D.  Ornamental grasses: A group of perennial plants that include true grasses (of the families Proacea and Graminea), sedges (of the family Cyperaceae) and rushes (of the familyJuncaceae, including the Juncus and Luzula cultivars). Such grasses are generally planted in groups and may range in size from several inches to more than six (6) feet. In contrast to turf grasses, that require regular cutting during the growing season, ornamental grasses are typically cut back only once per year, generally in late winter. 
E.  Outdoor seating (area): Any portion of a business establishment where the principal business activity is the sale and consumption of food on-premises, and is unenclosed and not used for other purposes. 
F.  Outdoor storage: The storage of foods and materials outside of any building or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency nature. 
G.  Overlay District: A zoning district that over-lays one or more base zoning districts and imposes requirements in addition to those of the base district or modifies the regulations otherwise applicable in the base zoning district.  
14.2.19. - Words and Terms Beginning with "P" 
A.  Parade: Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, procession, assembly, meeting or gathering of any kind of persons, groups, or organizations, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the village, whether or not including vehicles, floats, or moving displays. 
B.  Parkway: That area of land between the property line abutting any public right-of-way, highway or street, and the back of curbs, edges of pavement, whether concrete or asphalt, or other improved roadway surface. 
C.  Particulate matter: Dust, smoke or any other form of airborne pollution in the form of minute separate particles. 
D.  Perennial: A plant whose life cycle is more than two (2) years. 
E.  Porte cochere: A porch roof projecting over a driveway at the entrance to a building providing shelter for persons entering or leaving vehicles and that is an integral part of an architectural design for an existing or proposed principal building. 
F.  Primary Street: A street that receives priority over other streets in terms of setting front lot lines and locating building entrances; typically the main street as opposed to a side street. 
G.  Processed ball: Plants dug bare root, while dormant, to which a moist medium is added around the roots to form a ball designed to sustain plant growth.  
14.2.20. - Words and Terms Beginning with "Q" 
RESERVED  
14.2.21. - Words and Terms Beginning with "R" 
A.  Rainwater Harvesting Equipment: A rain barrel, cistern or similar container that collects and stores rainwater or other water that would otherwise be lost as runoff. 
B.  Recreational vehicle (RV): A trailer, boat trailer, travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, tent trailer, boat, personal watercraft, snowmoible, all-terrain vehicle or similar vehicle. Camper that are attached to a pickup truck are not considered a recreational vehicle. 
C.  Ringelmann Chart: The chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke, or "smoke density." 
D.  Ringelmann number: The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission or the light-obscuring capacity of smoke.  
14.2.22. - Words and Terms Beginning with "S" 
A.  Screen: A method of reducing visual impacts through the use of plant materials, berms, fences and/or walls or any combination of such features. 
B.  Screening: Structures, such as an attractive fence consisting of cedar slats or redwood boards, or equal, and landscaping maintained for the purpose of concealing areas from view on a year-round basis. 
C.  Semi-pervious surface: Also referred to as semi-pervious material. A material that allows for at least forty (40) percent absorption of water into the ground or plant material, such as pervious pavers, permeable asphalt and concrete, or gravel. 
D.  Setback: An open, unobstructed area that is required to be provided by this zoning ordinance (see also 14.1.9.). 
E.  Shed, storage: A detached accessory structure used or intended to use for the storage of garden equipment and household items incidental to the principal use. 
F.  Shrub: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, that consists of a number of small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground. May be deciduous or evergreen. 
G.  Shrub, low: Any shrub that attains a mature height of four (4) feet or less when left unpruned. 
H.  Shrub, tall: Any shrub that attains a mature height of more than four (4) feet when left unpruned. 
I.  Sign-related definitions: See Sec. 8.12 for all sign-related definitions. 
J.  Single ownership: Ownership by an individual, partnership, corporation, cooperative or condominium having control over exterior maintenance of buildings and grounds. 
K.  Smoke: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or combustion process that is made up of particulate matter. 
L.  Smoke unit: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann Number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this calculation: 
1.  A Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a minute during the period of observation; 
2.  Each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; and 
3.  The various products are then added together to give the total number of smoke units observed during the entire observation period. 
M.  Specified anatomical areas: (a) less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
N.  Specified sexual activities: (a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or (c) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
O.  Solar Energy System: A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical energy. 
1.  Solar Energy System, Building-Integrated: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural components. 
2.  Solar Energy System, Structure-Mounted: A solar energy system that is mounted on the façade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure. 
3.  Solar Energy System, Flush-Mounted: A solar energy system that is mounted flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six (6) inches in height above that surface. 
4.  Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted: A solar energy system mounted on the ground and not attached to any other structure other than structural supports. 
P.  Solar Panel: A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels are assembled on-site into solar arrays. 
Q.  Street: All property dedicated or intended for public or private street, highway, freeway or roadway purposes or subject to easements therefor. 
R.  Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, including a story that has more than three-quarters of its height above grade. 
S.  Story, ground: Also referred to as ground floor. The first floor of a building that is level to or elevated above the finished grade on the front and corner facades, excluding basements or cellars. 
T.  Story, half: A space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than sixty (60) percent of the floor area is finished off for use, and a story in which more than one-half but not more than three-quarters of its height is above grade. 
U.  Street line: A line forming the boundary of the right-of-way of a street. 
V.  Street wall: The outer face of any part of a building nearest to and facing on a street, except open steps and terraces. Where the front lot line setback is thirty (30) feet or more, bay windows projecting not more than four (4) feet toward the front lot line, and sun parlors (not a part of any other room), porches and piazzas projecting not more than ten (10) feet toward the front lot line are shall not considered a part of the front street wall, provided no such bay window, sun parlor, porch or piazza exceeds in height the first story of the building of which it is a part. 
W.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground or attached to something having a permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including but without limiting the generality of the foregoing; buildings, advertising signs, backstops for tennis courts, pergolas, and swimming pools; provided, however, that this definition does not include underground tanks for the storage of any type of fuel. 
X.  Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Y.  Swimming pool: Any temporary or permanent artificial pool or receptacle for water installed, constructed or maintained in, on or above the ground (not including those enclosed and located entirely within a dwelling), having a perimeter of more than twenty-five (25) feet and a depth of more than two (2) feet at any point. 
Z.  Swimming pool, private residential: Any swimming pool constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground, outside of a building used as a dwelling unit.  
14.2.23. - Words and Terms Beginning with "T" 
A.  Trailer, camping: A vehicular portable RV unit mounted on a chassis and constructed with collapsible partial side walls that fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the camp site. 
B.  Trailer, travel: A vehicular, portable RV unit built on a chassis, designed to be drawn by another vehicle, and permanently identified as a "travel trailer." 
C.  Transparency: The measurement of the percentage of a facade that has highly transparent, low reflectance windows. 
D.  Tree: A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches. May be deciduous or evergreen. 
E.  Tree, ornamental: A deciduous tree planted primarily for its ornamental value or for screening. May be any size at maturity but will tend to be smaller than a shade tree. 
F.  Tree, protected: An existing tree designated on the landscape plan to remain after construction. 
G.  Tree, shade: A tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy. 
H.  Tree, street: A tree planted in close proximity to a street in order to provide a canopy over the street, to give the street a sense of spatial definition and human scale, to provide shade and soften the street environment. 
I.  Turfgrass: Grasses planted, by seeding or sodding, to establish a lawn that is usually maintained by mowing during the growing season.  
14.2.24. - Words and Terms Beginning with "U" 
A.  Utility penthouse: An enclosed space located on a roof for the housing of a stairway or equipment used in the operation of a building such as tanks, fans, heating and cooling equipment, or elevator machinery, but containing no habitable or storage space. 
B.  Use, open-air: storage yards, construction debris sites, used vehicle sales lots, vehicle impound yards, auto wrecking, junkyards, and similar open-air uses when the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open-air use of the lot. 
C.  Use, principal: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.  
14.2.25. - Words and Terms Beginning with "V" 
A.  Vehicle Fuels, Alternative: Electricity, CNG (compressed natural gas), LNG (liquefied natural gas), LPG (liquefied petroleum gas), and hydrogen. 
B.  Vehicle Fuels, Conventional: Gasoline and diesel fuel. 
C.  Visible Basement: A half story partially below grade and partially exposed above with required transparency on the street facade.  
14.2.26. - Words and Terms Beginning with "W" 
A.  Wine making facility: A facility that produces up to fifty thousand (50,000) gallons of wine per calendar year.  
14.2.27. - Words and Terms Beginning with "X" 
RESERVED  
14.2.28. - Words and Terms Beginning with "Y" 
A.  Yard: An actual (as opposed to "required") open, unoccupied space that exists on a lot between a building and a lot line. 
B.  Yard, Front: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines between the side lot lines. 
C.  Yard, Rear: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side yards. 
D.  Yard, Side: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear lot line. 
E.  Yard, Street: Any yard abutting a street.  
14.2.29. - Words and Terms Beginning with "Z" 
RESERVED 
( Ord. No. 4036 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-11-18; Ord. No. 4084 , § 2, 6-10-19)  
APPENDIX D - COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, adopted July 8, 2019, repealed the former App. D, §§ 1—12, and enacted a new App. D as set out herein. The former App. D pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3000, §§ 1—11, adopted Aug. 23, 1999; Ord. No. 3199, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 11, 2003; Ord. No. 3268, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 25, 2004; Ord. No. 3511, § 2, adopted Sept. 8, 2008; and Ord. No. 3974, § 2, adopted May 22, 2017. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; civil defense and emergencies, Ch. 8; planning and development, Ch. 18; soil erosion and sedimentation, Ch. 19.5; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; official plan and subdivision regulations, App. B; basic zoning ordinance, App. C. 
 
Section 1. - Countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the Village, for the purpose of promoting effective, equitable and acceptable stormwater management measures, that certain ordinance known as the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance ("Countywide Ordinance"), latest revision date of May 14, 2019, as now existing or hereafter amended, of which not less than one (1) copy has been and is now filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and the whole thereof as if set out in full herein. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 2. - Amendment of countywide ordinance. 
A.  Subsection 15-32 shall be amended by adding subsection 15-32.C, which shall read in its entirety as follows: 15-32.C: All general certifications which have been and those which will be hereafter adopted by DuPage County are adopted by the Village of Villa Park. 
B.  Subsection 15-71. Site Runoff Conveyance Requirements shall be amended by adding subsection 15-71.H, which shall read in its entirety as follows: 15-71.H: Any development that is not part of a major subdivision with a site runoff storage facility per Section 15-72, shall include 1% minimum slope swales along the entire length of the rear and side property lines, if physically possible. If there is less than a continuous 1% minimum slope from the new impervious area to an existing storm sewer or defined watercourse, then perforated drain tiles, storm drains, dry wells or other Post Construction Best Management Practices (PCBMPs) approved by the Village shall be required to convey or store the 100-year site runoff associated with the new impervious area. Such drainage improvements shall be as directed by the Director of Public Works based on technical feasibility, impact on other properties, available easements and cost. Whenever possible, such direction shall be based on site inspections rather than a topographic survey. Perforated drain tiles and/or storm drains shall drain from flat or low areas into existing separated storm sewer or defined watercourse. The preferred location for storm drain inlets shall be a rear corner of the lot. The perforated drain pipes shall be installed in a washed gravel trench wrapped with the non-woven geo-fabric material. PCBMPs proposed to store the 100-year site runoff associated with all new impervious area shall be sized to provide a volume (cubic feet) equal to the new impervious area times a rainfall depth of 0.63 feet (7.58"). All PCBMPs shall be located on the subject property and outside of any utility easements or public rights-of-way unless specifically approved by the Director of Public Works. 
C.  The portion of Subsection 15-72.A preceding 15.72.A.1 of the Countywide Ordinance, as amended, shall be read as follows for the purposes of this ordinance: 15-72.A: The following cases or special conditions represent exceptions to providing site runoff storage. These exceptions do not apply to multiple family developments and all non-residential developments except Roadway Development as identified in Section 15-72.A.4 and those "Special Cases of Development" identified in Sections 15-72.B and 15-72.C. 
D.  Subsection 15-72.B shall be amended by adding subsection 15-72.B.1, which shall read in its entirety as follows: 15-72.B.1: Developments that require Village-specific runoff storage and are already 80% or more impervious, shall calculate the required storage using a continuous simulation or event hydrograph method that demonstrates the post-development peak runoff rate does not exceed 0.04 cfs/acre for the 2-year 24-hour duration storm event. Developments that are less than 80% impervious shall calculate the required storage using a continuous simulation or event hydrograph method that demonstrates the post-development peak runoff rate does not exceed 0.10 cfs/acre for the 100-year 24-hour duration storm event, unless the development reduces the total amount of impervious area, in which case the storage shall be calculated based on the 2-year 24-hour duration storm event. Alternatively, the Village issued Required Storage Volume table can be used in lieu of detailed modeling for determining the required storage volumes. 
E.  Subsection 15-72.D.1 of the Countywide Ordinance, as amended, shall be read as follows for the purpose of this ordinance: 15-72.D.1 The area for which site runoff storage is to be calculated will be the limits of grading or land cover disturbance, or a combination, whichever encompasses the greatest area of the Development Site, and will also include any Development area for which site stormwater storage was deferred in Section 15-72.A.1. For multiple family developments and non-residential developments requiring site runoff storage as a result of Appendix D amendments to Section 15-72.A, the area for which site runoff storage is to be calculated will be the limits of the new impervious area (not net new impervious area). In no case shall the required site runoff storage be less than what is required by the Countywide Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 3. - Scope. 
(a)  This ordinance supplements the following ordinances to the extent of any inconsistencies only: 
(1)  Subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Building ordinance. 
(b)  The provisions of this ordinance further regulate and restrict: 
(1)  The subdivision, layout, and improvement of land, including drainage, underground utilities, and service facilities. 
(2)  The excavating, filling and grading of lots and other parcels and areas of special flood hazard areas, the storing of certain materials thereon, stream and other floodwater runoff channels and detention ponds and basins. 
(3)  The location, construction, and elevation of buildings and other structures and parts and appurtenances thereof. 
(c)  Before starting any of the work regulated by this ordinance, an applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in the aforementioned ordinances with respect to submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement plans, building and zoning permits, inspections, appeals, and similar matters along with those set forth in the ordinance and as required by state statute and regulations of any department of the State of Illinois. 
(d)  The applicant shall also obtain any and all other local, state and federal permits that may be required for this type of development activity. The stormwater permit will only be issued on the condition that the other required permits have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 4. - Site runoff storage fee-in-lieu program. 
As authorized by Subsection 15-97.C of the Countywide Ordinance, the Village hereby adopts a site runoff storage variance fee program. Under this program, the developer may be provided with an alternative to physically providing stormwater detention. The owner or other person proposing development in certain situations shall have the option of paying to the Village cash funds in lieu of complying with the provisions that require physical detention storage of stormwater. The cash funds shall be in an amount that is substantially equal to the estimated cost to the Village for providing an alternate means of stormwater detention storage that is substantially equivalent to the increased amount of stormwater runoff that will result from the proposed development, as determined by the Village Engineer. Calculations of such increased amount of stormwater runoff shall be made on the basis of (and expressed in terms of) a cubic foot of volume, or a fraction thereof. All funds paid to the Village under this section shall be segregated, held, and disbursed only to pay the costs of stormwater improvements as the Village deems appropriate. 
(A)  The site runoff storage variance fee program will not apply if the area of the proposed development is within a special flood hazard area without written approval of the Village's Stormwater Administrator. 
(B)  The site runoff storage variance fee program application submittal shall fully comply with Section 15-27 and subsection 15-117.G of the Countywide Ordinance. 
(C)  The payment rate due from an owner-developer for the site runoff storage variance fee program shall be calculated at the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per cubic foot of exemption detention storage. The exemption detention storage volume shall be in accordance with Section 15-72 of the Countywide Ordinance or Section 2 of Appendix D, as appropriate. The three dollars ($3.00) per cubic foot of exemption detention storage volume has been calculated by the Village Engineer to be sufficient to compensate the Village for total expenses in providing detention storage in another location. This amount shall be considered current at the time of passage of this ordinance. 
From time to time, as frequently as the Village board may deem it necessary or desirable, the Village board shall determine and establish the cost to the Village of providing one (1) cubic foot of stormwater exemption detention storage, such cost to include, without limitation, the cost of necessary land acquisition, engineering expenses, legal fees, and other related expenditures. The amount so determined and established shall serve as the basis for the calculation of the cash funds to be paid as provided in this section until such time as a different amount is determined and established by the Village Board. 
(D)  The owner-developer shall be exempt from the stormwater detention storage requirement identified in Section 2 of Appendix D, provided that: 
(1)  The owner-developer has procured the written approval of the Village Engineer. 
(2)  The owner-developer has made a cash payment to the Village for the amount of detention storage volume exempted and the payment made at the established dollar rate per cubic foot volume. 
(E)  For developments requiring stormwater detention storage per Section 15-72 of the Countywide Ordinance (County detention requirements), Section 15-97.A and Sections 15-117, 15-118, and 15-119 shall also apply. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 5. - Post construction best management practices (PCBMP) fee-in-lieu program. 
As authorized by Section 15-98 of the Countywide Ordinance, the Village hereby adopts a Post Construction Best Management Practice Fee-In-Lieu Program. Under this program, the developer may be provided with an alternative to physically providing post-construction best management practices for development or improvement. The owner or other person proposing development in certain situations shall have the option of paying the Village cash funds in lieu of complying with the provisions that require post-construction best management practices. The cash funds shall be in an amount that is substantially equal to the estimated cost of physically providing the post-construction best management practices as defined in "Schedule B, Detention Variance Fee and BMP Fee-In-lieu Schedule" of the Countywide Ordinance. Calculation of such fees shall be made per Section 15-98 of the Countywide Ordinance. All funds paid to the Village under this section shall be segregated, held, and disbursed in a manner consistent with Section 15-98 of the Countywide Ordinance. 
(A)  The Post Construction Best Management Practice Fee-In-Lieu Program requires written approval of the Village. 
(B)  The Post Construction Best Management Practice Fee-In-Lieu Program requires that the conditions of Section 15-63 apply to the development. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 6. - Other development requirements. 
The president and the board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use, and development. 
(A)  New subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(B)  Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall display the following flood data: 
(1)  The boundary of the special flood hazard area; 
(2)  The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available special flood hazard area maps; 
(3)  Easements of lands dedicated to the Village for access for channel maintenance purposes; and 
(4)  The base flood elevation for each building site. 
(C)  The building and zoning department shall take the following into consideration when preparing or revising the comprehensive plan, community development program, housing assistance plan, and other land use or development programs: 
(1)  Preserving special flood hazard area land for open space uses such as farming or recreation; 
(2)  Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings; 
(3)  Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plants, natural gas storage and other critical or especially hazardous facilities from locating in the special flood hazard area; 
(4)  Identifying the elevations of the base flood and past floods at the entrance to public buildings, on street signs, or other prominent locations; and 
(5)  Other flood hazard mitigation or floodplain management activities that could help accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 7. - Subdivisions; required information. 
A stormwater submittal shall accompany preliminary plats and plans. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 8. - Utility standards. 
All new construction and substantial improvements to utilities shall provide that: 
(A)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of storm or ground waters into the systems. 
(B)  All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of storm or ground waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into storm or ground waters. 
(C)  All new and replacement on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(D)  Sanitary manholes constructed within floodplain areas must have rim elevations at or above the base flood elevation or must be provided with watertight, lock-type covers. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 9. - Stormwater submittal fee schedule. 
A plan review, inspection, and permit fee for stormwater management permits issued by the Village of Villa Park shall be paid to the Village upon permit application. The fees are as set forth in the following schedule: 
STORMWATER SUBMITTAL 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. disturbed and less than 2,500 sq. ft. of net new impervious 	No fee (no permit required) 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. disturbed - located in Special Management Area 	$355.00 
 
Residential 	
Single parcel <10,000 sq. ft. 	$355.00 
Single/multiple parcels >10,000 sq. ft. and < acres (including subdivisions) 	$540.00 
Single/multiple parcels >3 acres and <10 acres (including subdivisions and PUDs) 	$1,215.00 
Single/multiple parcels >10 acres and <50 acres (including subdivisions and PUDs) 	$2,105.00 
Single/multiple parcels >50 acres (including subdivisions and PUDs) 	$2,105.00 + $10.00/acre above 50 acres 
 
Commercial 	
Single/multiple parcels >5,000 sq. ft. and <1 acre (including subdivisions or PUDs) 	$540.00 
Single/multiple parcels >1 acre and >5 acres (including subdivisions or PUDs) 	$1,215.00 
Single/multiple parcels >5 acres and <10 acres (including subdivisions or PUDs) 	$2,105.00 
Single/multiple parcels >10 acres (including subdivisions or PUDs) 	$2,105.00 + $10.00 acre above 10 acres 
 
Other Administrative Fees 	
Resubmittals 	$100.00 each 
Special Management Areas 	Consultant review fee 
Variations (if hearing required) 	$300.00 + hearing cost 
Appeals (if hearing required) 	$300.00 + hearing cost 
 
All fees shall be paid at the time the application is submitted, or the application will not be accepted. In addition to the stormwater management permit fees set forth above, applicants for stormwater management permits shall also provide an appropriate letter of credit in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the engineer's estimated costs of construction of the stormwater facilities, together with an additional amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated costs of soil and erosion control. The form of the letter of credit shall be acceptable to the Village attorney, and no construction shall commence until such time as a letter of credit has been approved by the Village Attorney and accepted by the Village of Villa Park. Fees for review of engineering plans that accompany stormwater permit application must be paid in accordance with Section 18-203.(b). 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 10. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that development either inside or outside of the special flood hazard area will be free from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not create liability on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 11. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 12. - Exempt village projects and developments. 
As previously approved by Ordinance Nos. 2929 and 2930 of the Village, the official list of exempt projects and developments is set forth in Exhibits 1 and 2 of this ordinance and are available for inspection in the office of the Village Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
Section 13. - Floodway and floodplain maps designations adopted. 
The DuPage County, Illinois Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels which are listed for the Village of Villa Park in Exhibit 2 of the Countywide Ordinance, with effective dates of August 1, 2019, or as hereafter amended are hereby adopted, including the denoted Floodway and Floodplain designations. The "Flood Insurance Study - DuPage County, Illinois and incorporated Areas" as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated as revised: August 1, 2019, or as hereafter amended is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 4091 , § 1, 7-8-19)  
APPENDIX E - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 3580, adopted Nov. 9, 2009, adopted Appendix E, to read as herein set out. The ordinance has been printed as enacted, except for the correction of obvious spelling errors. Any other change is encased in brackets [ ]. History notes indicate amendments to the ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Statutory Authority. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Village of Villa Park Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance." 
2.  The DuPage County Stormwater Management Committee and the DuPage County Board promulgated a similar Ordinance pursuant to their authority to adopt ordinances regulating the quality of all stormwater runoff channels, streams, and basins in DuPage County, in accordance with the adopted DuPage County Stormwater Management Plan (the "Plan"). The Plan represents the County's policy for management of stormwater quantity and quality. The statutory authority for this Ordinance is contained in 55 ILCS 5/5-1041, 5/5-1042, 5/5-1049, 5/5-1062, 5/5-1063, 5/5-1104, 5/5-12003, and 5/5-15001 et seq.; and 415 ILCS 5/43, and other applicable authority, all as amended from time to time. 
3.  As applicable, the municipalities within DuPage County may promulgate and enforce this Ordinance pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2 and such other authority as applicable to those communities.  
Sec. 16-2. - Purposes of this Ordinance. 
1.  The purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of [the] Village of Villa Park, and protect and enhance water quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This Ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of discharges other than those occurring as a direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II permit process. Other purposes of this Ordinance include: 
a.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm drainage system by nonstormwater discharges; and 
b.  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the storm drainage system. 
2.  The purposes of this Ordinance are consistent with the Plan and advance the following objectives of the Plan: 
a.  Protect and enhance the quality, quantity, and availability of surface and groundwater resources. 
b.  Preserve and enhance existing aquatic and riparian environments and encourage restoration of degraded areas. 
c.  Promote equitable, acceptable, and legal measures for stormwater management. 
3.  The purposes of this Ordinance shall be implemented by its provisions.  
Secs. 16-3—16-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 16-11. - Interpretation of Terms and Words. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and 
2.  Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural number include the singular number; and 
3.  The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive; and 
4.  The phrase "Director" refers to the individual responsible for the enforcement.  
Sec. 16-12. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition. 
Building. A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes manufactured homes and includes both the above-ground and the below-ground portions of the structure. 
Clean Water Act (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Committee. The Stormwater Oversight Committee of the Village of Villa Park. 
Community. Any municipality, or the unincorporated County, within DuPage County acting as a unit of local government. 
County. The County of DuPage, Illinois. 
Department. The Village of Villa Park Public Works Department or successor agency. 
Director. The Village of Villa Park Director of Public Works or successor position or his or her designee. 
Drain. Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid. 
Facility. Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose. 
Hazardous Materials. Any material which may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment. 
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community. 
Illicit Discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in Section 16-41.3 of this Ordinance. 
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to an industrial NPDES stormwater permit, as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Line. A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two or more points. 
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). A conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. A permit issued by Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt in the tributary drainage basin. 
Notice of Intent (NOI). Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Notice of Intent to participate in coverage under the General Permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activity. 
Parcel. Contiguous land under single ownership or control. 
Person. Any individual, association, partnership, public or private corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns of such entity. 
pH Neutral. pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 Standard Units. 
Plan. The DuPage County Stormwater Management Plan, adopted by the DuPage County Board in September 1989, as amended from time to time. 
Pollutant. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Runoff. The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that basin. 
Sewage. Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually conveyed by sewers. 
Sewer. An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers. 
Sewerage. A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage. 
Storm Drainage System. A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structure. Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure" includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams, sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and concrete patios. 
Wastewater. Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by a wastewater treatment facility. 
Waters of the United States. As defined in the CWA, "Waters of the United States" applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "Waters of the United States." Generally, those waters include the following: 
All interstate waters; 
Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce; 
Tributaries of the above; 
Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and 
Wetlands adjacent to all the above.  
Secs. 16-13—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 16-21. - Applicability. 
This Ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Villa Park, unless explicitly exempted by Section 16-41.3 of this Ordinance, including any amendments or revisions thereto.  
Sec. 16-22. - Interpretation. 
1.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare and the environment of the residents of the Village of Villa Park, and to effectuate the purposes of this Ordinance and enabling legislation. 
2.  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or requirements shall apply. 
3.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.  
Secs. 16-23—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Participating Communities. 
Participating communities within DuPage County shall promulgate and enforce this Ordinance in accordance with the following participation levels. Participation levels shall be established through the adoption of intergovernmental agreements. 
1.  Duties of a Full Participant community include: 
a.  Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for full participation in the Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program. 
b.  Provide the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division annually. 
c.  Provide assistance to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division in acquiring access to the storm drainage system as mutually deemed necessary. 
d.  Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of this Ordinance when necessary per Article 8 of this Ordinance. 
e.  Provide the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division with documentation of any enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one (1) year for inclusion in the IEPA Annual Facility Inspection Report. 
2.  Duties of a Partial Participant community include: 
a.  Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for partial participation in the Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program. 
b.  Provide the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division annually. 
c.  Tracing discharges to their source when the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division determines that an illicit discharge has been located within the jurisdiction of the community. 
d.  Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of this Ordinance when necessary per Article 8 of this Ordinance. 
e.  Provide the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division with documentation of any enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one (1) year for inclusion in the IEPA Annual Facility Inspection Report. 
3.  Duties of a nonparticipant community include: 
a.  Responsible for developing and implementing an Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program to ensure compliance with the IEPA NPDES regulations within municipal limits on its own behalf. 
b.  If an intergovernmental agreement is not submitted to the County for partial or full participation, the community will be designated as a nonparticipant.  
Sec. 16-32. - Responsibility for Administration. 
The Village of Villa Park Public Works Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Department may be delegated in writing by the Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest, or in the employ of, the Department as representatives, contractors, designees and/or assigns.  
Sec. 16-33. - Duties of Director. 
The duties and functions of the Director shall include: 
1.  Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this Ordinance, as applicable; 
2.  Supervising the execution of this Ordinance; and 
3.  Notifying the communities, and the IEPA, of any amendments to this Ordinance.  
Sec. 16-34. - Representative Capacity. 
In all cases when any action is taken by the Director, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, such action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the Village of Villa Park, and neither the Director nor his or her designee, in so acting for the Village of Villa Park shall be rendered personally liable.  
Secs. 16-35—16-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 5. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 16-41. - Prohibition of Illicit Discharges. 
1.  No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into the storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in Section 16-41.3 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system shall be prohibited: 
a.  Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt within the drainage area of the MS4. 
b.  Discharges from an illicit connection. 
3.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect on water quality as determined by the Director: 
a.  Discharges caused by governmental public works and stormwater management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
b.  Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or IEPA. 
c.  Water line and fire hydrant flushing. 
d.  Landscape irrigation water. 
e.  Rising groundwaters. 
f.  Ground water infiltration. 
g.  Pumped groundwater. 
h.  Discharges from potable water sources. 
i.  Foundation drains. 
j.  Air conditioning condensate. 
k.  Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation). 
l.  Springs. 
m.  Water from crawl space pumps. 
n.  Footing drains. 
o.  Storm sewer cleaning water. 
p.  Water from any outdoor residential, charitable, or automobile dealership premises car wash. 
q.  Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents. 
r.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
s.  Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges. 
t.  Residual street wash water. 
u.  Discharges or flows from firefighting activities. 
v.  Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges. 
w.  Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed). 
x.  Discharges associated with dye testing of water line, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification to the Department at least two (2) full business days prior to the test date, unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such notification. 
y.  Other discharges approved by the Department as being substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in Section 16-41.3 of this Ordinance.  
Sec. 16-42. - Prohibition of Illicit Connections. 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited. 
2.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
3.  A person is considered to be in violation of this Ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
4.  Connections in violation of this Ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Department and the appropriate sanitary treatment facility. 
5.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written Notice of Violation from the Department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the Department.  
Secs. 16-43—16-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 6. - INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 16-50. - Submission of Notice of Intent (NOI) to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division. 
1.  Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA's General Permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activity shall submit a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division at the same time the operator submits the original Notice of Intent to the IEPA as applicable. 
2.  The copy of the Notice of Intent may be delivered to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division either in person or by mailing it to: 
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater 
DuPage County Stormwater Management Division 
421 North County Farm Road 
Wheaton, IL 60187 
3.  A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the Notice of Intent to do so to the DuPage County Stormwater Management Division.  
Secs. 16-51—16-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 16-56. - Notification of Spills. 
1.  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such spill. 
a.  In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations. 
b.  Said person shall notify the Department of the spill in person or by phone, facsimile, or email no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Department within three (3) business days of the phone notice. 
c.  If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years. 
2.  Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in Section 16-56.1, shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable fines set forth in Section 16-66. 
3.  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this Ordinance. 
4.  Notwithstanding the language of paragraph 2 of this provision, a party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not be relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act.  
Secs. 16-57—16-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 8. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 16-61. - Enforcement: Violations. 
1.  The Director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. The Village of Villa Park may enter into agreements with other governmental units for the purpose of implementing this Ordinance. 
2.  A person violates this Ordinance when that person: 
a.  Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this Ordinance; or 
b.  Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any provision of this Ordinance or of any order or notice issued by the Director; or 
c.  Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this Ordinance to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under the control of such person; or 
d.  Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this Ordinance, or to maintain or continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this Ordinance on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first person.  
Sec. 16-62. - Notice to Correct Violations: Director May Take Action. 
1.  The Director may issue a Notice of Violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and/or to cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this Ordinance. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a Notice of Violation and/or order to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
a.  The Director shall set forth the form and content of any notices issued under this Ordinance. 
b.  The Director may issue a Warning of Violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If a person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the Director may, thereafter, issue a Notice of Violation. 
c.  The Director may issue a Warning of Violation and disburse educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. 
2.  If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section, the Director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any legal proceeding authorized by this Ordinance, under the law or equity, necessary to enforce any provision of this Ordinance and/or to protect public health and safety. Any legal action brought under this Ordinance shall be in the name of the Village of Villa Park.  
Sec. 16-63. - Emergency Cease and Desist Orders. 
1.  The Department may obtain an emergency order in the event of the following: 
a.  Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur; and 
b.  That the person's violation has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an imminent threat of violation is present. 
2.  The Department may issue the emergency order to the violator directing that the violator: 
a.  Immediately cease and desist all such violations; 
b.  Immediately comply with all Ordinance requirements; and 
c.  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
3.  Any person notified of an emergency order under this Subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or Waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The Department may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this Ordinance. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Department within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.  
Sec. 16-64. - Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. 
Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a threat to public health and safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.  
Sec. 16-65. - Nuisance Abatement. 
Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the Director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety. 
1.  In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the Director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the Director may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said situation. The Director may take such action without having to first issue a Notice of Violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is located, or, waiting for such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the Director. 
2.  In all other cases, the Director may notify, in writing, the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the Director may direct that appropriate proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of such a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this Ordinance and/or authorizing the Department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this Ordinance, shall be liable to the Department for any costs incurred by the Department to effect such abatement, or removal, including reasonable attorney's fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a court of competent jurisdiction.  
Sec. 16-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3700, § 3, adopted May 21, 2012, deleted § 16-66, entitled "Fines" in its entirety.  
Sec. 16-67. - Remedies Not Exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this Ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedy available under this Ordinance or under any applicable Federal, State, or local law and do not supersede or limit, any and all other penalties provided by law. The Director may seek, at his discretion, cumulative remedies.  
Secs. 16-68—16-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 9. - SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS 
 
Sec. 16-76. - Suspension of MS4 Access Due to Detection of Illicit Discharges. 
1.  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Department shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the Department for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the Department. 
2.  In emergency situations, the Department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, storm drainage system, or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The Department shall obtain an emergency court order authorizing such termination.  
Secs. 16-77—16-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 10. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 16-86. - Right to Appeal. 
1.  Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the Director. The Director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the Villa Park Stormwater Oversight Committee of the Village of Villa Park in the manner provided for below. 
2.  Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by the Director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this Ordinance may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the Director shall be made within seven (7) days of the decision contested, excepting an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty in which cases which an appeal shall be brought before said amount becomes thirty (30) days past due. 
a.  The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved notifies the Director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of the Director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear, statement stating the following: 
(i)  Identifying the decision of the Director which such person is appealing and how this Ordinance has been misread, misinterpreted, or misapplied in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the Director to have relied upon. 
(ii)  The name and both a mailing address and a telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information shall be used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely upon in support of the request. 
b.  The Director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner provided in Section 16-86.2.c. 
c.  Upon receipt of such Notice of Appeal, if relief is not granted by the Director in accordance with Section 16-86.2.b of this Ordinance, the Director shall set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date that the Director receives such Notice of Appeal unless the Director and party requesting the hearing agree to a different schedule. The Director shall notify the person making the appeal of the date of such hearing. 
d.  At the hearing the person making the appeal may appear in person or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the decision is based. 
3.  The Stormwater Oversight Committee shall have the authority to reverse, modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the Director made pursuant to this Ordinance upon appeal. The Stormwater Oversight Committee shall not act in a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any Federal or State standard or requirement. The Stormwater Oversight Committee or the Village Board may adopt such additional rules and procedures, as it deems appropriate for performing such matters. 
4.  The decision of the Committee may be appealed to the Village Board in accord with the Village Board Rules.  
Sec. 16-87. - Enforcement Measures after Appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7) days of the decision of the Director or Stormwater Oversight Committee or Village Board, as appropriate upholding the decision of the Department, then representatives of the Department are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the Village from commencing a legal action seeking emergency relief.  
Secs. 16-88—16-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 11. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 16-96. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Ordinance.  
Sec. 16-97. - Most Restrictive Provisions Apply. 
1.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this Ordinance. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application. 
2.  This Ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. Where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.  
Sec. 16-98. - Ultimate Responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance are minimum standards; therefore, this Ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.  
Sec. 16-99. - Amendments. 
This Ordinance may be amended in accordance with the adopted rules of the Villa Park Village Board.  
Sec. 16-100. - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect for all purposes, and its effective date shall be, December 1, 2009. 
