
Brazil, IN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF BRAZIL, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Local legislation current through Ord. 4-2007, passed 2-27-2007









Published by:





American Legal Publishing Corporation





432 Walnut Street, 12th Floor





Cincinnati, Ohio  45202





Tel: (800) 445-5588





Fax: (513) 763-3562





E-Mail: customersevice@amlegal.com





Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




OFFICIALS



 



Mayor
 
Brian L. Wyndham


City Attorney
 
Traci Lawson


City Clerk-Treasurer
 
Karen McQueen



Councilmembers



Ward 1
 
Sam Glover


Ward 2
 
Brad Deal


Ward 3
 
A. Ann Bradshaw


Ward 4
 
Carol Evans


At-Large
 
Tyler Hutcheson



Board of Public Works and Safety



President
 
Brian L. Wyndham


Member
 
Ruth Ann Jeffries


Member
 
Linda Messmer




 



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Brazil City Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,”
“Codified Ordinances” or “Code” may be substituted. Code title,
chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code. All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between 2 or more sections.



   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved
by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The
section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or
subsection.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this
code, as originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be
altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive
headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.



(I.C. 1-1-1-5)



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to 3 or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      AND.  May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense
requires it.



      ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is
the subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every
other owner of property.



      BOARD.  The Board of Public Works and Safety.



      CLERK-TREASURER.  The Clerk-Treasurer of the Common Council.



      COUNCIL.  The Common Council.



      COUNTY.  Clay County, Indiana.



      ET SEQ.  The Latin phrase meaning “and the following.”



      HIGHWAY.  Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



      I.C.  The Indiana Code.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MAYOR.  The Mayor of Brazil, the chief executive officer.



      MONTH.  One calendar month.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or
agents thereof.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  When referring to sections or
divisions in this code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or
next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is
designated.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      STATE.  The State of Indiana.



      TOWNSHIP.  The township or townships in which the city is
located.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.  Include printing, lithographing or
other modes of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of
a person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or
the person’s mark.



      YEAR.  One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.



(I.C. 1-1-4-5, 1-1-4-1)  (1982 Code, § 10.04)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable. If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer
shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this
municipality exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the
Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date
of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the
ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or
the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were
transferred.



(I.C. 1-1-6-1)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be
excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section
or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law
is not revived unless it so expressly provided. The repeal of any section
shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred
under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The
section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of
sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the
penalty, forfeiture or liability.



(I.C. 1-1-5-1)



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or
to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall
not be affected by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and
prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date
of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this
code had not been enacted.



Statutory reference:



   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example:



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example:



(I.C. 36-5-2-2)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1982 and subsequently amended, the
previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(1982
Code, §     ).”



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent
violations, except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and
parking.



   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL



      31.   EXECUTIVE BRANCH



      32.   LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



      33.   JUDICIAL BRANCH




      34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES, SALARIES AND OTHER RENUMERATION




CHAPTER 30:  CITY GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL



Section




Boundaries and Organization




   30.001   Establishing corporate boundaries



   30.002   Purpose



   30.003   Organization



Specific Executive Departments and Related Boards



   30.015   Department of Aviation and its Board of Commissioners



   30.016   Board of Public Works and Safety



   30.017   Legal Department



   30.018   City Plan Commission



   30.019   Board of Zoning Appeals



   30.020   City Tree Board



   30.021   Redevelopment Commission and Department



   30.022   Economic Development Commission



   30.023   Park entities



   30.024   Housing authority



   30.025   Police and fire entities and policies



   30.026   City planning and building entities



City Clerk-Treasurer



   30.040   Election and term of office



   30.041   Powers and duties



   30.042   Duties as Fiscal Officer



   30.043   Compensation



   30.044   Deputies and employees



   30.045   Office space



   30.046   Right to legal counsel



Purchasing Policies



   30.060   Purpose



   30.061   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States



   30.062   Protection of offers and status of documents as public
records



   30.063   Discussions with offerors responding to a request for
proposals



   30.064   Delay of opening of offers



   30.065   Evidence of financial responsibility



   30.066   Use of requests for proposals for purchase of designated
types of supplies



   30.067   Modification and termination of contracts



   30.068   Purchase of services



   30.069   Creation of City Purchasing Agency



   30.070   Board of Public Works and Safety designated Purchasing
Agency



   30.071   Purchasing Agency powers and duties



Policies



   30.085   Harassment policy



   30.086   Application and use of credit cards by officers and
employees



   30.087   Acceptance of credit cards for payment of fees and the like



Fiscal Branch and Procedures; City Funds



   30.100   City Clerk-Treasurer as Fiscal Officer



   30.101   Compensation for services to city utilities by
Clerk-Treasurer



   30.102   Board of Finance



   30.103   Budget, tax levies and tax rates



   30.104   Ordinance required to borrow money; revenue from taxes



   30.105   Ordinance required to appropriate additional funds



   30.106   Resolution required to transfer funds



   30.107   Creation of Police Bicycle Patrols Donations Fund



   30.108   Creation of Traffic Safety Fund



   30.109   Local Road and Street Fund (LRS)



   30.110   Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH)



   30.111   City funds and account numbers



   30.112   Authorization to accept ACH payments at the authorization
of the requesting utility customer in the conduct of monetary transactions



City Government Charts



   30.125   Organization chart of the Executive Branch



   30.126   Fiscal Branch organizational chart




BOUNDARIES AND ORGANIZATION




§ 30.001  ESTABLISHING CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The purpose of establishing the entire corporate boundaries of
the city, the boundaries be and the same are declared and defined as follows,
to-wit: Beginning at a point 36 feet west and 20 feet north of the northwest
corner of Lot No. 4, Block No. 4, in North Meridian Place Addition to the
City of Brazil, Indiana; thence running east parallel with the north line of
Hendrix Street to the center line of Forest Avenue; thence south on the
center line of Forest Avenue to a point due west of the north line of Strain
Street; thence east parallel with Hendrix Street to west line of Vandalia
Street; thence north on the west line of Vandalia Street to the center line
of Rariden Street; thence east parallel with Hendrix Street to a point due
north of the east line of Lovett's Park Addition to the City of Brazil,
Indiana; thence south parallel with Elm Street to the center line of Hendrix
Street; thence east on the center line of Hendrix Street to the center line
of Murphy Avenue (formerly known as the Carbon Road); thence south on the
center line of Murphy Avenue to a point 500 feet north of the north line of
the National Road; thence east parallel with the National Road to the east
line of a tract of land heretofore set off to Clara Bell Rardin by partition
of the lands of which her father, Jonathan Rardin, died seized; thence south
on the east line 500 feet to the north line of the National Road; thence in a
southwesterly direction on the north line of the National Road to the east
line of Brazil Township; thence south of the east line of Brazil Township to
a point 100 feet south of the south line of the right of way of the
Pennsylvania Railroad; thence south-westerly parallel with the Pennsylvania
Railroad to the center line of Murphy Avenue; thence south on the center line
of Murphy Avenue to a point due east of the north line of C. W. Ward's First
Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence west 1,230 feet to a point;
thence north parallel to the east line of C.W. Ward's First Addition to the
City of Brazil, Indiana, 430 feet to a point; thence in a northeasterly
direction to a point due south of the center line of Beech Street; thence
north to the south line of the right of way of the Pennsylvania Railroad.
Thence in a southwesterly direction along the south line of the right of way
to the east line of Ashley Street; thence south along the east line of Ashley
Street to the north line of Mechanic Street thence in a northeasterly
direction along the north line of Mechanic Street to a point due north of the
east line of C. W. Ward's First Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana;
thence south to the northeast corner of C. W. Ward's First Addition to the
City of Brazil, Indiana; thence west along the north line of the addition to
the east line of Vandalia Street; thence in a southwesterly direction across
Vandalia Street to the south line of Ridge Street; thence along the south
line of Ridge Street to the northeast corner of Lot No. 64 in Stewart's
Second Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence southeasterly along
the east line of the Lot No. 64 to the southeast corner of the Lot No. 64;
thence in a southwesterly direction along the south line of Lots No. 64 and
65 in Stewart's Second Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana, to the east
line of Alabama Street, thence south along the east line of Alabama Street
and along the east line of the first alley east of Alabama Street a distance
of 541.2 feet; thence east a distance of 436 feet to the half section line;
thence south on the half section line to the north line of Maple Street in C.
W. Ward's First Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence east on the
north line of Maple Street to the east line of C. W. Ward's First Addition to
the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence south on the east line to the center line
of Pinckley Street; thence west on center line of Pinckley Street to the east
line of Foster's Highland Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence
south on the east line of Foster's Highland Addition to the north line of
Center Street, thence west to a point due south of the southwest corner of
Lot No. 11 in Poster's Star Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence
south from the point 2,587.30 feet to a point; thence west from the latter
point 1,206 feet to the east line of Forest Avenue Road; thence north with
the east line of Forest Avenue Road to a point due east of the south line of
Knight and Root's Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence west along
the south line of Knight and Root's Addition and the south line of the
Indianapolis Rolling Mill's Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana, to the
east line of Wm. Leavitt Jr.’s First Addition to the City of Brazil,
Indiana; thence in a southwesterly direction along the east line of Wm.
Leavitt Jr.’s addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana, to the south line of
the addition; thence west along the south line of Wm. Leavitt's Jr.,
Addition, Leavitt and Wilson's Addition and Wm. Leavitt Sr.’s First .and
Second Additions to the City of Brazil, Indiana, to the west line of Morgan
Street; thence north along the west line of Morgan Street to the south line
of Williams Street; thence west along the south line of Williams Street to
the west line of Wm. Leavitt's Sr., Second Addition to the City of Brazil,
Indiana; thence north along the west line of the addition to the north line
of the right of way of the Pennsylvania Railroad; thence in a northeasterly
direction along the north right of way line of the Pennsylvania Railroad to a
point due north of the west line of the first alley west of Leavitt Street;
thence north parallel with Leavitt Street to the center line of Pinckley
Street; thence west along the center line of Pinckley Street to the south
line of A. S. Hill's Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence in a
southwesterly direction along the south line of the A. S. Hill's Addition to
the west line of the A. S. Hill's Addition; thence in a northwesterly
direction along the west line of the A. S. Hill's Addition to the northwest
corner of Lot No. 48; thence west along the congressional township line
between Township 12 North, Range 7 west and Township 13 North, Range 7 west
to the center of the Water Works Road; thence north along the center of the
Water Works Road to the north line of the National Road; thence south 69
degrees, 51 minutes west, 168 feet 5 9-16 inches; thence north 40 degrees 20
minutes, 444 feet 7-3/4 inches; thence south 80 degrees 45 minutes west 890
feet 5-1/2 inches; thence north 475 feet; thence north 89 degrees 35 minutes
east, 1,316 feet -7/8 10 inches to section line between Sections 35 and 36,
Township 13 north, Range 7 west; thence north along the section line 35 feet
to a point; thence east 506 feet to a point; thence south 355 feet to the
north line of C. H. Kattman's First Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana;
thence in a northeasterly direction along north line of the C. H. Kattman's
Addition to a point 236 feet west of the west line of Hendrix's Seventh
Addition to the City of Brazil, Indiana; thence north parallel with McGuire
Street to the center line of Hendrix Street; thence east along the center
line of Hendrix Street to the west line of Sherman Street; thence north on
the west line of Sherman street to the point of beginning.



   (B)   All the territory within the limits as above defined shall be
and comprise the territory of the city and the territory as above defined and
described is made the territory of and incorporated within the limits of the
city and the boundaries of the city are extended, defined and established so
as to correspond with the boundaries of the territory and jurisdiction of the
city is extended over all the territory as above described and defined.



(1982 Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. 73-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 30.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Indiana General Assembly has revised and recodified all
the laws and statues relating to local government into I.C. Title 36.



   (B)   The City of Brazil is now required, as of September 1, 1982,
to establish its branches, departments and certain boards and commissions for
the effective functioning of city government.



   (C)   The Common Council for the City of Brazil deems it necessary
to establish and have concise and specific divisions of authority and
responsibility within city government to enable city officials to effectively
respond to the needs of its citizens.



(1982 Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. 14-1982, passed 8-30-1982)



§ 30.003  ORGANIZATION.



   The government of the City of Brazil, Indiana shall consist of the
following branches:



   (A)   Executive Branch;



   (B)   Legislative Branch;



   (C)   Fiscal Branch; and



   (D)   Judicial Branch.



(1982 Code, § 30.02) (Ord.14-1982, passed 8-30-1982)



Statutory references:



   Executive branch, see I.C. 33-35



   Fiscal branch, see I.C. 36-4-10



   Judicial branch, see I.C. 33-35



   Legislative branch, see I.C. 36-4-6




SPECIFIC EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND RELATED BOARDS




§ 30.015  DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION AND ITS BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   Creation of Aviation Department. There shall be a Department
of Aviation for the necessity of acquiring and operating an airport in Clay
County, Indiana.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



   (B)   Membership of Aviation Board of Commissioners.



      (1)   There shall be established an Aviation Board of
Commissioners which shall consist of 4 members to be appointed by the
executive of the City of Brazil, Indiana (the Mayor) and the executive of the
County of Clay, Indiana (the Clay County Board of Commissioners).



      (2)   No more than 2 of the members of the Aviation Board of
Commissioners shall be of the same political party, and that the executive of
the City of Brazil, (the Mayor) shall have the right to a appoint 2 members
to the Aviation Board of Commissioners, provided each appointment is an
individual of a different political party; and further, that the executive of
the County of Clay, Indiana (the Clay County Board of Commissioners) shall
have the right to appoint 2 members to the Aviation Board of Commissioners,
provided each appointment is an individual of a different political party.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



   (C)   Terms of office.



      (1)   The first members of the Aviation Board of Commissioners
hold office as follows: 1 for the term of 4 years which the member shall be
appointed by the executive of the City of Brazil, Indiana; 1 for a term of 3
years which the member shall be appointed by the executive of the County of
Clay, Indiana; 1 for the term of 2 years which the member shall be appointed
by the executive of the County of Clay, Indiana; and 1 for the term of 1 year
which the member shall be appointed by the executive of the City of Brazil,
Indiana.



      (2)   The first members so appointed shall hold office from
12:00 p.m. on the first Monday in January of the year of their appointment,
which shall be January 5, 1987. On the expiration of their respective terms,
the executive of the respective entity shall appoint a Commissioner or
Commissioners to fill the vacancy or vacancies caused by the expiration, and
the Commissioner or Commissioners so appointed shall hold office for a term
of 4 years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. If a
vacancy occurs in the Aviation Board of Commissioners by resignation or
otherwise, the executive who made the appointment shall appoint a
Commissioner for the remainder of the term of the Commissioner vacating his
or her appointment.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



   (D)   Removal of Commissioners. The executive(s) having the
appointment powers may, at any time, remove a Commissioner from office who
the executive has appointed, but only upon filing in writing with the
Clerk-Treasurer of the fiscal body the reason(s) for the removal.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



   (E)   Aviation Board’s powers and duties.



      (1)   The Aviation Board of Commissioners shall have all
powers and duties permitted by the laws of the State of Indiana, pursuant to
I.C. 8-22-2-5, and by rules and regulations it may create which are
consistent with the laws of the State of Indiana.



      (2)   In general, the Aviation Board of Commissioners shall
abide by the provisions of I.C. 8-22-2-1 et seq., and amendments thereto.



      (3)   In the event the Board wishes to sell part or the whole
of the aviation land or improvements owned by the eligible entities (City of
Brazil, Indiana and County of Clay, Indiana), then the Board shall prepare an
ordinance authorizing the sale and submit it to the fiscal body of each
entity. Before any part of the aviation land or improvements are transferred,
it will require passage of an ordinance by both the City of Brazil, Indiana
and the County of Clay, by and through their fiscal bodies. Proceeds of the
sale shall be deposited in the aviation fund which shall be managed by the
County of Clay which shall be responsible for all required accountings of the
funds with state and federal taxing authorities.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



   (F)   Tax levy. The County of Clay, Indiana, by and through its
proper authority, shall be responsible for establishing the appropriate tax
levy for the Department of Aviation, acting by its Aviation Board of
Commissioners. All appropriations for the Department of Aviation and/or the
Aviation Board of Commissioners shall be handled by the Clay County Council
of Clay County, Indiana.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



   (G)   Bond issues. In the event the need arises to sell bonds for
the purpose of providing for payment of the cost of construction, extensions,
additions or improvements to the aviation land, or for any reason permitted
by laws of the State of Indiana, the Clay County Council, Clay County,
Indiana shall be the fiscal body which is authorized to issue and sell the
bonds pursuant to I.C. 8-22-2-18.



(Ord. 19-1986, passed 12-23-1986)



§ 30.016  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   (A)   Chief administrative body; departments under control of Board.
The Board of Public Works and Safety shall be the chief administrative body
of the city and have control of the day-to-day operations of the Police
Department, Fire Department, Street and Sanitation Departments and the
Utilities Department.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(E))



   (B)   Three-member Board.



      (1)   The members of the Board of Public Works and Safety
shall be the Mayor and 2 persons who have been voters of the city for at
least 1 year immediately preceding the appointment.



      (2)   These 2 persons shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor subject to I.C. 36-4-11-2.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(E)(1))



   (C)   Mayoral appointments of department heads. The Mayor shall
appoint the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments, the heads of the
Street and Sanitation and Utilities Departments subject to approval by the
Board of Public Works and Safety. The appointees serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor subject to I.C. 36-4-11-2.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(B)(2))



   (D)   Clerk of the Board. The Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as Clerk
of the Board of Public Works and Safety without additional compensation.



   (E)   Board meetings. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall
make rules governing the time and place for holding regular meetings and the
procedure to be used for calling and giving notice thereof.



   (F)   Powers of the Board. The Board of Public Works and Safety
shall have any and all powers given to it by ordinance and as set forth in
the applicable Indiana Code provisions.



§ 30.017  LEGAL DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Department of Law. The Department of Law shall be headed by
the City Attorney who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-11.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(F))



   (B)   The powers of the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall have
the powers and duties as specified in I.C. 36-4-9-12.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(F))



   (C)   Role of City Attorney. The City Attorney shall advise and
represent the city, its officers, departments, boards, commissions and
agencies in all legal matters involving them. The officers, departments,
boards, commissions and agencies shall not employ or retain other attorneys
without the written authorization of the City Attorney.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(F))



§ 30.018  CITY PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   Seven-member City Plan Commission. The City Plan Commission
shall consist of 7 members and shall be appointed as follows.



      (1)   The municipal legislative body (The Common Council of
the City of Brazil, Indiana) shall appoint 3 persons, who must be elected or
appointed municipal officials or employees in the municipal government, as
members.



      (2)   The municipal executive (the Mayor) shall appoint 4
citizen members, of whom no more than 2 may be of the same political party.



      (3)   Upon the establishment of a 7-member City Plan
Commission, 2 citizen members shall initially be appointed for a term of 3
years and 2 shall be appointed for a term of 4 years. Each member's term
expires on the first Monday of January of the second, third or fourth year,
respectively, after the year of the member's appointment. Appointments by the
municipal legislative body are for 1 year. All members are eligible for
reappointment.



(Ord. 1-1986, passed 1-14-1986)



   (B)   Powers and duties. The members of the City Plan Commission
shall have all powers and duties as prescribed by I.C. 36-7-4-100 et seq.



(Ord. 1-1986, passed 1-14-1986)



   (C)   Commission's role to the Common Council. The City Plan
Commission shall act in an advisory capacity and shall make recommendations
to the Common Council on all zoning ordinances prior to the Common Council
taking final action on the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 1-1986, passed 1-14-1986)



§ 30.019  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall operate pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-901 et seq., and shall be known as the
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 1-1986, passed 1-14-1986)



   (B)   Five-member Board. The Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consist of 5 members and appointment of members shall be as follows:



      (1)   Three citizen members shall be appointed by the
executive of the municipality (the Mayor), of whom 1 shall be a member of the
City Plan Commission and 2 shall not be members of the City Plan Commission.
One member shall be appointed by the municipal legislative body (Common
Council of the City of Brazil, Indiana), who must not be a member of the City
Plan Commission. One citizen member shall be appointed by the City Plan
Commission, who must be a member of the City Plan Commission other than the
member appointed under division (B)(2) below; and



      (2)   Each appointment shall be for a term of 4 years. A
member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and a member is
eligible for reappointment.



(Ord. 1-1986, passed 1-14-1986)



§ 30.020  CITY TREE BOARD.



   (A)   Creation and establishment of a 5-member Tree Board. There is
created and established a City Tree Board under the direction of the Common
Council for the City of Brazil which shall consist of 5 members, citizens and
residents of this city, 3 of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Common Council. The Brazil Street Department Commissioner and
a member of the Common Council shall be the remaining 2 members of the Tree
Board. Any application for permit or approval from the Tree Board shall be
directed to the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



   (B)   Term of office of Tree Board members. The term of the 3
persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be 3 years except that the term of
1 of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only 1 year and
the term of 1 member of the first board shall be for 2 years. In the event
that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor for the unexpired portion of the
term.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



   (C)   No compensation for Board members. Members of the board shall
serve without compensation.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



   (D)   Duties and responsibilities of City Tree Board.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Tree Board to
study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of trees and shrubs along streets and in other public
areas. This plan will include ways to disseminate information for the
continuation of community education concerning tree care. A plan will be
presented to the Common Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall
constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the City of Brazil.
The plan may be updated periodically and the updated plan will be affective
upon approval by the Common Council.



      (2)   The City Tree Board shall serve as an advisory council
to the Brazil Parks and Recreation Board concerning the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of all park trees.
However, authority and control over park trees shall remain with the Brazil
Parks and Recreation Board.



      (3)   The City Tree Board, when requested by the Common
Council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon
any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.



      (4)   The Common Council will be responsible for reviewing,
approving and establishing fee schedules for all permits issued by the City
Tree Board.



   (E)   Operation and regulations of City Tree Board.



      (1)   The City Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make
its own rules and regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings which will
form permanent records on file in the City Clerk-Treasurer's office.



      (2)   A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 30.021  REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Department of Redevelopment. The Brazil Department of
Redevelopment is controlled and administered by a Redevelopment Commission.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(G))



   (B)   Redevelopment Commission. The Redevelopment Commission shall
consist of 5 members, 3 of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and appointed
by the Common Council.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(G))



   (C)   Terms of Commissioners. Each Commissioner shall serve for 1
year from January 1 after his or her appointment and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.



   (D)   Powers of the Redevelopment Commission. The Redevelopment
Commission shall exercise the powers and duties granted it by I.C. 36-7-14.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(G))



§ 30.022  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Brazil Economic Development Commission shall consist of 5
appointed by the Mayor. One shall be nominated by the Clay County Council and
1 shall be nominated by the Brazil Common Council, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12-5.



   (B)   The Economic Development Commissioners shall take office upon
their appointment, and their terms run from February 1 after their original
appointment, for a period of:



      (1)   Two Commissioners selected by the Mayor shall serve for
3 years. One Commissioner selected by the Mayor shall serve for 1 year;



      (2)   One Commissioner, if nominated by the Common Council,
shall serve for 2 years; and



      (3)   One Commissioner, if nominated by the Common Council,
shall serve for 1 year.



   (C)   The Economic Development Commission shall exercise the powers
granted in pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12 for the furtherance of economic,
business, commercial, recreational, health and manufacturing development; the
abatement and/or control of harmful pollution; and development and
improvement for development and any financing attendant thereto.



(Ord. 9-2005, passed 5-11-2005)



§ 30.023  PARK ENTITIES.



   (A)   Department of Parks and Recreation. The Brazil Department of
Parks and Recreation shall have administrative and management jurisdiction
over Forest Park and Babe Wheeler Park. The Department shall consist of a
Parks and Recreation Board, a Park Superintendent and other personnel that
the Board deems necessary.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(K))



   (B)   Parks and Recreation Board. The Parks and Recreation Board
shall consist of 4 members appointed by the Mayor with no more than 2 being
affiliated with the same political party.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(K)(1))



   (C)   Park Board terms of office. The terms of office and the
filling of vacancies shall be according to applicable state statutes.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(K)(2))



   (D)   Park Board powers and duties. The powers and duties of the
members of the Parks and Recreation Board and the Park Superintendent shall
be pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-1 through 36-10-3-14 and other applicable
provisions of this code.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(K)(3))



   (E)   Municipal Golf Course Board.



      (1)   The City of Brazil Municipal Golf Course Board shall
have the power to govern, control, supervise and operate the Brazil Municipal
Golf Course.



      (2)   The Municipal Golf Course Board shall consist of 5
members appointed by the Mayor.



      (3)   The terms of office of Board members and the filling of
vacancies shall be according to the powers set forth in Chapters 97 and 98 of
this code.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(L))



§ 30.024  HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Brazil Housing Authority. The City of Brazil Housing Authority
shall exist pursuant to I.C. 36-7-18, and shall be administered by 5
Commissioners appointed by the Mayor.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(M))



   (B)   Terms of office. The terms of office of the Commissioners
shall be governed by I.C. 36-7-18-7 and may be removed from office pursuant
to I.C. 36-7-18-9.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(M)(1))



   (C)   Purpose of Housing Authority. The purpose of the Housing
Authority is the clearance, re-planning and reconstruction of areas in which
unsanitary or unsafe housing conditions exist, and the providing of safe and
sanitary dwelling accommodations for persons of low income.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(M)(2))



§ 30.025  POLICE AND FIRE ENTITIES AND POLICIES.



   (A)   Police Pension Board. The Police Pension Board of Trustees
shall be elected and perform certain duties with respect to statutory pension
funds for the city's police officers pursuant to I.C. 36-8-6 and 36-8-8.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(N))



   (B)   Fire Pension Board. The Firefighters’ Pension Board of
Trustees shall be elected and perform certain duties with respect to
statutory pension funds for the city's firefighters pursuant to I.C. 36-8-7
and 36-8-8.



(1982 Code, § (0))



   (C)   Police Reserve Unit.



      (1)   The City of Brazil may establish a Police Reserve Unit.



      (2)   The Police Reserve Unit shall consist of not more than
__ persons.



      (3)   Members of the Police Reserve Unit shall be appointed by
the same authority which appoints regular members of the Brazil Police
Department.



      (4)   Any person appointed to the Police Reserve Unit may not
be a member of the regular Police Department, but shall have all of the
police powers of the regular members except as limited by the rules and
regulations of the Department and state law.



      (5)   Persons serving as police reserves are not eligible to
participate in any pension program provided for regular members of the
Department.



      (6)   The authority appointing the persons to the Reserve Unit
shall establish rules, regulations and minimum training requirements which
shall govern the Police Reserve Unit.



   (D)   Physical fitness policies for all permanent employees of the
Brazil Police and Fire Departments.



      (1)   (a)   All permanent employees of the Brazil Police
and Fire Departments shall take physical examinations at least 1 per year, at
the cost of the Department.



         (b)   The Police or Fire Chief shall have the discretion
to order any police officer or firefighter to take a physical examination at
Department cost if the Police Chief or Fire Chief has reason to believe that
the employee needs to be medically examined in order to carry out the duties
of that employee.



         (c)   If an employee refuses or fails to obey the
request of the Police Chief or Fire Chief to undertake a physical examination
at Department cost, then failure to obey shall be deemed to be a violation of
work rules and policy, a knowing violation of a reasonable and uniformly
enforced rule of the employer, conduct endangering the safety of self and
others, refusing to obey instructions or breach of duty in connection with
work which is reasonably owed employer by an employee.



         (d)   The Police Chief and/or Fire Chief shall not
discriminate in carrying out the powers created through the employment policy
set forth above.



         (e)   In the event the employee fails to obey the
reasonable request to take a physical examination, then the Police Chief
and/or Fire Chief shall, in writing, inform the Brazil Board of Public Works
of this refusal and may take disciplinary action against the employee
pursuant to applicable law and due process.



      (2)   The Chief of the Police Department and/or Fire
Department shall establish a physical agility test that does not discriminate
on the basis of sex and physical agility testing shall, at a minimum, include
testing for:



         (a)   Fear of heights (acrophobia);



         (b)   Fear of confinement (claustrophobia);



         (c)   Muscular strength;



         (d)   Muscular endurance;



         (e)   Cardiovascular endurance; and



         (f)   Musculoskeletal flexibility.



      (3)   The Chief of the respective department also may adopt
standards establishing a written aptitude test, however, all tests shall be
administered in a non-discriminatory manner and with prior written notice to
the employees.



      (4)   (a)   The Police Chief and/or Fire Chief shall be
authorized to hire trained instructors for the limited purpose of the
aforementioned testing, however all physical agility tests, written aptitude
tests and the temporary hiring of trained instructors shall be approved by
the Board of Public Works and Safety prior to the administration of testing
and hiring.



         (b)   In the event the Police Chief and/or Fire Chief
determines that the employee does not take or pass the physical agility test
or written aptitude test, then the Chief shall immediately, in writing,
report the facts to the Brazil Board of Public Works and Safety which shall
subsequently conduct a hearing on the issue, provided applicable law relative
to due process and discipline of Fire Department and Police Department
employees are followed.



      (5)   The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall be authorized to
establish any other testing relative to physical fitness or agility of the
employee, provided it is administered in an non-discriminatory manner and
that other tests are first approved by the Brazil Board of Public Works and
Safety.



(Res. 2-1989, passed 6-13-1989)



   (E)   Salaries of police officers and firefighters. The Common
Council shall establish, by proper ordinance, the annual compensation of
members of the Police and Fire Departments pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3-3.



§ 30.026  CITY PLANNING AND BUILDING ENTITIES.



   (A)   City Planning and Building Administrator Office.



      (1)   The Office of the City Planning and Building
Administrator shall be headed and administered by the City Planning and
Building Administrator who shall be appointed by the Mayor, be subject to
removal by the Mayor and shall work under the supervision of the Mayor.



      (2)   The Mayor may appoint  2 persons to head and administer
the Office of the City Planning and Building Administrator, 1 being
designated as the City Planning Administrator and 1 being designated as the
City Building Administrator.



      (3)   As Building Administrator, the person so appointed shall
be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of Title XV and shall have
the authority to enter on private property in any reasonable exercise of his
or her duties to enforce that title.



      (4)   As Planning Administrator, the person appointed shall
perform those duties as prescribed, in the Zoning Code, Title XV and those
duties as prescribed in Chapter 157 providing for improvement location
permits.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(P))



   (B)   Bonds and compensation.



      (1)   The Administrator provided for in this section shall be
paid compensation in a sum set by the Common Council.



      (2)   The city shall provide and furnish the proper forms and
supplies necessary for the Administrator to perform the required duties.



      (3)   The Administrator so appointed shall post an officials
bond in the amount of $1,000, the premium of which shall be paid by the city.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(P))  (Ord. 14-1982, passed 8-30-1982; Am. Ord. 23-1982,
passed 11-22-1982; Am. Ord. 34-1983, passed 10-24-1983)




CITY CLERK-TREASURER




§ 30.040  ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected pursuant to I.C.
3-10-6.



   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall take office at 12:00 p.m. on
January 1 following his or her election, and shall serve for 4 years and
until a successor is elected and qualified.



§ 30.041  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer may administer oaths, take
depositions and take acknowledgments of instruments as required by law.



   (B)   The City Clerk-Treasurer may perform all duties prescribed by
law, which include but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   Serve as Clerk-Treasurer of the Common Council pursuant
to I.C. 36-4-6-9 and maintain custody of its records;



      (2)   Maintain all records required by law;



      (3)   Keep the City Seal;



      (4)   Upon the Clerk-Treasurer's successor being elected and
qualified, deliver all the records and property of the Clerk's office;



      (5)   Administer oaths when necessary on the discharge of the
Clerk's duties, without charging a fee;



      (6)   Take depositions, without charging a fee;



      (7)   Take acknowledgment of instruments that are required by
statute to be acknowledged without charging a fee; and



      (8)   Perform all other duties prescribed by law.



§ 30.042  DUTIES AS FISCAL OFFICER.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall perform all duties under I.C.
36-4-10-4.5, as the Fiscal Officer and Head of the City Department of Finance.



§ 30.043  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The compensation for the services of the person holding the
office of City Clerk-Treasurer shall be fixed by the Common Council. The
ordinance must be published under I.C. 5-3- 1, with the first publication at
least 30 days before final passage by the legislative body.



   (B)   The compensation may not be changed in the year for which it
is fixed, nor may it be educed below the amount fixed if in the previous year.



§ 30.044  DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall appoint the number of deputies and
employees needed for the effective operation of the office, with the approval
of the Common Council.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is directly responsible for billing and
collection of city-owned utilities and shall appoint employees who are
responsible for that billing and collection.



   (C)   Employees and deputies serve at the pleasure of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 30.045  OFFICE SPACE.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-10-2.5, office space for the City Clerk-Treasurer
and his or her staff and records is to be provided in city-owned or leased
buildings.



§ 30.046  RIGHT TO LEGAL COUNSEL.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-10-5.5, the City Clerk-Treasurer may hire or
contract with competent attorneys or legal research assistants.




PURCHASING POLICIES




§ 30.060  PURPOSE.



   (A)   I.C. 5-22 applies to every expenditure of public funds by a
governmental body.



   (B)   The City of Brazil is a governmental body under I.C. 5-22.



   (C)   I.C. 5-22 requires the city to establish purchasing rules and
policies for the city.



(Ord. 5-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.061  PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.



   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all
city purchases and shall be purchased unless the city determines that:



   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;



   (B)   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;



   (C)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States
is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available
supplies manufactured elsewhere; and



   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.



(Ord. 5-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.062  PROTECTION OF OFFERS AND STATUS OF DOCUMENTS AS PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   Protection of offers prior to opening. The purchasing agent
shall retain all offers received in a secure location prior to the date and
time at which offers will be opened in order to prevent disclosure of the
contents prior to the opening of the offers.



   (B)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers. After offers have been
opened, the purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers
in a manner so as to permit evaluation of the offers by the persons
responsible for evaluating the offers.



   (C)   Public records status of bids. Bids submitted in response to
an invitation for bids must be available for public inspection and copying
after the time of the bid opening.



   (D)   Register of proposals. The purchasing agent shall prepare a
register of proposals for each request for proposals issued which shall
contain information concerning the proposals available or public inspection
and copying. Proposals may not be disclosed.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.063  DISCUSSIONS WITH OFFERORS RESPONDING TO A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.



   The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with, and best and final
offers may be obtained from responsible offerors who submit proposals
determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for a contract
award.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.064  DELAY OF OPENING OF OFFERS.



   When the Common Council makes a written determination that it is in the
city's best interests, offers may be opened after the time stated in the
solicitation. The date, time and place of the rescheduled opening must be
announced at the time and place of the originally scheduled opening.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.065  EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Purchases less than $25,000. The purchasing agent may not
require evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a
purchase is less than $25,000.



   (B)   Purchases between $25,000 and $75,000. The solicitation may
include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial
responsibility. If evidence of financial responsibility is required, the
solicitation must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a
bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated
cost of the purchase.



   (C)   Purchases over $75,000. The solicitation shall include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility and
must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or
certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of
the purchase.



   (D)   Small business set-asides. The purchasing agent may determine
that no evidence of financial responsibility shall be required for a small
business set-aside purchase.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.066  USE OF REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS FOR PURCHASES OF DESIGNATED TYPES
OF SUPPLIES.



   The Common Council determines that:



   (A)   It is either not practicable or not advantageous to purchase
certain types of supplies by sealed competitive bidding; and



   (B)   Receiving proposals is the preferred method for purchasing the
following types of supplies: equipment, goods and materials costing less than
$25,000.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.067  MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Price adjustments. The purchasing agent may include provisions
to permit price adjustments in a purchase contract. The following provisions
for price adjustments may be included:



      (1)   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a
fixed price adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance or
as soon after the beginning of performance as possible;



      (2)   Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices
specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;



      (3)   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable
to the events or situations under clauses with adjustment of profit or fee,
all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;



      (4)   Price adjustments must be computed in an other manner as
the contracting parties may mutually agreed upon; or



      (5)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price
adjustments must be computed by a unilateral determination by the
governmental body of the costs attributable to the events or situations under
clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as computed by the governmental
body in accordance with applicable rules adopted by the governmental body.



   (B)   Adjustments in time of performance. The purchasing agent may
include provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments for time of
performance under the contract.



   (C)   Unilateral rights of supplier. The purchasing agent may
include in a purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral right
of the supplier to order changes in the work within the scope of the contract
or to order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.



   (D)   Quantity variations. The purchasing agent may include in a
purchase contract provisions dealing with variations between the estimated
quantities of work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.068  PURCHASE OF SERVICES.



   (A)   The Common Council determines that each city agency and
department may purchase services, except for the services of attorneys in
whatever manner the purchaser determines to be reasonable. Only the Head of
the Department of Law may purchase the services of attorney.



   (B)   The city purchasing agent may not require any city agency,
department or office to purchase services in any particular manner.



(Ord. 6-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.069  CREATION OF CITY PURCHASING AGENCY.



   There is created the City of Brazil Purchasing Agency (hereinafter
referred to as "Purchasing Agency") pursuant to I.C. 5-22, to serve as the
Purchasing Agency for the City of Brazil.



(Ord. 7-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.070  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY DESIGNATED PURCHASING AGENCY.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby designated as the
Purchasing Agency for the city.



(Ord. 7-1998, passed 7-14-1998)



§ 30.071  PURCHASING AGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties
authorized under I.C. 5-22, as may be supplemented from time to time by
ordinances adopted by the Common Council and policies adopted by the
Purchasing Agency.



   (B)   The Purchasing Agency shall act as the Purchasing Agency for
every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department
or other establishment of the City of Brazil.



   (C)   The Purchasing Agency may designate, in writing, as any
employee of the city as a purchasing agent.



(Ord. 7-1998, passed 7-14-1998)




POLICIES




§ 30.085  HARASSMENT POLICY.



   (A)   Harrassment policy.  The city is committed to providing a
work environment that is free of all forms of discrimination and conduct that
can be considered harassing, coercive, or disruptive, including sexual
harassment. Actions, words, jokes, or comments based on an individuals' sex,
race, color, national origin, age, religion, disability, or any other legally
protected characteristic will not be tolerated. The city provides ongoing
sexual harassment training to ensure you the opportunity to work in an
environment free of sexual and other unlawful harassment.



   (B)   Scope.  This policy applies to all city employees and all
third parties on city premises.



   (C)   Purpose.  To ensure that all employees have the right to work
in an environment free from sexual and other unlawful harassment.



   (D)   Definition. 



      SEXUAL HARASSMENT.  Unwanted sexual advances, or visual, verbal,
or physical conduct of a sexual nature. This definition includes many forms
of offensive behavior and includes gender-based harassment of a person of the
same sex as the harasser. The following is a partial list of sexual
harassment examples:



      (1)   Unwanted sexual advances.



      (2)   Offering employment benefits in exchange for sexual
favors.



      (3)   Making or threatening reprisals after a negative
response to sexual advances.



      (4)   Visual conduct that includes leering, making sexual
gestures, or displaying of sexually suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons
or posters.



      (5)   Verbal conduct that includes making or using derogatory
comments, epithets, slurs, or jokes.



      (6)   Verbal sexual advances or propositions.



      (7)   Verbal abuse of a sexual nature, graphic verbal
commentaries about an individual's body, sexually degrading words used to
describe an individual, or suggestive or obscene letters, notes, or
invitations.



      (8)   Physical conduct that includes touching, assaulting, or
impeding or blocking movements. Unwelcome sexual advances (either verbal or
physical), requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct
of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when:



         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of employment;



         (b)   Submission or rejection of the conduct is used as
a basis for making employment decisions; or



         (c)   The conduct has the purpose or effect of
interfering with work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive work environment.



   (E)   Procedure.



      (1)   All allegations of sexual harassment reported will be
quickly and discreetly investigated. To the extent possible, the
confidentiality of the person making the report and that of any witnesses and
the alleged harasser will be protected. Concerns and reports may be made
without fear of reprisal or retaliation.



      (2)   If an employee should experience or witness sexual or
other unlawful harassment, they shall immediately do 1 or both of the
following:



         (a)   Take action to stop the harassment. While the
employee is not obligated to confront the person, he or she may choose to
speak privately with the person initiating the offending conduct and ask him
or her to stop. It is helpful to provide the person with the reasons why the
conduct is offensive, as he or she may be unaware of its impact. If the
conduct stops, the employee may choose not to report the incident. If they
believe it would be inappropriate to contact that person, they should
immediately contact their supervisor. If the supervisor is unavailable, the
Human Resources/Safety Director or the Mayor may be contacted. The time,
place, and nature of the complaint should be relayed to the person contacted.
The complaint must be made in written form. The Humane Resources/Safety
Director will, in cooperation with the Mayor, investigate the complaint and
take appropriate action. When the investigation is completed, the person
filing the complaint will be informed of its outcome.



         (b)   Any supervisor or manager who becomes aware of
possible sexual or other unlawful harassment must immediately advise the
Humane Resources/Safety Director or the Mayor's Office so it can be
investigated in a timely and confidential manner.



      (3)   Employees who violate this policy will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination. Appropriate action will
be taken against third party violators.



   (F)   False accusations procedures.  The city recognizes that false
accusations of harassment and sexual harassment can have a serious effect on
innocent men and women. Individuals falsely accusing another of harassment or
sexual harassment will be disciplined in accordance with the nature and
extent of his or her false accusation. Discipline may include termination.



(Ord. 30-2006, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 30.086  APPLICATION AND USE OF CREDIT CARDS BY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Credit card issuance.



      (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to make
application for business credit cards for use by city officials and
employees. All credit card account applications shall be signed by the Mayor
and Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   The city shall obtain business credit cards from only 1
credit card company.



      (3)   Business credit cards so issued shall have a maximum
limit of $5,000.



   (B)   Credit card use policies and procedures.



      (1)   When not in use, the credit cards shall be secured in
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   Upon request by a city official or employee, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the credit card for use and shall keep a record
showing the date of issuance, date of return and purpose of use.



      (3)   Charges shall only be made on the credit card to
purchase items or services which are authorized and budgeted in the budget of
city.



      (4)   Within 72 hours of the purchase, the person using the
credit card shall provide a copy of the credit card receipt and shall inform
the Clerk-Treasurer in writing of the following:



         (a)   The purpose of the purchase;



         (b)   The line item from which the purchase is to be
paid; and



         (c)   An itemized list of all charges incurred and
whether those are paid from different budget line items.



      (5)   All credit card billing statements shall be sent by the
issuer to the Clerk-Treasurer and the charges on the cards shall be paid by
the Clerk-Treasurer from the appropriate budget line item pursuant to the
claims procedures of the city.



      (6)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall pay the charge cards promptly
so that no interest carrying charges of penalties will be incurred due to
late payments. Any employee who causes interest or carrying charges to be
added to the credit card account by a failure to timely provide the required
information to the Clerk-Treasurer shall be personally liable for the
interest or carrying charge.



      (7)   No credit card issued by the city for any elected
officer, department head or employee shall be used by any person for a
private purchase.



(Ord. 33-2005, passed 10-12-2005)



§ 30.087  ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARDS FOR PAYMENT OF FEES AND THE LIKE.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to establish accounts at, enter into
agreements with and pay fees to ETS Corporation, Sterling, Virginia, for the
purpose of enabling the City of Brazil to accept Visa and MasterCard credit
cards in the conduct of monetary transactions; and be it further that the
user fee is established in the amount of 1.2% of the monetary value of
monetary transaction plus $0.20 per transaction, fee to be collected and
retained by the City of Brazil for each monetary transaction paid in part or
in whole through the use of a credit card.



(Ord. 21-2005, passed 7-27-2005)




FISCAL BRANCH AND PROCEDURES; CITY FUNDS




§ 30.100  CITY CLERK-TREASURER AS FISCAL OFFICER.



   (A)   The Fiscal Branch shall be composed of the City
Clerk-Treasurer as the Fiscal Officer of the city and head of that branch.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall perform his or her duties pursuant
to I.C. 36-4-10-5 and any other duties as the Common Council may, by
ordinance, require.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer may appoint 1 Deputy Clerk-Treasurer who
shall be paid solely from funds appropriated for the Office of
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (D)   The Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall work under the exclusive
direction of the Clerk-Treasurer and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(1982 Code, § 30.05)  (Ord. 14-1982, passed 8-30-1982)



§ 30.101  COMPENSATION FOR SERVICES TO CITY UTILITIES BY CLERK-TREASURER.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be compensated for services rendered by him
or her to the various city utilities.



(1982 Code, § 30.05)  (Ord. 14-1982, passed 8-30-1982)



§ 30.102  BOARD OF FINANCE.



   (A)   The Board of Finance of the City of Brazil, Indiana is
designated and created pursuant to I.C. 5-13-7.



   (B)   The Board is to meet biennially for the purpose of designating
depositories for the depositing of public funds.



   (C)   The Board is to receive proposals from certain banks and trust
companies for the purpose of being designated and depository for the purpose
of receiving public funds.



   (D)   The Board shall have supervision of all public funds of its
city and the safekeeping and deposit thereof in accordance with the
applicable laws of the State of Indiana.



   (E)   The Board shall require the Brazil Clerk-Treasurer to deposit
and maintain the balance in each designated depository in proportion to the
total resources of each depository as it bears to the total resources of all
depositories so designated for receiving public funds.



§ 30.103  BUDGET, TAX LEVIES AND TAX RATES.



   The City of Brazil is governed by I.C. 6-1.1-17-1 et seq., addressing
procedures for fixing and reviewing budgets, tax rates and tax levies.



§ 30.104  ORDINANCE REQUIRED TO BORROW MONEY; REVENUE FROM TAXES.



   (A)   The City of Brazil is permitted to borrow money in
anticipation of current revenue from taxes in order to meet immediate cash
needs pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-20.



   (B)   Temporary loans are evidenced by time warrants, using as
collateral receipts from property taxes yet to be collected.



   (C)   The Brazil Common Council is authorized to make temporary
loans only by the passage of a proper ordinance.



§ 30.105  ORDINANCE REQUIRED TO APPROPRIATE ADDITIONAL FUNDS.



   An ordinance passed by the Common Council and notice to the public is
required when appropriating additional funds in excess of a budgetary item
and reducing appropriations.



§ 30.106  RESOLUTION REQUIRED TO TRANSFER FUNDS.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-14, the city may transfer funds from one fund
to another by the adoption of a proper resolution by the Common Council.



§ 30.107  CREATION OF POLICE BICYCLE PATROLS DONATIONS FUND.



   (A)   There is created a new restricted donations fund which shall
be designated as the "Police Bicycle Patrols Donations Fund."



   (B)   The sole purpose of the fund is to allow the Police Department
to receive monetary donations from the community and individuals, deposit
contributions into the Police Bicycle Patrols Donations Fund and disburse
monies therefrom to establish, initiate and promote police bicycle patrols
for the citizens of Brazil, to purchase items needed for police bicycle
patrols, such as bicycles, bicycle helmets, uniforms, equipment, parts, to
provide training and all other necessary expenses to operate, maintain and
promote the Brazil Police Department Bicycle Patrol Unit.



   (C)   The Fund shall be perpetual until terminated pursuant to the
terms of this subchapter.



   (D)   This Fund may be terminated by the enactment of an ordinance
and any fund balance in that fund shall revert back to the Brazil Police
Department General Fund to be used for any purposes lawfully allowed.



(Ord. 13-1998, passed 8-25-1998)



§ 30.108  CREATION OF TRAFFIC SAFETY FUND.



   (A)   There is created a new fund as a part of Brazil Police
Department's General Fund which shall be designated as the "Traffic Safety
Fund."



   (B)   The purpose of the fund is to allow the Police Department to
receive monetary donations from the community and individuals, deposit
contributions into the Traffic Safety Fund and disburse monies therefrom to
establish, initiate and promote traffic safety and bicycle safety programs
for the citizens and youth of Brazil and Clay County, to purchase child
safety devices, such as child safety seats, bicycle helmets and the like.



   (C)   The Fund shall be perpetual until terminated pursuant to the
terms of this subchapter.



   (D)   This Fund may be terminated by the enactment of an ordinance
and any fund balance in that fund shall revert back to the Brazil Police
Department General Fund to be used for any purposes lawfully allowed.



(Ord. 6-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



§ 30.109  LOCAL ROAD AND STREET FUND (LRS).



   The Local Road and Street Fund (LRS) is established for the purpose of
receiving applicable state funds and for expenditures permitted by statute.



(I.C. 8-14-2-1 et seq.)



§ 30.110  MOTOR VEHICLE HIGHWAY FUND (MVH).



   The Motor Vehicle Highway Fund is continued for the purposes of
receiving applicable state funds and for expenditures permitted by statute.



(I.C. 8-14-2-1 et seq.)



§ 30.111  CITY FUNDS AND ACCOUNT NUMBERS.



   The following funds are continued in effect. Each fund shall be funded
and operated in accordance with all statutory requirements.



   (A)   Fund and account number.



      (1)   Personal Service-1000.



      (2)   Supplies-2000.



      (3)   Services and Charges-3000.



      (4)   Capital Outlay-4000.



   (B)   General fund.



      (1)   Mayor-101001.



      (2)   Clerk-Treasurer-101002.



      (3)   Law-101003.



      (4)   Council-101004.



      (5)   Zoning-101005.



      (6)   Fire-101006.



      (7)   Police-101007.



      (8)   Miscellaneous-101004515.



   (C)   Payroll fund-701001111.



 



M.V.H.
 

201

 
Parks non-reverting
 

211



L.R.S.
 

202

 
Economic Development
 

218



Parks
 

204

 
Police education
 

233



Cemetery
 

205

 
Police deferral
 

239



Pool
 

206

 
Police safety
 

278



Golf
 

270

 
Fire education
 

280



Unsafe building
 

241





 



 



C.C.I.F.
 

401



C.C.D.
 

402



Water
 

601



Sewer
 

606



Sanitation
 

620





 



 


Pensions





Fire
 

702



Police
 

703



Police Bike Fund
 

217



Law enforcement-drug money
 

275





 



§ 30.112  AUTHORIZATION TO ACCEPT ACH PAYMENTS AT THE AUTHORIZATION OF THE
REQUESTING UTILITY CUSTOMER IN THE CONDUCT OF MONETARY TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to establish accounts at,
enter into agreements with, and pay fees to First Financial Bank Corporation;
Brazil, Indiana (Home Office: Terre Haute, Indiana), for the purpose of
enabling the City Utilities to accept ACH payments in the conduct of monetary
transactions.



   (B)   ACH payments may only be credit to the customers account on
the 8th of each month. If the 8th day should fall on a Saturday or Sunday,
the credit will be applied to the respective utility customer account on the
following Monday.



   (C)   Utility customers must complete and sign, in person, an
automatic payment withdrawal contract and voided check (as prescribed in
Exhibit A of Ordinance 31-2006).



   (D)   In the event that ACH payment results in a non-sufficient fund
transaction, a $15 NSF fee will be applied to the account plus any and all
penalties. If the ACH payment results in 3 or more non-sufficient fund
transactions within a 12-month calendar year, the utility customer shall
loose all privileges of the ACH payment service offered by the city utilities.



   (E)   Utility customers shall have the right to withdraw their
request temporarily, not to exceed twice in a 12-month calendar year;
however, this limitation shall not apply to customers who request to
temporary withdraw do to an erroneously large payment, and when the customer
has or is expected to apply for an adjustment. Customer must complete and
sign, in person, the necessary form as prescribed in Exhibit B of Ordinance
31-2006. All requests must be completed at least 1 week prior to the
scheduled ACH payment, as described in division (B) of this section.



   (F)   Utility customers shall have the right to permanently withdraw
their request by completion of the form as prescribed in Exhibit C of
Ordinance 31-2006. All requests must be completed at least 1 week prior to
the scheduled ACH payment, as described in division (B) of this section.



   (G)   The city shall not be held liable for any charges incurred by
the utility customer by their financial institution.



   (H)   The user fee is established in the amount of $0.25 per month
per transaction, the fee to be collected and retained by the city for each
monetary transaction paid in part or in whole through the use of an ACH
payment.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 11-14-2006)




CITY GOVERNMENT CHARTS




§ 30.125  ORGANIZATION CHART OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH.







§ 30.126  FISCAL BRANCH ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.







CHAPTER 31:  EXECUTIVE BRANCH



Section



   31.01   City executive



   31.02   Election of the Mayor



   31.03   Mayor’s term of office



   31.04   Mayor Pro Tempore



   31.05   Powers and duties of the Mayor



   31.06   Mayor’s monthly meetings with department heads



   31.07   Salary of the Mayor



   31.08   Listing of executive departments of the city



   31.09   Listing of boards and commissions



§ 31.01  CITY EXECUTIVE.



   The Mayor is the city executive and head of the Executive Branch. He or
she shall faithfully perform the required duties and responsibilities as
specified in I.C. 36-4-5-3 through 35-4-5-7 and other applicable statutes and
ordinances.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(A))



§ 31.02  ELECTION OF THE MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be elected pursuant to I.C. 3-10-6, as it may be
amended from time to time.



§ 31.03  MAYOR'S TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor shall take office at 12:00 p.m. on the first day of January
following his or her election and shall serve for 4 years and until a
successor is elected and qualified pursuant to I.C. 3-10-6.



§ 31.04  MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.



   There is established the position of Mayor Pro Tempore pursuant to I.C.
36-4-6-8. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall be appointed from the membership of the
Common Council of the City of Brazil. He or she shall have all the powers of
the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor.



§ 31.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer and make all
appointments to all offices and positions of employment authorized by the
laws of the state or by ordinances of Council and, except as may be otherwise
be provided by Council of the General Assembly, all officers and employees of
the city, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the state, shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor.



§ 31.06  MAYOR'S MONTHLY MEETINGS WITH DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-5-6, the Mayor must meet with officers in charge
of city departments.



§ 31.07  SALARY OF THE MAYOR.



   The Common Council shall, by ordinance, fix the annual compensation of
the Mayor. That ordinance must be published pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1. The
Mayor's salary may not be changed in the year for which it is fixed, nor may
it be reduced below the amount fixed for the previous year.



§ 31.08  LISTING OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS OF THE CITY.



   As a part of the Executive Branch, there are created the following
executive departments:



   (A)   Department of Aviation;



   (B)   Police Department;



   (C)   Fire Department;



   (D)   Department of Law;



   (E)   Street and Sanitation Department;



   (F)   Department of Parks and Recreation;



   (G)   Utilities Department consisting of Water and Sewage
Departments;



   (H)   Department of Redevelopment; and



   (I)   Office of City Planning and Building Administrator.



(1982 Code, 30.03(D))



§ 31.09  LISTING OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   (A)   As a part of the Executive Branch, there are created the
following boards and commissions:



      (1)   Aviation Board of Commissioners;



      (2)   The Board of Public Works and Safety;



      (3)   The Board of Parks and Recreation;



      (4)   The Redevelopment Commission;



      (5)   The City Plan Commission;



      (6)   The Board of Zoning Appeals;



      (7)   The Economic Development Commission;



      (8)   The Golf Course Board;



      (9)   The Housing Authority;



      (10)   The Police Pension Board of Trustees;



      (11)   The Firefighters Pension Board of Trustees; and



      (12)   Economic Development Commission.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint persons to serve as members of the
boards and commissions specified herein above pursuant to applicable law and
ordinances, except where state law provides for certain appointments by
someone other than the Mayor or by election. Those persons appointed by the
Mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.



(1982 Code, § 30.03(B))



CHAPTER 32:  LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



Section




Generally




   32.01   Five-member Common Council



   32.02   Four Councilmanic Districts



   32.03   Voting for Council members



   32.04   Statutory duties of the Council



   32.05   Clerk of the Council



   32.06   Regular and special meetings of the Council



   32.07   Mayor’s duties as Presiding Officer of the Council



   32.08   Order of business at meetings



   32.09   Contempt and disorder in the Council Room



   32.10   Introduction and adoption of ordinances and resolutions



   32.11   Questions of order



   32.12   Appeal from decision of Presiding Officer



   32.13   Suspension of rules



   32.14   Parliamentary rules




   32.15   Compensation of the Common Council





Miscellaneous Powers of the Common Council




   32.30   Annexation requirements; resolution addressing a fiscal plan
and annexation ordinance of the Council



   32.31   Appropriations



   32.32   Budgets of the city



   32.33   Claim procedures



   32.34   Compensation to be set by Council for officers and employees



   32.35   Home rule authority



   32.36   Interlocal agreements



   32.37   Ordinance required of the Council to vacate public property



   32.38   Procedures for tax abatements



   32.39   Council’s declaration of downtown development areas




Acquisition of Real Estate by Means Other than Eminent Domain




   32.50   Purpose of regulations



   32.51   Acquisition of property by donation



   32.52   Acquisition of property by purchase



   32.53   Purchase of property without a declared public purpose or use



   32.54   Eminent domain supersedes




GENERALLY




§ 32.01  FIVE-MEMBER COMMON COUNCIL.



   The Legislative Branch of the City of Brazil shall be the Common
Council consisting of 5 members, 4 of whom shall be elected from 4
Councilmanic Districts located within the corporate limits of the city and 1
of whom shall be elected at large.



(1982 Code, § 30.04)



§ 32.02  FOUR COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The City of Brazil shall be divided into 4 Councilmanic
Districts pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-5 known as Wards for the purpose of
electing members to the Common Council of the city, with the boundaries of
the Wards being as follows.



      (1)   Ward 1 shall consist of all of that part of the city
which lies north of the centerline of National Avenue and east of the
centerline of Forest Avenue.



      (2)   Ward 2 shall consist of all of that part of the city
which lies north of the centerline of National Avenue and west of the
centerline of Forest Avenue and east of the centerline of Sherman Street.



      (3)   Ward 3 shall consist of all of that part of the city
which lies west of the centerline of Sherman Street and north of the
centerline of National Avenue, plus all of that part of the city which lies
south of the centerline of National Avenue and west of Forest Avenue.



      (4)   Ward 4 shall consist of all of that part of the city
that lies south of the centerline of National Avenue and east of Forest
Avenue (State Road 59).



(Am. Ord. 16-2002, passed 12-10-2002)



   (B)   The Councilmanic Districts shall be as follows.



      (1)   Councilmanic District 1 shall consist of Ward 1.



      (2)   Councilmanic District 2 shall consist of Ward 2.



      (3)   Councilmanic District 3 shall consist of Ward 3.



      (4)   Councilmanic District 4 shall consist of Ward 4.



      (5)   Councilmanic District At-Large shall consist of the
entire city.



   (C)   The map below depicts the 4 Councilmanic Districts.







 



§ 32.03  VOTING FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   Each registered voter of the city may vote for 1 Common Council
candidate for the at-large membership, and 1 candidate for the respective
ward in which he or she resides. The at-large candidate receiving the most
votes from the entire city and each ward candidate receiving the most votes
from their respective wards shall be elected to the Common Council of the
city.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(G))



§ 32.04  STATUTORY DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.



   The Common Council shall have exclusive authority by the city
ordinances and resolutions to appropriate tax monies received by the city
along with those functions as specified in I.C. 36-4-4-4 and I.C. 36-4-6-18
and other applicable statutes and ordinances.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(A)



§ 32.05  CLERK OF THE COUNCIL.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be Clerk of the Council and shall
perform the duties prescribed by I.C. 36-4-6-9 and others as the Council may
direct.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(B))



§ 32.06  REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   The regular meeting date and time for the Common Council shall
be at 7:30 p.m. on 2 nights each month exactly 2 weeks apart as established
by the members of the Common Council at its first meeting after their
election as required by I.C. 36-4-6-7.



   (B)   Special meetings may be called when necessary after giving
proper legal notice.



(Ord. 1-92, passed 1-14-1992)



§ 32.07  MAYOR'S DUTIES AS PRESIDING OFFICER OF THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the President Pro
Tempore, shall be the Presiding Officer of the Council.



   (B)   Meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the applicable
statutes (I.C. 36-4-6-10 through 36-4-6-17) and in accordance with the
following rules.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D))



§ 32.08  ORDER OF BUSINESS AT MEETINGS.



   The order of business to be followed at a meeting of the Common Council
shall be as follows:



   (A)   Call to order;



   (B)   Pledge of allegiance and prayer;



   (C)   Roll call;



   (D)   Reading of minutes and approval;



   (E)   Reports of committees, boards and commissions;



   (F)   Old business;



   (G)   New business;



   (H)   Approval of claims for payment;



   (I)   Public comment; and



   (J)   Adjournment.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(1))



§ 32.09  CONTEMPT AND DISORDER IN THE COUNCIL ROOM.



   (A)   No person shall use violent or contemptuous language, behave
in a disorderly manner or refuse to obey the orders of the Mayor or Presiding
Officer in the Council Room while the Common Council is in session.



   (B)   The Mayor or Presiding Officer may order the removal from the
Council room of anyone who intentionally disturbs the decorum of the meeting.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(2))



§ 32.10  INTRODUCTION AND ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   All ordinances shall be regularly filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer at least 5 days before a regular meeting.



   (B)   All ordinances shall be read 1 time before being duly passed,
and no ordinance shall pass on the same day in which it is introduced unless
the provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-13 are complied with.



   (C)   Resolutions shall be subject to the same rule in method of
introduction and adoption as ordinances.



   (D)   On passage or adoption of any ordinance or resolution the ayes
and nays shall be taken and entered in the record, and the ordinance shall be
processed in accordance with I.C. 36-4-6-14 through 35-4-6-17.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(3))



§ 32.11  QUESTIONS OF ORDER.



   The Mayor or Presiding Officer shall decide all questions of order. He
or she shall decide whether any question submitted to the Council for
adoption or rejection is decided in the affirmative or negative.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(4))



§ 32.12  APPEAL FROM DECISION OF PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   From any decision of the Presiding Officer any member may
appeal to the Council.



   (B)   The appeal shall be by motion duly made and seconded.



   (C)   The majority vote as defined in I.C. 36-4-6-11 is necessary to
overrule the chair.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(5))



§ 32.13  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   The order of business may be suspended by a 2/3 vote of members of the
Council.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(6))



§ 32.14  PARLIAMENTARY RULES.



   Parliamentary procedure shall be in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Order.



(1982 Code, § 30.04(D)(7))



§ 32.15  COMPENSATION OF THE COMMON COUNCIL.



   The Common Council shall, by ordinance, fix the compensation of its
members.




MISCELLANEOUS POWERS OF THE COMMON COUNCIL




§ 32.30  ANNEXATION REQUIREMENTS; RESOLUTION ADDRESSING A FISCAL PLAN AND
ANNEXATION ORDINANCE OF THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-3-13, the Common Council must adopt a
resolution addressing a written fiscal plan and a definite policy addressing
the cost estimates of planned services to be furnished to any territory
desired to be annexed.



   (B)   The Common Council may, by ordinance which defines the
corporate boundaries of the city, annex territory which is contiguous to the
municipality subject to the conditions of I.C. 36-4-3-1 et seq.



§ 32.31  APPROPRIATIONS.



   (A)   An appropriation ordinance must specify, by items, the amount
of each appropriation and the department for which it is made. The Common
Council may by ordinance decrease an appropriation ordinance.



   (B)   The Council may, on the recommendation of the Mayor, make
further or additional appropriations by ordinance, unless the result would be
to increase the tax levy set under I.C. 6-1.1-17.



§ 32.32  BUDGETS OF THE CITY.



   (A)   The Fiscal Officer shall present the report of budget
estimates to the Common Council under I.C. 6-1.1-17.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-7-6, the city shall formulate a budget
estimate for the filing budget year. Estimates must be formulated prior to
the publication of the notice of budget estimates required pursuant to I.C.
6-1.1-17-3.



§ 32.33  CLAIM PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Common Council may pass an ordinance permitting money to
be disbursed for lawful city purposes authorized pursuant to applicable state
law.



   (B)   The Council shall require the appropriate form to be completed
which is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and available for
public inspection during regular business hours.



§ 32.34  COMPENSATION TO BE SET BY COUNCIL FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The city may fix the level of compensation of its officers and
employees upon the passage of a proper ordinance.



§ 32.35  HOME RULE AUTHORITY.



   The Common Council may exercise all the powers that it believes it
needs for the effective operation of government as to local affairs.



§ 32.36  INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS.



   The Common Council may, by ordinance or resolution, approve a written
agreement between itself and other governmental entities which may address
purchasing, selling or exchanging of services, supplies or equipment between
or among themselves.



§ 32.37  ORDINANCE REQUIRED OF THE COUNCIL TO VACATE PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Common Council may, by proper ordinance, vacate public
property which it finds would not hinder the growth of the neighborhood or
inhibit access by the public.



   (B)   Vacation proceedings do not deprive a public utility of the
use of all or part of a public way or public place to be vacated if the
utility is occupying and using all or part of that public 1 or place at the
time that the vacation proceedings are instituted.



§ 32.38  PROCEDURES FOR TAX ABATEMENTS.



   (A)   All requests or petitions for real and/or personal property
tax abatements in the county shall first be reviewed and considered by the
County Redevelopment Commission.



   (B)   The Redevelopment Commission shall review all abatement
requests and make a recommendation to the Council as to whether the abatement
request should be granted. The Council, however, shall not be bound by the
Redevelopment Commission's recommendation.



   (C)   The Redevelopment Commission shall establish procedures for
considering and reviewing abatements and shall create general guidelines for
the public concerning abatements.



   (D)   The Redevelopment Commission shall also assist those seeking
an abatement by preparing all documentation necessary to consider and grant
an abatement including, but not limited to, SB-1 forms, petitions requesting
abatements, designating and confirming resolutions, target area resolutions,
required public notices and “clawback” agreements. The Redevelopment
Commission shall further assist those seeking an abatement by arranging for
the publication of required notices related to the abatement.



   (E)   In consideration of providing the above–referenced services
to those seeking an abatement, the Redevelopment Commission shall charge an
abatement application filing fee of $750 for a single abatement (either real
or personal) and a fee of $900 for a dual abatement (both real and personal)
to defray its legal expenses in retaining counsel to prepare the necessary
documentation in consultation with the applicant. This fee shall include all
publication costs.



   (F)   The filing fee shall only be required of applicants who
actually file a request for abatement. No fee shall be charged to a person or
entity that merely inquires about abatements or obtains information about
abatements from the Redevelopment Commission.



(Ord. 11-2006, passed 3-28-2006)



§ 32.39  COUNCIL’S DECLARATION OF DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AREAS.



   The following areas of downtown Brazil, Indiana, are designated as slum
and blighted as defined by I.C. 36-7-14:



   (A)   South side of U.S. 40 between Sycamore and State Road 59;



   (B)   South side of U.S. 40 between Franklin and Meridian;



   (C)   South side of U.S. 40 between Warren and Leavitt;



   (D)   North side of U.S. 40 between Cass and Depot; and



   (E)   North side of U.S. 40 between Chicago and Leavitt;



(Res. 5-1991, passed 9-10-1991)




ACQUISITION OF REAL ESTATE BY MEANS OTHER THAN EMINENT DOMAIN




§ 32.50  PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   I.C. 36-1-4-5 gives the city authority to acquired and own
interests in real or personal property by means other than by eminent domain.



   (B)   The Common Council deems it necessary to regulate the purchase
or acquisition of real property by the city and establish a procedure for
doing so by means other than by eminent domain.



(Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-23-1993)



§ 32.51  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY BY DONATION.



   Before the city may acquire an interest in real property by donation,
the Board of Public Works and Safety (hereinafter referred to as "Board")
shall do the following:



   (A)   Determine that there is a definite public use and/or purpose
for the real estate to be acquired. The donation of that real estate must be
refused and denied by the Board if no public use or purpose can be designated
and identified;



   (B)   The Board shall have the real estate appraised by at least 3
disinterested, qualified and licensed real estate appraisers who shall each
submit to the Board a written appraisal of the same;



   (C)   The Board shall have the real estate inspected for possible
underground mine shafts, soil erosion or any other obstacles to the desired
public use or purpose of the land, inspections to be conducted by qualified
persons or experts in real estate inspections;



   (D)   The Board shall do or have performed a complete title search
so as to determine whether the city will receive good and marketable title to
the real estate to be donated. The donation must be refused and denied by the
Board if clear and marketable title cannot be shown by the benefactor;



   (E)   If acquisition of the real estate is deemed to be in the best
interests of the city, the Board shall adopt a resolution to acquire
ownership interest in that real estate by donation and specify therein the
public use or purpose for acquiring the real estate, the appraised values
thereof, the legal description and common address of the real estate, that
the real estate is fit for the designated public use or purpose, and that the
benefactor has clear and marketable title to convey to the city;



   (F)   If a resolution is adopted by the Board, that resolution must
be submitted to the Common Council for final acceptance and approval before
the real estate can be acquired; and



   (G)   Once the Common Council has approved the resolution, the Board
may proceed to accept conveyance of the property at a public meeting thereof.



(Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-23-1993)



§ 32.52  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY BY PURCHASE.



   Before the city may acquire an interest in real property by purchase,
other than by eminent domain, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall do
the following:



   (A)   Declare a public use or public purpose for the real estate to
be purchased;



   (B)   Have the real estate appraised by 3 disinterested, qualified
and licensed appraisers and obtain written appraisals from each;



   (C)   Have the real estate inspected by qualified persons or experts
for possible underground mine shafts, soil erosion or other obstacles to the
desired public use or purpose of the land;



   (D)   The owner of the real estate shall provide the Board with
evidence of good and marketable title to the real estate to be purchased, or,
in the alternative, the Board shall do or have performed a complete title
search to determine whether the city will receive clear and marketable title
thereto;



   (E)   If there are no obstacles existing on or under the real
estate, if clear and marketable title is shown, and if acquisition of the
real estate is deemed to be in the best interests of the city, the Board
shall adopt a resolution to acquire ownership interest in that real estate by
purchasing same at a price either at or below the appraised value, and
specify therein the public use or purpose for acquiring the real estate, the
appraised values thereof and the agreed upon purchase price, the legal
description and common address of the real estate, that the real estate is
fit and suitable for the designated public use or purpose, and that the owner
of the property has clear and marketable title to convey to the city;



   (F)   If a resolution is adopted by the Board, that resolution must
be submitted to the Common Council for final acceptance and approval before
the real estate can be acquired; and



   (G)   Once the Common Council has approved the resolution, the Board
may proceed to acquire the property at a public meeting thereof and execute,
on behalf of the city, any and all documents necessary to consummate the
conveyance.



(Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-23-1993)



§ 32.53  PURCHASE OF PROPERTY WITHOUT A DECLARED PUBLIC PURPOSE OR USE.



   Neither the Board of Public Works and Safety, the Common Council, any
elected or appointed official or employee of the city may purchase or
authorize the purchase or receive by donation, on behalf of the city, any
real estate without full compliance with the provisions and requirements of
this subchapter, and if there is no declared public use or purpose for the
real estate to be acquired, any acquisition in violation of this subchapter
shall entitle either the Board or the Common Council to void the acquisition
by resolution.



(Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-23-1993)



§ 32.54  EMINENT DOMAIN SUPERSEDES.



   Nothing in this section or subchapter shall take precedence over the
authority of the city to acquire property by eminent domain as set forth in
applicable state statutes and law of the State of Indiana.



(Ord. 5-1993, passed 2-23-1993)



CHAPTER 33:  JUDICIAL BRANCH



Section



   33.01   City Court established



   33.02   Jurisdiction of City Court



   33.03   Election of city judge



   33.04   City Court operations



   33.05   Salary of the city judge



   33.06   Powers of the City Court



§ 33.01  CITY COURT ESTABLISHED.



   The judicial branch of the city shall be composed of a City Court
headed by a judge of the City Court elected pursuant to I.C. 3-10.1-1-3.



§ 33.02  JURISDICTION OF CITY COURT.



   There is created a City Court of Brazil, Indiana pursuant to I.C.
33-10.1 which shall have criminal jurisdiction of all violations of
ordinances of the city of Brazil and of all misdemeanors and infractions and
civil jurisdiction in all civil cases where the amount in controversy does
not exceed the statutory limit, with the exceptions of actions for slander,
libel, mortgage foreclosure, where the title to real estate is in issue,
matters relating to a decedent's estate, appointment of guardians and all
related matters, and actions in equity.



(1982 Code, § 30.06(A))



§ 33.03  ELECTION OF CITY JUDGE.



   (A)   The judge of the City Court shall be elected in the general
election pursuant to I.C. 33-10.1-1-3(b).



   (B)   The judge shall take office and operate the City Court on
January 1 following election.



(1982 Code, § 30.06(B))



§ 33.04  CITY COURT OPERATIONS.



   All other matters relating to the operation of the City Court shall be
performed pursuant to I.C. 3-10.1-3.



(1982 Code, § 30.06(C))  (Ord. 14-1982, passed 8-30-1982)



§ 33.05  SALARY OF THE CITY JUDGE.



   The salary of the city judge shall be determined by the Common Council
in a like manner as other elected officials.



§ 33.06  POWERS OF THE CITY COURT.



   The Brazil City Court shall have all powers provided by applicable
state law.



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL POLICIES, SALARIES AND OTHER RENUMERATION



Section



   34.01   Adopted by reference.



§ 34.01  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The personnel policies, salaries of officers and employees and other
renumeration is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as fully as if
set out at length herein.



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITIES IN GENERAL



      51.   DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL STANDARDS



      52.   SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS



      53.   WATER REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES IN GENERAL



Section



   50.01   Authority to establish water utilities



   50.02   Authority to establish sewage utilities



§ 50.01  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH WATER UTILITIES.



   The city may regulate the furnishing of water to the public. It may
also establish, maintain and operate Waterworks.



§ 50.02  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH SEWAGE UTILITIES.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety may erect, maintain and operate
works for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage.



CHAPTER 51:  DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL STANDARDS



Section




General Regulations




   51.01   Preamble



   51.02   Conflicting ordinances



   51.03   Compliance with this chapter and other ordinances



   51.04   Abbreviations and definitions



   51.05   General stormwater control policy



   51.06   Determination of impact drainage areas



   51.07   Information requirements



   51.08   Submittal and consideration; roles of city engineer and
Council



   51.09   Methodology for determination of pre and post-development
runoff quantities



   51.10   Methodology for determination of detention storage volumes



   51.11   Storm sewer design standards and specifications



   51.12   Open channel design standards and materials



   51.13   Stormwater detention design standards



   51.14   Miscellaneous design criteria




   51.15   Easement requirements





Specific Regulations




   51.30   Erosion and sediment control



   51.31   Placement of utilities



   51.32   Compliance required and time limits for permits



   51.33   Change in plans



   51.34   Certifications required for as-built condition



   51.35   Subdivision covenants



   51.36   Inspections and corrective measures



   51.37   Disclaimer of liability



   51.38   Effective date



   51.39   Exempt projects



   51.40   Permit fees



   51.41   Detailed drawings of design standards and appendix
incorporated by reference



   51.99   Penalty




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 51.01  PREAMBLE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the hazard to public
health and safety caused by excessive stormwater runoff, to enhance economic
objectives and to protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of
land and water resources within the City of Brazil.



   (B)   This chapter regulates:



      (1)   Stormwater drainage improvements related to development
of land located within the City of Brazil, including minor and major
subdivisions;



      (2)   Drainage control systems installed during new
construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land;



      (3)   Erosion and sediment control systems installed during
new construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land; and



      (4)   The design, construction and maintenance of stormwater
drainage facilities and systems.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.02  CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed as additional
requirements to minimum standards required by other ordinances of Clay
County. In case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.03  COMPLIANCE WITH THIS CHAPTER AND OTHER ORDINANCES.



   (A)   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, compliance
with the requirements set forth in Ch. 157 and other applicable ordinances
with respect to submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision
plats, improvements plans, building and zoning permits, construction,
inspections, appeals and similar matters and compliance with applicable State
of Indiana statutes and regulations shall be required.



   (B)   No drainage permit shall be issued for development within the
city limits as defined in § 51.04(C) except single-family dwelling houses in
approved subdivisions, until the plans for construction, extension,
remodeling, alteration or repair have been approved in writing by the City of
Brazil and the engineer. This process for obtaining a drainage permit is
outlined in § 51.08.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.04  ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Although not all of the abbreviations and definitions listed
below are used in this chapter, the additional terminology is provided to
assist ordinance administrators, other community officials, residents and
permit applicants in understanding technical terminology associated with the
subject matter of this chapter.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AC-FT.  Acre-feet.



      CFS.  Cubic feet per second.



      COE.  United States Army Corps of Engineers.



      FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency.



      FPS.  Feet per second.



      HERPICC.  Highway Extension and Research Project for Indiana
Counties and Cities.



      IDEM.  Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



      IDNR.  Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



      INDOT.  Indiana Department of Transportation.



      NRCS.  National Resources Conservation Service.



      SWCD.  Soil and Water Conservation District.



   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      APPARENT RIGHT-OF-WAY.



         (a)   All that area lying adjacent to, and including,
the public road which is being used and occupied by the public and public
utilities, and the area of maintenance by county or city government.



         (b)   The limits of the apparent right-of-way shall be
defined as the greater of any of the following:



            1.   Existing fence of long standing;



            2.   Edge of existing utilities;



            3.   Field occupation lines (plowed or tilled
ground);



            4.   Existing woody vegetation (may signify
evidence of prior fence location);



            5.   Or if none of the above exists, edge of
traveled road surface, and the adjacent area of maintenance by a county or
city road development.



         (c)   The APPARENT RIGHT-OF-WAY is subordinate to
dedicated rights-of-way  of record.



      BACKFLOW PREVENTER.  A device that allows liquids to flow in
only 1 direction in a pipe. BACKFLOW PREVENTERS are used on sewer pipes to
prevent a reverse flow during flooding situations.



      BACKWATER.  The rise in water surface elevation caused by some
obstruction such as a narrow bridge opening, buildings or fill material that
limits the area through which the water shall flow.



      BASE FLOOD.  See REGULATORY FLOOD.



      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The water surface elevation
corresponding to a flood having 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in a given year.



      BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade on
all sides.



      BENCHMARK.  A marked point of known elevation from which other
elevations may be established.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.  Design, construction and maintenance
practices and criteria for stormwater facilities that minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, prevent erosion and capture pollutants.



      BUILDING.  See STRUCTURES.



      CAPACITY OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY.  The maximum flow that
can be conveyed or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage
to public or private property.



      CENTERLINE OF CHANNEL.  The middle point or baseline of a
channel.



      CHANNEL.  A natural or artificial watercourse which periodically
or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link
between 2 bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to
confine the water.



      CONTIGUOUS.  Adjoining or in actual contact with.



      CONTOUR.  Imaginary line on the earth's surface which connects
points of equal elevation.



      CONTOUR LINE.  Line on a map which represents a contour or
points of equal elevation.



      CONTROL STRUCTURE.  A structure designed to control the rate of
flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.



      CROSS WALKWAY.  A strip of land dedicated to public use, which
is reserved across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.



      CROWN OF PIPE.  The elevation of the top or highest point of the
internal surface of the transverse cross section of a pipe.



      CROSS- SECTION.  A graph or plot of ground elevation across a
stream valley, or a portion of it, usually along a line perpendicular to the
stream or direction of flow.



      CUBIC FEET PER SECOND (CFS).  Used to describe the amount of
flow passing a given point in a stream channel. One cubic foot per second is
equivalent to approximately 7.5 gallons per second.



      CULVERT.  A closed conduit used for the conveyance of surface
drainage water under a roadway, railroad, canal or other impediment.



      CURVE NUMBER (CN).  The NRCS index that represents the combined
hydrologic effect of soil, land use, land cover, hydrologic condition and
antecedent runoff condition.



      DAM.  All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together
with any abutments and appurtenant works, constructed to store, direct water
or create a pool (not including underground water storage tanks).



      DATUM.  Any level surface to which elevations are referred,
usually using mean sea level.



      DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE AREAS.  Non-riverain depressions in the
earth where stormwater collects. The volumes are often referred to in units
of acre-feet.



      DESIGN STORM.  A selected storm event, described in terms of the
probability of occurring once within a given number of years, for which
stormwater or flood control improvements are designed and built.



      DETENTION FACILITY.  A facility designed to detain a specified
amount of stormwater runoff assuming a specified release rate. The volumes
are often referred to in units of acre-feet. Examples include on rooftops, in
streets, parking lots, school yards, parks, open spaces or other areas under
predetermined and controlled conditions.



      DETENTION STORAGE.  The temporary storage of stormwater in a
detention facility, with the rate of release regulated by appropriately
installed devices.



      DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate a quarter-acre or larger including but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to an existing building that adds over 1/4 acre or
more of impermeable surface (ie: rooftop, parking lot, driveway and the like);



         (b)   All subdivisions requiring approval under the
current Chapter 157, effective after the adoption of this Drainage Chapter;



         (c)   Installing utilities, construction or
reconstruction of roads or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts; and



         (g)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



         (h)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as
the maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as painting or
re-roofing, resurfacing roads or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices. In addition, DEVELOPMENT does not include the reconstruction or
maintenance of regulated drains or replacement of existing stream crossing by
the City of Brazil.



      DISCHARGE.  Normally, the rate of flow into or out of a sewer,
stormwater storage facility or from a land surface. DISCHARGES are
customarily measured in cubic feet per second (cfs).



      DRAINAGE AREA.  The area from which water is carried off by a
drainage system; a watershed or catchment area.



      DRAINAGE EASEMENT.  An authorized grant made by a property owner
for use by another of any designated part of his or her property, and legally
recorded, for the purpose of ensuring satisfactory present and future
drainage of the property and the area surrounding the property.



      DROP MANHOLE.  Manhole having a vertical drop pipe connecting
the inlet pipe to the outlet pipe. The vertical drop pipe shall be located
immediately outside the manhole.



      DRY-BOTTOM DETENTION FACILITY.  A facility designed to be
completely dewatered after having provided its planned detention or runoff
during a storm event.



      DURATION.  The time period of a rainfall event.



      EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of
land by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for
a specific purpose or purposes.



      ENGINEER.  See PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.



      EROSION.  Wearing away of the land by running water and waves,
abrasion, temperature changes, ice and wind.



      EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.  Any area(s) outside of civil
boundaries where a specified governmental body has the right to interpret and
apply the law.



      FARM or FIELD TILE.  A subsurface pipe installed in an
agricultural area to allow drainage of farmland.



      FLOOD or FLOOD WATERS.  A general and temporary condition of a
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow,
the unusual and rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any
source.



      FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  A map prepared by
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that depicts the FEMA designated
floodways within a community. This map also includes the delineation of the
100-year and 500-year floodplain boundaries and the location of the flood
insurance study cross-sections.



      FLOOD CREST.  The maximum stage or elevation reached or expected
to be reached by the waters of a specified flood at a given location.



      FLOOD DURATION.  The length of time a stream is above flood
stage or overflowing its banks.



      FLOOD EASEMENT.  Easement granted to identify areas inundated by
the 100-year flood.



      FLOOD ELEVATION.  The elevation at all locations delineating the
maximum level of high waters for a flood of given return period.



      FLOOD FREQUENCY.  A statistical expression of the average time
period between floods equaling or exceeding a given magnitude. For example, a
100-year flood has a magnitude expected to be equaled or exceeded on the
average once every 100 years; this flood has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Often used interchangeably with RECURRENCE
INTERVAL.



      FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  A map prepared by the FEMA
that depicts special flood hazard areas as a Zone A within a community. There
are no study texts, base flood elevations or floodways associated with this
map.



      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  A map prepared by FEMA that
depicts special flood hazard areas within a community. This map also includes
the 100-year or base flood elevation at various locations along the
watercourses. More recent versions of the FIRM may also show the FEMA
designated floodway boundaries and the location on the flood insurance study
cross-sections.



      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  A study prepared by FEMA to assist
a community participating in the National Flood Insurance Program in its
application of the program regulations. The STUDY consists of a text which
contains community background information with respect to flooding, a
floodway data table, summary of flood discharges, flood profiles, a flood
insurance rate map and a flood boundary and floodway map.



      FLOODPLAIN.  The channel proper and the areas adjoining the
channel which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory or
100-year flood. Any normally dry land areas that is suspectable to being
inundated by water from any natural source. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the
floodway and the floodway fringe districts.



      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of a program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited
to flood control projects, floodplain land use regulations, floodproofing of
buildings and emergency preparedness plans.



      FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS.  General term applied to the full range
of codes, ordinances and other regulations relating to the use of land and
construction within floodplain limits. The term encompasses zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building and housing codes, encroachment
laws and open area (space) regulations.



      FLOOD PROFILE.  A graph showing the relationship of water
surface elevation to a specific location, the latter generally expressed as
distance above the mouth of the stream of water flowing in an open channel.
It is generally drawn to show surface elevation for the crest of a specific
magnitude of flooding, but may be prepared for conditions at any given time
or stage.



      FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG).  The elevation of the regulatory
or 100-year flood plus 2 feet at any given location in the special flood
hazard area or 100-year floodplain.



      FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any
river or stream.



      FLOODWAY FRINGE.  That portion of the floodplain lying outside
the floodway, which is inundated by the regulatory flood.



      FOOTING DRAIN.  A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a
basement wall foundation to relieve water pressure caused by high ground
water elevation.



      FREEBOARD.  An increment of height added to the base flood
elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable efforts such as
those caused by ice or debris jams. See FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE.



      FRENCH DRAIN.  A drainage trench backfilled with a coarse,
water-transmitting material; may contain a perforated pipe.



      GABION.  An erosion control structure usually consisting of wire
cage filled with rocks.



      GRADE.  The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit or
the like or natural ground surface usually expressed in terms of the
percentage the vertical rise (or fall) bears to the corresponding horizontal
distance.



      HYDRAULIC GRADE LINE (HGL).  The open channel flow, the HGL is
equal to the water surface elevation, whereas for pressure flow it is the
level to which water will rise in a pipe due to its own pressure.



      HYDRODYNAMIC LOADS.  Forces imposed on structures by floodwaters
due to the impact of moving water on the upstream side of the structures,
drag along its sides and eddies or negative pressure on its downstream side.



      HYDROGRAPH.  For a given point on a stream, drainage basin or a
lake, a graph showing either the discharge, stage (depth), velocity or volume
of water with respect to time.



      HYDROLOGY.  The science of the behavior of water, its dynamics,
composition and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth
and underground. A typical hydrologic study is undertaken to compute flow
rates associated with specified flood events.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  Any hard-surfaced, human-made area that
does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not limited to
building roofs, parking and driveway areas, compacted graveled areas,
sidewalks and paved recreation areas.



      INFILTRATION.  Passage or movement of water into the soil.



      INFILTRATION SWALES.  A depressed earthen area that is designed
to promote infiltration.



      INLET.  An opening into a storm sewer system for the entrance of
surface stormwater runoff, more completely described as a storm sewer inlet.



      INVERT ELEVATION.  The elevation at the inside bottom of a
culvert or other conduit.



      JUNCTION CHAMBER.  A converging section of conduit, usually
large enough for a person to enter, used to facilitate the flow from 1 or
more conduits into a main conduit.



      LAND SURVEYOR.  A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to practice land surveying.



      LATERAL STORM SEWER.  A storm sewer that has an inlet at its
upstream end and empties into another storm sewer or facility.



      LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  A letter from FEMA removing an
existing structure or a legally defined parcel of land unaltered by fill from
a special flood hazard area.



      LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  A letter from FEMA officially
revising the current National Flood Insurance Program map to show changes to
floodplains, floodways or flood elevations. LOMR's typically depict decreased
flood hazards.



      LOW ENTRY ELEVATION.  The elevation in a structure where
overbank flooding can enter the structure.



      LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The absolute lowest grade around the
outside of a structure, taking into account patios and support posts for
decks or porches.



      LOWEST FLOOR.  Refers to the lowest of the following:



         (a)   The top of the basement floor;



         (b)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the
lowest level of the building;



         (c)   The top of the first floor of buildings
construction on a slab or of buildings elevated on pilings or construction on
a crawl space with permanent openings; or



         (d)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure below
an elevated building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance
to the flow or flood waters unless:



            1.   The walls are designed to automatically
equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood waters, by providing a minimum of 2 openings (in addition
to doorways and windows) having a total area of 1 square foot for every 2
square feet of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade; or



            2.   The enclosed space shall be usable only for
the parking of vehicles or building access.



      MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Drainage system carrying runoff from
drainage area of 1 or more square miles.



      MANHOLE.  Storm sewer structure through which a person may enter
to gain access to an underground storm sewer or enclosed structure.



      MANNING ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENT or MANNING'S "N" VALUE.  A
dimension less coefficient ("n") used in the Manning's equation to account
for channel wall frictional losses in steady uniform flow.



      MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Drainage system carrying runoff from a
drainage area less than 1 square mile.



      NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).  A federal program
enabling property owners to purchase flood insurance. FEMA administers the
NFIP in communities throughout the United States. The NFIP is based on an
agreement between local communities and the federal government which states
that if a community will implement floodplain management measures to reduce
future flood hazard areas, the federal government will make flood insurance
available within the community as a financial protection against flood losses
that do occur.



      NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929 (NGVD 1929).  A
nationwide federal elevation datum used to reference topographic elevations
to a known value.



      OFF-SITE.  Everything not located at or within a particular site.



      ON-SITE.  Located within the developing property where runoff
originates.



      100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



      OPEN CHANNEL.  A conveyance in which the liquid stream is not
completely enclosed by solid boundaries.



      ORIFICE.  A device which controls the rate of flow from a
detention basin.



      OUTFALL.  The point or location where storm runoff discharges
from a sewer or drain. Also applies to the outfall sewer or channel which
carries the storm runoff to the point of outfall.



      OVERLAND FLOW.  Consists of sheet flow, shallow concentrated
flow and open channel flow.



      PEAK FLOW.  The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point
in a channel or conduit resulting from a predetermined storm or flood.



      PLANIMETRIC DATA.  Horizontal measurements involving distances
or dimensions on a diagram, map, plat of survey or topographic map. Normally
given in units of feet or meters.



      PLAT OF SURVEY.  A scaled diagram showing boundaries of a tract
of land or subdivision. This may constitute a legal description of the land
and be used in lieu of a written description.



      PRIVATE DRIVE.  A private drive serves as the means of vehicular
access to the public road or street system for not more than 1 residence or
business.



      PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.  A person licensed under the laws of the
State of Indiana to practice professional engineering.



      RAINFALL INTENSITY.  The cumulative depth of rainfall occurring
over a given duration, normally expressed in inches per hour. In the rational
formula, this represents the average rainfall intensity over a duration equal
to the time of concentration for the catchment.



      REACH.  Any length of stream, channel or storm sewer.



      RECURRENCE INTERVAL.  A statistical expression of the average
time between floods equaling or exceeding a given magnitude.



      REDEVELOPMENT.  See the definition of DEVELOPMENT.



      REGULATED AREA.  All of the City of Brazil under the control of
the Common Council.



      REGULATED DRAIN.  A drain, either open channel or closed
tile/sewer, subject to the provisions of the Indiana Drainage Code, I.C.
36-9-27.



      REGULATORY FLOOD.  The discharge or elevation associated with
the 100-year flood as calculated by a method and procedure which is
acceptable to and approved by the IDNR and FEMA. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also
known as the BASE FLOOD.



      RELEASE RATE.  The amount of stormwater released from a
stormwater control facility per unit of time.



      RESERVOIR.  A natural or artificially created pond, lake or
other space used for storage, regulation or control of water. The reservoir
may be either permanent or temporary. The term is also used in the hydrologic
modeling of storage facilities.



      RETENTION FACILITY.  A facility designed to completely retain a
specified amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration or pumping. Volumes are often referred to in units
of acre-feet.



      RETURN PERIOD.  The average interval of time within which a
given rainfall event will be equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a
return period of 100 years has a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any 1 year.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land appropriated for public use as a
street, highway, driveway, alley or walkway or for any drainage or public
utility purpose of other similar uses.



      RIPRAP.  Large rock that when installed along an erodible
surface reduces the erosion and scour potential.



      RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by or resembling a stream
(including creeks and rivers).



      RUNOFF.  The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling
within a tributary drainage basin that exceed the infiltration capacity of
the soils of that basin, flow over the surface of the ground or are collected
in channels or conduits.



      RUNOFF COEFFICIENT.  A decimal fraction relating the amount of
rain which appears as runoff and reaches the storm sewer system to the total
amount of rain falling. A COEFFICIENT of 0.5 implies that 50% of the rain
falling on a given surface appears as stormwater runoff.



      SANITARY BACKUP.  The condition where a sanitary sewer reaches
capacity and surcharges into the lowest available area.



      SCOUR.  The clearing and digging action of flowing water.



      SEDIMENT.  Material of soil and rock origin, transported,
carried or deposited by water.



      SEDIMENTATION.  The process that deposits soil, debris and other
materials either on the ground surfaces or in bodies or water or watercourses.



      SEEPAGE.  The passage of water or other fluid through a porous
medium, such as the passage of water through an earth embankment or masonry
wall.



      SILT SCREEN FENCE.  A fence constructed of wood or steel
supports and either natural (e.g. burlap) or synthetic fabric stretched
across area of flow during site development to trap and retain on-site
sediment due to rainfall runoff.



      SIPHON.  A closed conduit or portion of which lies above the
hydraulic grade line, resulting in a pressure less than atmospheric and
requiring a vacuum within the conduit to start flow. A SIPHON utilizes
atmospheric pressure to affect or increase the flow of water through a
conduit. An inverted SIPHON is used to carry stormwater flow under an
obstruction such as a sanitary sewer.



      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  Those lands within the
jurisdiction of a community which are subject to inundation by the regulatory
or 100-year flood. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are usually designated on a
flood hazard boundary map as Zone A. After detailed evaluation of local
flooding characteristics, the flood insurance rate map will refine this
categorization into Zones A, AE, AH, AO and A1-30.



      SPILLWAY.  A waterway in or about a hydraulic structure designed
for the escape of excess water.



      STORM DURATION.  The length of time that water may be stored in
any stormwater control facility, computed from the time water first begins to
be stored. STORM DURATION may also refer to the length of a qualified
rainfall event (1/2-hour, 1-hour or 24-hour storms, for example).



      STORM SEWER.  A closed conduit for conveying collected
stormwaters.



      STORMWATER FACILITY.  All ditches, channels, conduits, levees,
ponds, natural or human-made impoundments, wetlands, tiles, swales, sewers
and other natural or artificial means of draining surface and subsurface
water from land.



      STORMWATER RUNOFF.  The water derived from rains falling within
a tributary basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in
channels or conduits.



      STREET.  The space or area between the lot lines, abutting upon
a right-of-way and designed as a way for vehicular traffic whether designated
as an alley, street, highway, throughway, freeway, expressway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated and which shall
include but not be limited to those illustrated in the comprehensive plan for
the City of Brazil. For the purpose of this subchapter, STREET shall be
classified as follows.



         ALLEY.  A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.



         ARTERIALS.  Those federal, state and county roads of
regional importance. These are high capacity highways moving traffic at fast
rates of speed. They provide good continuity between distant points and are
constructed to high standards. ARTERIAL HIGHWAYS provide 2 to 4 traffic lanes
and should have a median strip wherever possible. Crossing traffic from other
roads and access to abutting properties are often controlled, or partially so.



         CUL-DE-SAC STREET.  A local road with only 1 outlet,
having a paved, circular, turn-around at the closed end.



         FREEWAYS.  Limited-access highways which carry large
volumes of interstate traffic and have more importance regionally than
locally. They often contain 4 or more moving lanes and permit a continuous
high speed traffic flow. These highways have a high order of design and
construction requirements.



         LOCAL ROADS.  Low capacity and low speed roads whose
function is to provide direct access to homes and property. Through traffic
and heavy use of these roads should be discouraged. To the extent possible,
residence driveways and ingress and egress points to other uses or structures
should be oriented to the local roads rather than to the arterials or
collectors.



         LOCAL SUBDIVISION STREETS.  Low capacity and low speed
streets within major subdivisions whose function is to provide direct access
to homes and property. Through traffic and heavy use of these streets should
be discouraged.



         MAJOR COLLECTOR HIGHWAYS.  Have less regional importance
than the arterial highways and more county or inter-county significance. They
are medium-capacity highways moving traffic at relatively fast rates of
speed. They include both state designated routes and county roads. MAJOR
COLLECTOR HIGHWAYS provide 2 traffic lanes.



         MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS.  Local roads which are parallel
to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.



         MINOR COLLECTOR ROADS.  Moderate capacity thoroughfares
designed to accommodate relatively low speed traffic. They should, however,
provide a smooth flow of traffic. Two moving lanes, unseparated, but wider
than local road lanes are required.



      STRUCTURE.  Refers to a structure that is principally above
ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid
storage tank, a manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also
includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180
days.



      STRUCTURAL ENGINEER.  A person licensed under the laws of the
State of Indiana to engage in the designing or supervising of construction,
enlargement or alteration of structures or any part thereof, for others, to
be constructed by persons other than himself or herself.



      STRUCTURAL FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT MEASURES.  Those physically or
engineering measures employed to modify the ways floods behave, e.g. dams,
dikes, levees, channel enlargements or diversions.



      SUBAREA/SUBBASIN.  Portion of a watershed divided into
homogenous drainage units which can be modeled for purposes of determining
runoff rates. The SUBAREAS/SUBBASINS have distinct boundaries, as defined by
the topography of the area.



      SUMP PUMP.  A small pump that discharges seepage from foundation
footing drains.



      SURCHARGE.  Backup of water sanitary or storm sewer system in
excess of the design capacity of the system.



      TAILWATER.  The water surface elevation at the downstream side
of a hydraulic structure (ie. culvert, bridge, weir, dam or the like).



      THALWEG.  The deepest point of an open channel.



      TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC).  The travel time of a particle of
water from the most hydraulically remote point in the contributing area to
the point under study. This can be considered the sum of an overland flow
time and times of travel in street gutters, storm sewers, drainage channels
and all other drainage ways.



      TOPOGRAPHIC MAP.  Graphical portrayal of the topographic
features of a land area, showing both the horizontal distances between the
features and their elevations above a given datum.



      TOPOGRAPHY.  The representation of a portion of the earth's
surface showing natural and human-made features of a given locality such as
rivers, streams, ditches, lakes, roads, buildings and most importantly,
variations in ground elevations for the terrain of the area.



      TRIBUTARY.  Based on the size of the contributing drainage area,
a smaller watercourse which flows into a larger watercourse.



      UNDERDRAIN.  A small-diameter perforated pipe that allows the
bottom of a detention basin, channel, swale or street to drain.



      WATERCOURSE.  Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural
or human-made drainage way in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters
flow.



      WATERSHED.  The land area drained by contributing water to a
specific point that could be along a stream, lake or other stormwater
facilities. Watersheds are often broken down into subareas for the purpose of
hydrologic modeling.



      WATERSHED AREA.  The total area from which surface runoff is
carried away by a drainage system.



      WEIR.  A device which is used to restrict the flow of water
thereby limiting the discharge rates. A WEIR can also facilitate calculation
of measurement of the discharge rates. These are often used to control the
rate of flow out of stormwater storage facilities.



      WET- BOTTOM RETENTION FACILITY.  A facility designed to retain a
permanent pool of water after having provided its planned detention of runoff
during a storm event.



      WETLANDS.  Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions and/or those wetland
areas that are under the COE jurisdiction.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.05  GENERAL STORMWATER CONTROL POLICY.



   (A)   It is recognized that, with the possible exception of the
major watercourses, the smaller streams and drainage channels serving the
City of Brazil may not have sufficient capacity to receive and convey
stormwater runoff resulting from continued urbanization.



   (B)   Accordingly, the storage and controlled release rate of excess
stormwater runoff shall be required for all development, as defined in §
51.04, that is located within the Brazil city limits.



      (1)   General release rates.



         (a)   In general, the release rates of stormwater from
developments and redevelopments shall be:



 


Post-Developed Peak Rate

 
Must Not Exceed
 
Pre-Developed Peak Rate


10-year frequency storm
 
must not exceed
 
2-year frequency storm


100-year frequency storm
 
must not exceed
 
10-year frequency storm



 



         (b)   That is, the release rates for developments and
redevelopments up to and including the 10-year return period storm may not
exceed the pre-developed 2-year return period stormwater runoff rate. The
release rate for developments for the 11-100-year return period storm shall
not exceed the pre-developed peak 10-year return period rate.



      (2)   Downstream restrictions.



         (a)   In the event the natural downstream channel or
storm sewer system is inadequate to accommodate the release rate provided
above, then the allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate
permitted by the capacity of the receiving downstream channel or storm sewer
system. Additional detention, as determined by the city engineer, shall be
required to store that portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the
receiving sewers or waterways.



         (b)   If more than 1 detention/retention facility is
involved in the development of the area upstream of the limiting restriction
and the outlets leave the development site at different locations, the
allowable release rate from any 1 detention basin shall be in a direct
proportion to the ratio of its drainage area to the drainage area of the
entire watershed upstream of the restriction.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.06  DETERMINATION OF IMPACT DRAINAGE AREAS.



   (A)   The city engineer is authorized, but not required, to classify
certain geographical areas as impact drainage areas and to enact and
promulgate regulations which are generally applied. In determining impact
drainage areas, the city engineer shall consider factors as topography, soil
type, capacity of existing legal drains and distance from adequate drainage
facility.



   (B)   The following areas shall be designated as impact drainage
areas, unless good reason for not including them is presented to the city
engineer:



      (1)   A floodway or floodplain as designated by the
Subdivision Chapter of the City of Brazil;



      (2)   Land within 75 feet of each bank of any regulated ditch;
and



      (3)   Land within 75 feet of the center line of any regulated
drain tile.



   (C)   Land where there is not an adequate outlet, taking into
consideration the capacity and depth of the outlet, may be designated as an
impact drainage area by resolution of the Common Council. Special
requirements for development within any impact drainage area shall be
included in the resolution.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.07  INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General. The following information shall either accompany or
be presented on the plans of all development projects. All plan sheets and
other information and data prepared shall be stamped by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor engaged in storm drainage design.



   (B)   Existing condition information (to be shown on submitted
plans):



      (1)   A title sheet shall be included with the following
information: project name and location map, name, address, telephone number
and seal of the registered professional engineer or licensed/registered land
surveyor preparing the plans;



      (2)   Legal description of site;



      (3)   A topographic map of the land to be developed and
adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or drainage of the
development. The contour intervals shall be 1 foot when slopes are less or
equal to than 2% and shall be 2 feet when slopes exceed 2%. All elevations
shall be given in either National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD) or
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD);



         (a)   If the project site is less than or equal to 2
acres in total land area, the topographic map shall include all topography of
land surrounding the site to a distance of at least 100 feet; and



         (b)   If the project site is greater than 2 acres in
total land area, the topographic map shall include all topography of land
surrounding the site to a distance of at least 200 feet.



      (4)   Adequate number of benchmarks shown with elevations
referenced to NGVD, NAVD, to facilitate checking of elevations without more
than 1 setup of a surveyor's level, except for large development sites where
additional setups may be warranted;



      (5)   The location of existing streams and other stormwater
runoff channels;



      (6)   One or more typical cross sections of all existing
channels or other open drainage facilities. Cross sections must be
represented perpendicular to the expected flow path and the location
indicated on the map;



      (7)   Spot elevations shown at drainage break points;



      (8)   Normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and
detention/retention facilities, their floodplains and direction of inflow and
outflow;



      (9)   The size and location of regulated drains, farm drains,
inlets and outfalls, if any of record. Include the elevations of tile outlet
inverts;



      (10)   Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and outfalls, if
any of record;



      (11)   Septic tank systems, disposal field and outlet, if any
of record;



      (12)   Seeps, springs, flowing and other wells, that are
visible or of record;



      (13)   Roads, rights-of-way, building set backs, drainage,
regulated drain and overhead or underground utility easements;



      (14)   The extent of the floodplains for any stream or channel
(draining more than 640 acres or 1 square mile) at the established 100-year
flood elevation per FEMA maps, IDNR Recommendation Letter, or engineer's
calculations and the limits of the regulatory floodway, all properly
identified and sources noted. NOTE: The regulatory floodway may be measured
from the effective FEMA map; however, floodplain boundaries shall be
determined based on the 100-year flood elevation/ profile and the existing
topography on the map (flood insurance will still be required on those
portions of the FEMA designated floodplain until the applicant requests and
receives a LOMR/LOMA from FEMA);



      (15)   The extent and location of any current wetlands area
located on the subject property. A plan must be submitted which details how
the wetland loss will be mitigated. The developer is responsible for all
necessary coordination and compliance with IDNR or COE regulations; and



      (16)   Each plan sheet shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size
and include the following:



         (a)   A title block located in the lower right hand
corner of each sheet that includes the project name, job number, sheet title
(geometric grading and the like), sheet number, date of preparation and
latest revision date and description;



         (b)   Map scale (preferably with a scale between 1
inch=20 feet and 1 inch=100 feet);



         (c)   A legend clearly identifying all symbols indicated
on each sheet; and



         (d)   North arrow.



   (C)   Existing condition information (to be included within a report
or as a separate exhibit):



      (1)   Soil names and their hydrologic classification for the
proposed development when hydrologic methods requiring soils information are
used;



      (2)   Each upstream, off-site drainage area tributary to the
subject site on USGS quadrangle maps or other more detailed topographic maps;



      (3)   Watershed boundary delineation for each stormwater
facility (storm sewer, culvert, swale, detention basin and the like) on the
subject property; and



      (4)   Copy of the effective FEMA map, annotated to show the
project location and property boundaries in relation to the regulatory
floodplain and floodway.



   (D)   Proposed condition information to be shown on submitted plans
(in addition to previous plan requirements):



      (1)   Plan to convey upstream, off-site runoff through or
around the subject property;



      (2)   Proposed contours and where they tie into existing
contours;



      (3)   Location and percentage of impervious surfaces expected
when the development is completed;



      (4)   Depth and amount of storage required by design of the
new facilities;



      (5)   Proposed layout and design of storm sewers, other storm
drains including the outfall and outlet locations and (approximate) invert
elevations, the receiving stream or channel and its 100-year return period
water elevation;



      (6)   Layout of swales which collect runoff from on-site
and/or off-site watersheds;



      (7)   Existing detention/retention facilities to be
maintained, enlarged or otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be built;



      (8)   Proposed culverts and bridges; include elevations,
waterway openings;



      (9)   Identification of overland flow routes to
detention/retention facilities;



      (10)   New channels or other open drainage facilities to be
constructed, their locations, cross sections and profiles. Cross sections
should be represented perpendicular to the expected flow path;



      (11)   Interim drainage plan which is to be incorporated into
the development pending completion of the development and the final drainage
plan;



      (12)   All proposed underground and overhead utility and
drainage easements;



      (13)   Parts of the proposed street system where pavements are
planned to be depressed sufficiently to convey or temporarily store overflow
from storm sewers and over the curb runoff resulting from the heavier
rainstorms and the outlets for overflow;



      (14)   Slope, type and size of all sewers and other waterways.
Plan and profile of all storm sewers and culverts must also be submitted; and



      (15)   Erosion control plan.



   (E)   Proposed condition information (to be included within a report
or as a separate exhibit). The report should be comprehensive and detail all
the steps which the designer took during the design process and how the
design satisfies the requirements of this chapter. The report should include:



      (1)   A description of the present land use as well as
proposed land use;



      (2)   Hydrologic and hydraulic information detailing existing
and proposed drainage patterns on the subject site, along with any off-site
drainage entering the site. All hydrologic and hydraulic computation should
be included in the report. These calculations should include, but not be
limited to: development of runoff curve numbers or runoff coefficients,
runoff calculations, stage-discharge, relationships for detention/retention
facility outfalls, storage volume, times of concentration;



      (3)   Watershed boundary delineation for each proposed
stormwater facility (storm sewer, culverts, swale, detention basin and the
like);



      (4)   For all detention/retention facilities, a plot or
tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and
a plot or tabulations of the facility outfall rates for those water surface
elevations;



      (5)   Copies of all computer model runs used in the drainage
analyses. These computer runs should include both the model inputs and the
outputs. A floppy diskette with input files may expedite the review process;
and



      (6)   Discussion of significant drainage problems associated
with the project and assumptions associated with procedures used to evaluate
and propose solutions to these problems.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.08  SUBMITTAL AND CONSIDERATION; ROLES OF CITY ENGINEER AND COUNCIL.



   (A)   Two sets of preliminary, proposed final drainage plans and/or
construction plans as detailed in § 51.07 shall be submitted to the city
engineer. All preliminary plans, final plans and construction plans shall be
reviewed by the city engineer for compliance with the standards of this
chapter.



   (B)   Upon completion of their review, the city engineer may either
approve or deny each project. If the city engineer approves a project, than 3
copies of the approved project plans will receive the signature and approval
stamp of both the city engineer. Two copies of the plans will be returned to
the applicant, 1 copy will be kept on file at the office of the city engineer.



   (C)   The city engineer, as appointee of the Common Council, is
authorized to review engineering summaries of projects or other written
explanations for a variance to the requirements of this chapter and based
upon the same, make a recommendation to the Common Council concerning the
variance. The Common Council may grant exemptions from any and all
requirements of this chapter and/or waive any requirements of this chapter.
Any applicant or other party affected by any approval or denial of the
drainage permit may appeal the decision to the Common Council.



   (D)   Where the outfall from the stormwater drainage system of any
developer flows through real estate owned by other landowners prior to
reaching a regulated drain or natural waterway, no approval shall be granted
for a stormwater drainage system until all impacted owners either consent in
writing to the use of their real estate or are notified of the proposal and
their rights to appeal any approval of the design. Proof of this notification
must be submitted to the city engineer.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.09  METHODOLOGY FOR DETERMINATION OF PRE AND POST-DEVELOPMENT RUNOFF
QUANTITIES.



   (A)   Runoff quantities shall be computed for the area of the parcel
under development plus the area of the watershed flowing into the parcel
under development.



   (B)   The quantity of runoff which is generated as the result of a
given rainfall intensity may be calculated as follows:



      (1)   Development sites less than or equal to 5 acres in size,
with a contributing drainage area less than or equal to 50 acres and no
depressional storage. The rational method may be used.



         (a)   In the rational method, the peak rate of runoff,
Q, in cubic feet per second (cfs) is computed as:



 



 
 
Q=CIA


Where:
 
C=
 
Runoff coefficient, replacing the characteristics of the drainage area and
defined as the ratio of runoff to rainfall.


I=
 
Average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to the
time of concentration (tc) for a selected rainfall frequency.


A=
 
Tributary drainage area in acres.




 



         (b)   Values for the runoff coefficient "C" are provided
in Tables 1 and 2, which show values for different types of surfaces and
local soil characteristics. The composite "C" value used for a given drainage
area with various surface types shall be the weighted average value for the
total area calculated from a breakdown of individual areas having different
surface types.



         (c)   In the instance of undeveloped land situated in an
upstream area, a coefficient or coefficients shall be used which are related
to the use or uses which can be reasonably anticipated after development
occurs. Interpolation, extrapolation and adjustment for local conditions
shall be based on engineering experience and judgment.



         (d)   Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the
rainfall frequency data shown in § 51.10 below. In general, the time of
concentration (tc) methodology to be used for all stormwater management
projects within the City of Brazil shall be as outlined in the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA)-NRCS TR-55 manual.



         (e)   In urban or developed areas, the methodology to be
used shall be the sum of the inlet time and flow time in the stormwater
facility from the most remote part of the drainage area to the point under
consideration. The flow time in the storm sewers may be estimated by distance
in feet divided by velocity of flow in feet per second. The velocity shall be
determined by the Manning's equation (see § 51.11). Inlet time is the
combined time required for the runoff to reach the inlet of the storm sewer.
It includes overland flow time and flow time through established surface
drainage channels such as swales, ditches and sheet flow across areas such as
lawns, fields and other graded surfaces.



      (2)   Development sites greater than 5 acres in size or
contributing drainage area greater than 50 acres or with significant
depressional storage.



         (a)   The runoff rate for these development sites and
contributing drainage areas shall be determined by a computer model that can
generate hydrographs based on the NRCS TR-55 time of concentration and curve
number calculation methodologies and the huff third quartile (50%) rainfall
distribution.



         (b)   A sample time of concentration sheet can be found
in figure 1 and TR-55 curve numbers are given in Tables 5a-5d. Hydrologic
soil groups for each soil present in the City of Brazil are given in Table 6.
Rainfall depths for various frequencies and durations shall be taken from
Table 7.



         (c)   The huff third quartile (50%) is found in Table 8.
Examples of computer models that can generate hydrographs include TR-20
(NRCS) and HEC-1 (COE).



         (d)   Other models may be acceptable and should be
approved by the city engineer prior to their utilization.



      (3)   Development sites with drainage areas greater than or
equal to 1 square mile. For the design of any major drainage system as
defined in § 51.04, the discharge must be obtained from the IDNR. Other
portions of the site must use the discharge methodology in the applicable
section of this subchapter.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.10  METHODOLOGY FOR DETERMINATION OF DETENTION STORAGE VOLUMES.



   (A)   Development sites less than or equal to 5 acres in size, with
a contributing drainage area less than of equal to 50 acres and no
depressional storage.



      (1)   The required volume of stormwater storage may be
calculated using the rational method and based on the runoff from a 100-year
return period storm. A computer model that can generate hydrographs based on
the NRCS TR-55 time of concentration and curve number calculation
methodologies may also be used with the duration storm that produces the
highest runoff volume.



      (2)   The following 11-step procedure, based on the rational
method, may be used to determine the required volume of storage.
Alternatively, the worksheet labeled as Figure 2 may be completed to
determine the required volume of storage.



 


Step

 

Procedure






1.

 
Determine total drainage area in acres "A"



2.

 
Determine composite runoff coefficient "G" based on existing land use



3.

 
Determine time of concentration "t" in minutes based on existing conditions



4.

 
Determine rainfall intensity “I” in inches per hour, based on time of
concentration and using data given in Table 3 for the 2-year/10-year return
periods



5.

 
Compute runoff based on existing land use and 2-year/10-year return periods;
Qu=CuIuAu



6.

 
Determine composite runoff coefficient "Cd" based on developed conditions and
a 100-year return period



7.

 
Determine 100-year return rainfall intensity "Id" for various storm durations
"td" up through the time of concentration for the developed area using Table
3. If the desired time of concentration is not listed in Table 3, it can be
calculated using the parameters found in Table 4 with the following equation:
Id=c(Tr) a/(t+d)b; where: c, a, d and B are regional coefficients determined
by rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curves, Tr is the recurrence
interval (in years), and t corresponds to the time of concentration (in hours)



8.

 
Determine developed inflow rates "Qd" for various storm durations times "td"
up through the time of concentration of the developed area; Qd=Cd1dAd



9.

 
Compute a storage rate "S (td)" for various storm durations "td" up through
the time of concentration of the developed area; S (td)=Qd-Qu



10.

 
Compute required storage volume "Sr" in acre-feet for each storm duration
"td;" this assumes a triangular hydrograph of duration (2*td) hours with a
peak flow of S (td) at td hours



11.

 
Select largest storage volume computed in Step 10 for any storm duration "td"
for detention basin design




 



   (B)   Development sites greater than 5 acres in size or contributing
drainage area greater than 50 acres or with significant depressional storage.
All runoff detention storage calculations for these development sites shall
be prepared using a computer model that can generate hydrographs based on the
NRCS TR-55 time of concentration and curve number calculation methodologies.
The huff third quartile (50%) rainfall distribution and that storm duration
up to and including the 24-hour storm duration that gives the highest
required storage volume shall be utilized. The allowable release rates shall
be based on the storm durations which give the greatest discharge in the
pre-developed condition. Examples of computer models that can generate 
hydrographs include TR-20 (NRCS) and HEC-1 (COE). Other models may be
acceptable and should be approved by the city engineer prior to their
utilization.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.11  STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   General. All storm sewers, whether private or public, and
whether constructed on private or public property shall conform to the design
standards and other requirements contained herein.



   (B)   Design storm frequencies.



      (1)   (a)   All storm sewers, inlets, catch basins and
street gutters shall accommodate, as a minimum, peak runoff from a 10-year
return frequency storm. Additional discharges to storm sewer systems allowed
in this division must be considered in all design calculations.



         (b)   For rational method analysis, the duration shall
be equal to the time of concentration for the drainage area. In computer
based analysis, the duration is as noted in the applicable methodology
associated with the computer program.



      (2)   Culverts shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff
from a 24-hour, 50-year frequency storm when crossing under a road which is
part of the INDOT Rural Functional Classification System or is classified as
freeway, arterials and/or collectors by the City of Brazil Zoning Ordinance
or provides the only access to and from and from any portion of any
commercial or residential developments.



      (3)   For portions of the system considered minor drainage
systems, the allowable spread of water on collector streets is limited to
maintaining 2 clear 10-foot moving lanes of traffic. One lane is to be
maintained on local roads, while other access lanes (such as a subdivision
cul-de-sac) can have a water spread equal to 1/2 of their total width.



      (4)   Facilities functioning as a major drainage system as
defined in § 51.04 must also meet IDNR design standards.



   (C)   Manning's equation.



      (1)   Determination of hydraulic capacity for storm sewers
sized by the rational method analysis must be done using Manning's equation.



 



Where:
 
V=(1.486/n) R 2/3 S 1/2


Then:
 
Q=VA


Where:
 
Q=capacity in cubic feet per second


V=mean velocity of flow in feet per second


A=cross sectional area in square feet


R=hydraulic radius in feet


s=slope of the energy grade line in feet per foot


n=Manning’s "n" or roughness coefficient




 



      (2)   The hydraulic radius, R, is defined as the cross
sectional area of flow divided by the wetted flow surface or wetted
perimeter. Allowable "n" values are maximum permissible velocities for storm
sewer materials are listed in Table 9.



   (D)   Backwater method for pipe system analysis.



      (1)   For hydraulic analysis of existing or proposed storm
drains which possess submerged outfalls, a more sophisticated design/analysis
methodology than Manning’s equation will be required. The backwater
analysis method provides a more accurate estimate of pipe flow by calculating
individual head losses in pipe systems which are surcharged and/or have
submerged outlets. These head losses are added to a known downstream water
surface elevation to give a design water surface elevation for a given flow
at the desired upstream location. Total head losses may be determined as
follows: Total head loss=frictional loss+manhole loss+velocity head
loss+junction loss.



      (2)   Various computer modeling programs such as HYDRA,
ILLUDRAIN and STORMCAD are available for analysis of storm drains under these
conditions. Computer models to be utilized, other than those listed, must be
approved by the city engineer.



   (E)   Minimum size for storm sewers. The minimum diameter of all
storm sewers shall be 12 inches. The rate of release for detention storage
shall be controlled by an orifice plate or other device, subject to approval
of the city engineer, when the minimum 12-inch diameter pipe will not limit
the rate of release to the required amount.



   (F)   Pipe cover and grade. Sewer grade shall be so that, in
general, a minimum of 1-1/2 feet of cover is maintained over the top of the
pipe. If the pipe is to be placed under pavement, then the minimum pipe cover
shall be 2 feet from the top of the pavement to the top of the pipe. Pipe
cover less than the minimum may be used only upon written approval from the
city engineer. Uniform slopes shall be maintained between inlets, manholes
and inlets to manholes. Final grade shall be set with full consideration of
the capacity required, sedimentation problems and other design parameters.
Minimum and maximum allowable slopes shall be those capable of producing
velocities of between 2.5 and 15 feet per second, respectively, when the
sewer is flowing full. Maximum permissible velocities for various storm sewer
materials are listed in Table 9.



   (G)   Alignment. Storm sewers shall be straight between manholes
and/or inlets.



   (H)   Manholes/inlets.



      (1)   Manholes and/or inlets shall be installed to provide
human access to continuous underground storm sewers for the purpose of
inspection and maintenance. The casting access minimum inside diameter shall
be no less than 22 inches or a rectangular opening of no less than 22 inches.



      (2)   Manholes shall be provided at the following locations:



         (a)   Where 2 or more storm sewers converge;



         (b)   Where pipe size changes;



         (c)   Where a change in horizontal alignment occurs;



         (d)   Where a change in pie slope occurs; and



         (e)   At intervals in straight sections of sewer, not to
exceed the maximum allowed.



      (3)   The maximum distance between storm sewer manholes shall
be as follows:



 


Size of Pipe (Inches)

 

Maximum Distance (Feet)




12 through 42

 

400




48 and larger

 

600




 



      (4)   In addition to the above requirements, a minimum drop of
0.1 foot through manholes should be provided. When changing pipe size, match
crowns of pipes. Pipe slope should not be so steep that inlets surcharge
(i.e. hydraulic grade line below rim elevation).



      (5)   Manhole/inlet sizing shall be as follows:



 


Depth of Structure

 

Minimum Diameter

 

Minimum Square Opening






0-3 feet

 

24 inches

 

24 inches x 24 inches




3-5 feet

 

36 inches

 

36 inches x 36 inches




5 or more feet

 

48 inches

 

48 inches x 48 inches





 



   (I)   Inlet sizing and spacing. Inlets or drainage structures shall
be utilized to collect surface water through grated openings and convey it to
storm sewers, channels or culverts. The inlet grate opening provided shall be
adequate to pass the design 25-year flow with 50% of the inlet areas clogged.
An overload channel from sag inlets to the overflow channel or basin shall be
provided at sag inlets, so that the maximum depth of water that might be
ponded in the street sag shall not exceed 6 inches during the 25-year
frequency storm event. Inlet design and spacing may be done using the
hydraulic equations by manufacturers or office/weir equations. Use of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers HEC-12 computer program is also an acceptable
method. Gutter spread on continuous grades may be determined by using the
Manning's equation, or by using Figure 3.



   (J)   Workmanship. The specifications for the construction of storm
sewers shall not be less stringent than those set forth in the latest edition
of the INDOT, "Standard Specifications." Additionally, ductile iron pipe
shall be laid in accordance with American Water Works Association (AWWA)
C-600 and clay pipe shall be laid in accordance with either American Society
of Testing Materials (ASTM) C-12 or the appropriate American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) specifications. Variation
from these standards must be justified and receive written approval from the
city engineer.



   (K)   Materials.



      (1)   Storm sewer manholes and inlets shall be constructed of
cast in place concrete or precast reinforced concrete. Materials and
construction shall conform to the latest edition of the Indiana Department of
Transportation (INDOT) "Standard Specifications" § 720.



      (2)   Pipe and fittings used in storm sewer construction shall
be extra-strength clay pipe (ASTM C-12), ductile iron pipe (AWWA C-151), poly
vinyl chloride pipe (AASHTO M252), polyethylene pipe (AASHTO M252 or AASHTO
M292) or concrete pipe (AASHTO M170). Other pipe and fittings not specified
herein or in §§ 907-908 of the latest edition of the INDOT "Standard
Specifications" may be used only when specifically authorized by the city
engineer. Pipe joints shall be flexible and watertight and shall conform to
the requirements of § 906, of the latest edition of the INDOT "Standard
Specifications."



   (L)   Special hydraulic structures. Special hydraulic structures
required to control the flow of water in storm runoff drainage systems
include junction chambers, drop manholes, inverted siphons, stilling basins
and other special structures. The use of these structures shall be limited to
those locations justified by prudent planning and by careful and thorough
hydraulic engineering analysis. Certification of special structures by a
certified structural engineer may also be required.



   (M)   Connections to storm sewer systems.



      (1)   To allow any connections to the storm sewer system,
provisions for the connections shall be shown in the drainage calculations
for the system. Specific language shall be provided in the protective
covenants, on the record plat or with the parcel deed or record, noting the
ability or inability of the system to accommodate any permitted connections,
for example, sump pumps and footing drains.



         (a)   Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge
ground waters or other stormwaters shall be connected to the storm sewer
where possible or discharged into a designated storm drainage channel. Sump
pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary
sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be used
for 1 function only, either the discharge of stormwater or the discharge of
sanitary sewage.



         (b)   Footing drains shall be connected to storm sewers
where possible or designated storm drainage channels. No footing drains or
drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.



         (c)   No roof downspouts, roof drains nor roof drainage
piping shall be connected to the storm drainage system. No down spouts or
roof drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewers.



         (d)   Basement floor drains shall be connected to the
sanitary sewers.



      (2)   In addition, none of the above mentioned devices shall
be connected to any street underdrains.



   (N)   Maintenance responsibilities. Maintenance of stormwater
facilities during construction and thereafter, shall be the responsibility of
the land developer/owner. Assignment of responsibility for maintaining
facilities serving 1 or more lot(s) or holding(s) shall be documented by
appropriate covenants to property deeds and documented in sales agreements,
unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.12  OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN STANDARDS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   General. All open channels, whether private or public, and
whether constructed on private or public land, shall conform to the design
standards and other design requirements contained herein.



   (B)   Design storm frequencies.



      (1)   All open channels and swales shall accommodate, as a
minimum, peak runoff from a 10-year return frequency storm. For rational
method analysis, the storm duration shall be equal to the time of
concentration for the drainage area. In computer-based analysis, the duration
is as noted in the applicable methodology associated with the computer
program.



      (2)   Open channels with a carrying capacity of more than 30
cfs at bank-full stage shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff for a
24-hour, 5-year return frequency storm within the drainage easement.



      (3)   Open channel facilities functioning as a major drainage
system as defined in § 51.04 must also meet IDNR design standards.



   (C)   Manning's equation.



      (1)   The waterway for channels shall be determined using
Manning’s equation, where:



         (a)   Q = (1.486/n) A R2/3 S 1/2;



         (b)   Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs); and



         (c)   A = Waterway area of channel in square feet.



      (2)   Parameters R, S and n are explained in § 51.11.



   (D)   Channel cross-section and grade.



      (1)   The required channel cross-section and grade are
determined by the design capacity, the material in which the channel is to be
constructed and the requirements for maintenance. A minimum depth may be
required to provide adequate outlets for subsurface drains, tributary ditches
or streams. The channel grade shall be so that the velocity in the channel is
high enough to prevent siltation but low enough to prevent erosion.
Velocities less than 2 feet per second are not acceptable, as siltation will
take place and ultimately reduce the channel cross-section. The maximum
permissible velocities in vegetated-lined channels are shown in Table 10. In
addition to existing runoffs, the channel design should incorporate increased
runoff due to the proposed development.



      (2)   Where depth of design flow is slightly below critical
depth, channels shall have freeboard adequate to cope with the effect of
hydraulic jumps.



      (3)   Minimum swale slopes are 0.3%. All flow shall be
confined to the specific easements associated with each rear and side lot
swale that are part of the minor drainage system. Swales with slopes less
than 0.8% shall have tile underdrains to dry the swales.



      (4)   If roadside ditches are used rather than storm sewers,
the bottom of the ditch should be low enough to install adequately sized
driveway culverts without creating "speed bumps." The driveway culvert
inverts shall be designed to adequately consider upstream and downstream
culvert elevations.



      (5)   Flow of an open channel into a closed system is
prohibited, unless quantity and head loss computations demonstrate the closed
conduit to be capable of carrying all the open channel flow with no reduction
of velocity.



   (E)   Side slopes.



      (1)   Earthen channel side slopes shall be no steeper than 3
horizontal to 1 vertical (3:1). Flatter slopes may be required to prevent
erosion and for ease of maintenance.



      (2)   Where channels will be lined, side slopes shall be no
steeper than 1-1/2 horizontal to 1 vertical (1.5:1) with adequate provisions
made for weep holes.



      (3)   Side slopes steeper than 1-1/2 horizontal to 1 vertical
(1.5:1) may be used for lined channels provided that the side lining is
designed and constructed as a structural retaining wall with provisions for
live and dead load surcharge.



      (4)   When the design discharge produces a depth of greater
than 3 feet in the channel, appropriate safety precautions shall be added to
the design criteria based on reasonably anticipated safety needs.



   (F)   Channel stability.



      (1)   Characteristics of a stable channel are:



         (a)   It neither promotes sedimentation nor degrades the
channel bottom and sides beyond tolerable limits;



         (b)   The channel banks do not erode to the extent that
the channel cross-section is changed appreciably;



         (c)   Excessive sediment bars do not develop;



         (d)   Excessive erosion does not occur around culverts,
bridges, outfalls or elsewhere; and



         (e)   Gullies do not form or enlarge due to the entry of
uncontrolled flow to the channel.



      (2)   Channel stability shall be determined for an aged
condition and the velocity shall be based on the design flow or the bankfull
flow, whichever is greater, using an "n" value for the various channel
linings as shown in Table 10 of this subchapter. In no case is it necessary
to check channel stability for discharges greater than that from a 100-year
frequency storm.



      (3)   Channel stability shall be checked for conditions
immediately after construction. For this stability analysis, the velocity
shall be calculated for the expected flow from a 10-year frequency storm on
the watershed, or the bankfull flow, whichever is smaller, and the "n" value
for the newly constructed channels in the fine-grained soils and sands may be
determined in accordance with the "National Engineering Handbook 5,
Supplement B, Soil Conservation Service" and shall not exceed 0.025. This
reference may be obtained by contacting the National Technical Information
Service in Springfield, Virginia at 703-487-4650. The allowable velocity in
the newly constructed channel may be increased by a maximum of 20% to reflect
the effects of vegetation to be established under the following conditions:



         (a)   The soil and site in which the channel is to be
constructed are suitable for rapid establishment and support of erosion
controlling vegetation;



         (b)   Species of erosion controlling vegetation adapted
to the area, and proven methods of establishment are shown; and



         (c)   The channel design includes detailed plans for
establishment of vegetation on the channel side slopes.



   (G)   Drainage of waterways. Vegetated waterways that are subject to
low flows of long duration or where wet conditions prevail shall be drained
with a tile system or by other means such as paved gutters. Tile lines may be
outletted through a drop structure at the ends of the waterway or through a
standard tile outlet.



   (H)   Appurtenant structures.



      (1)   The design of channels will include provisions for
operation and maintenance and the proper functioning of all channels,
laterals, travelways and structures associated with the project. Recessed
inlets and structures needed for entry of surface and subsurface flow into
channels without significant erosion or degradation shall be included in the
design of channel improvements. The design will also provide for necessary
flood gates, water level control devices and any other appurtenance structure
affecting the functioning of the channels and the attainment of the purpose
of which they are built.



      (2)   The effects of channel improvements on existing
culverts, bridges, buried cables, pipelines and inlet structures for surface
and subsurface drainage on the channel being improved and laterals thereto
shall be evaluated to determine the need for modification or replacement.
Culverts and bridges which are modified or added as part of the channel
improvement projects shall meet reasonable standards for the type of
structure, and shall have a minimum capacity equal to the design discharge or
governmental agency design requirements, whichever is greater.



   (I)   Deposition of spoil. Spoil material resulting from clearing,
grubbing and channel excavation shall be disposed of in a manner which will:



      (1)   Minimize overbank wash;



      (2)   Provide for the free flow of water between the channel
and floodplain boundary unless the valley routing and water surface profiles
are based on continuous dikes being installed;



      (3)   Not hinder the development of travelways for maintenance;



      (4)   Leave the right-of-way in the best condition feasible,
consistent with the project purposes, for productive use by the owner; and



      (5)   Be approved by the IDNR or COE, whichever is applicable,
if deposited in the floodway.



   (J)   Materials.



      (1)   Materials acceptable for use as channel lining are:



         (a)   Grass;



         (b)   Revetment riprap;



         (c)   Concrete;



         (d)   Hand laid riprap;



         (e)   Precast cement concrete riprap;



         (f)   Grouted riprap;



         (g)   Gabions; and



         (h)   Straw or coconut matting (only until grass is
established).



      (2)   Other lining materials must be approved in writing by
the city engineer. Materials shall comply with the latest edition of the
INDOT "Standard Specifications."



   (K)   Maintenance responsibilities.



      (1)   Maintenance of open channels during construction and
thereafter, shall be the responsibility of the land developer/owner.



      (2)   Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities
serving 1 or more lot(s) or holding(s) shall be documented by appropriate
covenants to property deeds and documented in sales agreements, unless
responsibilities formally accepted by a public body.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.13  STORMWATER DETENTION DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   General. The following shall govern the design of any
improvement with respect to the detention of stormwater runoff. Basins shall
be constructed to temporarily detain the stormwater runoff which exceeds the
maximum peak release rate authorized by this chapter. The required volume of
storage provided in these basins, together with storage as may be authorized
in other onsite facilities, shall be sufficient to control excess runoff from
the 10-year or 100-year storm as explained below in division (D) below.



   (B)   Additional information. Also, basins shall be constructed to
provide adequate capacity to allow for sediment accumulation resulting from
development and to permit the pond to function for reasonable periods between
cleanings.



   (C)   Acceptable detention facilities. The increased stormwater
runoff resulting from a proposed development should be detained onsite by the
provisions of appropriate wet bottom or dry bottom detention facilities,
parking lots or other acceptable techniques. Measures which retard the rate
of overland flow and the velocity in runoff channels shall also be used to
partially control runoff rates.



   (D)   Allowable release rates. Control devices shall limit the
discharge to a rate so that the release rate from the site is no greater than
the 2-year predeveloped rate for 0-10 year return interval storms and the
10-year predeveloped rate for 11-100 year return interval storms. That is,
all storms up to and including the 10-year return period storm must be
detained at a release rate below the predeveloped peak 2-year return period
stormwater runoff rate. The release rate for developments and redevelopments
for the 11-100 year return period storms shall not exceed the predeveloped
peak 10-year return period rate. As stated in § 51.06, the allowable release
rates may be reduced from these levels if downstream restrictions exist.



   (E)   Drainage system overflow design. Drainage systems, including
all ditches, channels, conduits, swales and the like, shall have adequate
capacity to convey the stormwater runoff from all upstream tributary areas
(off-site land areas) through the development under consideration for a
100-year return period design storm calculated on the basis of the upstream
land use in its present state of development. Swales between privately owned
residential lots shall not be used to convey the above referenced stormwater
runoff unless the discharge paths are confined within the drainage easements
and/or common areas. In the case of existing upstream detention, an allowance
equivalent to the reduction in flow rate provided may be made for upstream
detention only when:



      (1)   The detention and release rate have previously been
approved by the City of Brazil official charged with the approval authority
at the time of the approval; and



      (2)   Evidence of its construction and maintenance can be
shown.



   (F)   General detention basin design requirements. Basins should be
designed to collect sediment and debris in specific locations so that removal
costs are kept to a minimum.



      (1)   The maximum volume of water stored and subsequently
released at the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in
excess of 48 hours from the start of the storm unless additional storms occur
within the period.



      (2)   All stormwater detention facilities shall be separated
by not less than 25 feet from any building or structure to be occupied.



      (3)   No detention facility or other water storage area,
permanent or temporary, shall be constructed under or within 20 feet of any
pole or high voltage electric line. Likewise, poles or high voltage electric
lines shall not be placed within 20 feet of any detention facility or other
water storage area.



      (4)   All stormwater detention facilities shall be separated
from any road by no less than 1 right-of-way width, measured from the top of
the bank, using the most restrictive right-of-way possible. If the width of
the right-of-way is less than 50 feet, then the minimum distance between top
of bank and road shall be increased to 50 feet.



      (5)   No slopes steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical (3:1)
for safety, erosion control, stability and ease of maintenance shall be
permitted.



      (6)   Safety screens having a maximum opening of 4 inches
shall be provided for any pipe or opening to prevent children or large
animals from crawling into the structures.



      (7)   Danger signs shall be mounted at appropriate locations
to warn of deep water, possible flood conditions during storm periods and
other dangers that exist. Fencing shall be provided if deemed necessary by
the city engineer.



      (8)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate
as simply as possible and shall require little or no maintenance and/or
attention for proper operation. They shall limit discharges into existing or
planned downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed the predetermined
maximum authorized peak flow rate.



      (9)   Emergency overflow facilities such as a weir or spillway
shall be provided for the release of exceptional storm runoff or in emergency
conditions should the normal discharge devices become totally or partially
inoperative. The overflow facility shall be of a design so that its operation
is automatic and does not require manual attention.



         (a)   Off-site flows greater than the rate produced by
the 10-year storm in the post-developed condition shall be conveyed through
the emergency spillway, not through the primary outlet structure.



         (b)   Emergency overflow facilities shall be designed to
handle 1-1/4 times the peak discharge and peak flow velocity resulting from
the 100-year design storm event runoff from the entire contributing
watershed, assuming post-development condition, draining to the
detention/retention facility.



      (10)   Grass or other suitable vegetative cover shall be
provided along the banks of the detention storage basin. Grass should be cut
regularly at approximately monthly intervals during the growing season or as
required to maintain the facility.



      (11)   Debris and trash removal and other necessary
maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis to ensure continued
operation in conformance to design.



      (12)   No residential lots or any part thereof, shall be used
for any part of a detention basin or for the storage of water, either
temporary or permanent, unless that part of a lot is located within an
easement. The easement must be of sufficient width, as determined by the city
engineer, to perform routine maintenance activities.



   (G)   Additional requirements for wet-bottom facility design.



      (1)   Where part of a detention facility will contain a
permanent pool of water, all of the items required for detention storage, and
in divisions (I) and (J) below, shall apply except that the system of drains
with a positive gravity outlet required to maintain a dry bottom facility
will not be required.



      (2)   A controlled positive outlet will be required to
maintain the design water level in the wet bottom facility and provide
required detention storage above the design water level. However, the
following additional conditions shall apply.



         (a)   Facilities designed with permanent pools or
containing permanent lakes shall have a water area of at least 1/2 acre. If
fish are to be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum depth of approximately
10 feet shall be maintained over at least 25% of the pond area. The remaining
lake area shall have no extensive shallow areas, except as required by
division (3) below.



         (b)   A safety ledge for 4 to 6 feet in width is
required and shall be installed in all lakes approximately 30 to 36 inches
below the permanent water level. In addition, a similar maintenance ledge 12
to 18 inches above the permanent water line shall be provided. The slope
between the 2 ledges shall be stable and of a material such as stone or
riprap which will prevent erosion due to wave action.



         (c)   A safety ramp exist from the lake shall be
required in all cases and shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and exit
slope of 6 horizontal to 1 vertical (6:1). The ramp shall be of a material
that will prevent its deterioration due to vehicle use or wave action such as
a concrete block chute or a cellular confinement system filled with #53
aggregate with a geotextile fabric underlay. Any other construction materials
shall receive prior approval from the city engineer.



         (d)   Periodic maintenance is required in lakes to
control weed and larval growth. The facility shall also be designed to
provide for the easy removal of sediment which will accumulate during periods
of reservoir operation. A means of maintaining the designed water level of
the lake during prolonged periods of dry weather may also be required.



         (e)   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation
shall be considered in all designs. Design calculations to substantiate the
effectiveness of any aeration facilities shall be submitted with final
engineering plans. Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of
aeration facilities shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the city
engineer.



         (f)   For visual clarification, refer to Figures 4 and 5.



   (H)   Additional requirements for dry-bottom facility design.
Detention facilities which will not contain a permanent pool of water shall
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Provisions shall be incorporated into facilities for
complete interior drainage of dry bottom facilities including the provisions
of natural grades to outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to
perimeter drainage facility, paved gutters or the installation of subsurface
drains;



      (2)   For residential developments, the maximum planned depth
of stormwater stored shall not exceed 4 feet; and



      (3)   In excavated detention facilities, a minimum side slope
of 3:1 shall be provided for stability. In the case of valley storage,
natural slopes may be considered to be stable.



   (I)   Parking lot storage.



      (1)   Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary
detention storage of stormwaters on all or a portion of their surface.



      (2)   Outlets for parking lot storage of stormwaters will be
designed so as to empty the stored waters slowly. Depths of stored water
shall be limited to a maximum depth of 7 inches so as to prevent damage to
parked vehicles and so that access to parked vehicles is not impaired.
Ponding should, in general, be confined to those positions of the parking
lots farthest from the area served.



   (J)   Detention facilities in floodplains. If detention storage is
provided within a 100-year floodplain, only the net increase in storage
volume above that which naturally existed on the floodplain shall be credited
to the development. No credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation
of the regulatory flood at the location unless compensatory storage is also
provided.



   (K)   Facility financial responsibilities. The construction costs of
stormwater control systems and required facilities which are identified in
the Subdivision Chapter of the City of Brazil shall be accepted as part of
the cost of land development.



   (L)   Facility maintenance responsibilities. Maintenance of
detention/retention facilities during construction and thereafter, shall be
the responsibility of the land developer/owner. Assignment of responsibility
for maintaining facilities serving 1 or more lots(s) or holding(s) shall be
documented by appropriate covenants to property deeds and documented in sales
agreements, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body.



   (M)   Joint development of control systems. Stormwater control
systems may be planned and constructed jointly by 2 or more developers as
long as compliance with this chapter is maintained.



   (N)   Diffused outlets. When the allowable runoff is released in an
area that is susceptible to flooding or erosion, the developer may be
required to construct appropriate storm drains through the area to avert
increased flood hazard caused by the concentration of allowable runoff at 1
point instead of the natural overland distribution. The requirements of
diffused outlet drains shall be at the discretion of the city engineer.



   (O)   IDNR requirements. All designs for basins to be constructed in
the floodway of a stream with a drainage area of 1 square mile or more must
also satisfy IDNR permit requirements.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.14  MISCELLANEOUS DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Grading and building pad elevations.



      (1)   Maximum yard slopes are 3:1 where soil has been
disturbed during construction processes. Top of foundation must be no less
than 6 inches above finished grade and a minimum of 15 inches above an
adjacent road elevation unless a written variance is granted by either the
city engineer.



      (2)   For all structures located in the SFHA as shown on the
FEMA maps, the lowest floor elevations of all residential, commercial or
industrial buildings, shall be so that all floors, including basement, shall
be at the flood protection grade and therefore have 2 feet of freeboard above
the 100-year flood elevation.



      (3)   The low entry elevation for residential buildings
outside the 100-year floodplain shall have 2 feet of freeboard above the
100-year under proposed conditions.



   (B)   Subsurface drain tile for subdivisions.



      (1)   All residential subdivisions shall require a perforated
subsurface drain tile system in addition to the storm sewer system for the
purpose of lowering the water table. Drain tiles shall be no less than 8
inches in diameter. All lots will have a subsurface drain tile on the lot or
within adjoining easements to serve the lot. The preferred location of all
subsurface drain tile is to be near the proposed area that the septic system
will be located, if septic systems are used.



      (2)   Subsurface inlets will be periodically located on the
subsurface drain tile line for inspection purposes only in order to locate
any problem areas that may occur. The subsurface drain tile system may be
tied into the storm sewer system, but must be accounted for in the storm
sewer calculations. The subsurface drain tile cannot be used for stormwater
storage. All lines must have a positive flow above the hydraulic grade line
of main line sewers and detention basins. The size of the subsurface drainage
tile shall not be any less than:



 


Number of Lots Allowed per Pipe Size

 

Tile or Pipe Diameter




N-Value=0.010

 

N-Value=0.017

 

(Inches)






1-10

 

1-5

 

8




11-17

 

6-11

 

10




17-28

 

12-17

 

12





 



   (C)   Structures near regulated drains. For regulated drains not
located in platted subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the city
engineer, no permanent structure shall be erected within 75 feet measured at
right angles from:



      (1)   The existing top edge of each bank of a regulated open
drain, as determined by the city engineer; or



      (2)   The center line of a tiled regulated drain.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.15  EASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   There shall be no trees or shrubs plants, nor any structures
erected in any drainage easement, unless otherwise provided by the city
engineer.



   (B)   In the case of pipes, the following access easements must be
dedicated to the City of Brazil:



 


Pipe Diameter (Inches)

 

Pipe Depth (Feet)

 

Minimum Easement Width (Feet)



15-24
 

6

 

10



Greater than 24
 

10

 

25




 



      (1)   Subdivisions.



         (a)   Each lot owner shall be responsible for
maintenance, including replacement or repair of any drainage facility
situated on the land owner's lot. The maintenance of any drainage facility
located on a common area not owned by any 1 lot owner shall be the joint and
several responsibility of all lot owners located within the subdivision.



         (b)   The new drain shall be placed in a minimum of
20-foot easement and shall be designated on the recorded plat as 20 feet
drain easement.



      (2)   Establishment of new regulated drain. This section is
not applicable.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)




SPECIFIC REGULATIONS




§ 51.30  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.



   (A)   The city engineer will require an erosion control plan to be
submitted as part of the construction plans and specifications.



   (B)   Plans for erosion and sediment control for all developments
shall include the following:



      (1)   Temporary erosion control measures, necessary during the
initial construction and establishment phases up to final site grading and
seeding;



      (2)   A permanent erosion control plan of all the graded and
non-hard surface areas within the proposed development, as planned for
completion, up to and including seeding of the final lot on which business or
residential dwellings are to be placed;



      (3)   Details concerning removal of temporary erosion control
devices after the initial establishment of adequate vegetative cover; and



      (4)   Maintenance procedures and responsible parties, as part
of the continuing plan, to keep all of the land under adequate cover and
erosion at an acceptable minimum.



   (C)   Erosion and sediment control shall follow the guidelines and
specifications outlined in the "Indiana Handbook for Erosion Control in
Developing Areas, Guidelines for Protecting Water Quality Through the Control
of Soil Erosion and Sedimentation on Construction Sites," published by the
Division of Soil Conservation, IDNR (October 1992).



   (D)   Runoff and erosion control systems shall be installed as soon
as possible and maintained during the course of site development and home
construction.



   (E)   In addition to submitting a copy of the erosion and sediment
control plan to the city engineer, the applicant must forward a copy of the
erosion and sediment control plan to the Common Council. The city engineer
will verify that a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan is on file
at the City of Brazil for review and approval. No drainage approval will be
granted until the erosion and sediment control plans have been approved by
the Brazil Common Council.



   (F)   Failure to comply may also result in the non-issuance or
withdrawal of building or occupancy permits for the parcels in non-compliance.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.31  PLACEMENT OF UTILITIES.



   No utility company may disturb existing storm drainage facilities
without the consent of the city engineer, whose decision may be appealed to
the Common Council. All existing drainage facilities shall have senior rights.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.32  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED AND TIME LIMITS FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Before the commencement of construction of a new building or
of a stormwater drainage facility or system for an existing building, the
owner shall personally apply in writing to the Common Council for a permit to
construct a stormwater detention facility or system, which application shall
set out the date of the intended construction, exact location, any plans,
specifications and any other information deemed necessary by the city
engineer, and expressly state that the owner has complied, and will at all
times comply with the standards set out in this chapter.



   (B)   If the work described in a drainage permit has not commenced
within 180 days from the date of permit issuance, the permit will expire and
a written cancellation notice will be sent to the property owner/developer.
If the work described in a drainage permit has not been substantially
completed (90% completed) within 1 year of the date of issuance thereof, the
permit will expire and written notice will be sent to the property
owner/developer. A written extension of up to 180 days may be granted by the
city engineer if the work in progress exceeds 50% completion. All other
instances must reapply for a new permit.



   (C)   Drainage permits granted prior to this chapter will be
controlled as follows: upon the adoption of this chapter, notice will be sent
to all existing permit holders, thereby giving notice that they are now under
a time limit as defined by this chapter and that their time begins at the
date of the passage of this chapter.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.33  CHANGE IN PLANS.



   (A)   Any significant change or deviation in the detailed
information after receipt of a drainage permit shall be filed with and
approved in writing by the city engineer prior to the land development
involving the change. Significant shall mean any change which will result in
greater than:



      (1)   A 10% reduction in flow capacity of any conveyance
systems;



      (2)   A 10% increase in required storage volume of any
detention system; or



      (3)   A 0.3-foot increase or decrease in 100-year elevation of
a detention/retention facility.



   (B)   Copies of the changes, if approved, shall be attached to the
final plans and specifications submitted for the drainage permit.



   (C)   Permits can be pulled and/or property transfers can be held if
it is found that plans other than those approved by the city engineer are
being used for construction.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.34  CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED FOR AS-BUILT CONDITION.



   (A)   After completion of the project and before the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, and acceptance of the completed construction
project from approved plans, a professionally prepared and certified "record
set" or "as-built" set of plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for
review.



   (B)   These plans shall include all pertinent data relevant to the
completed storm drainage system and shall include as a minimum:



      (1)   Pipe size and pipe material;



      (2)   Invert elevations;



      (3)   Top rim elevations;



      (4)   Lengths of all pipe structures;



      (5)   Data and calculations showing constructed detention
basin storage volume; and



      (6)   Certified statement on plans saying the completed storm
drainage system substantially complies with the final plans as approved by
the city engineer.



   (C)   (1)   Within 10 days after completion of a land alteration
for which a drainage permit was required and relative to which a certified
plan was required to be filed, a registered professional engineer, land
surveyor or architect, engaged in storm drainage design, shall execute and
file with the city engineer a certificate of completion and compliance.



      (2)   This certificate shall be in the format depicted in
Figure 6.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.35  SUBDIVISION COVENANTS.



   The following statements shall become part of the restrictive covenants
of every platted subdivision:



   (A)   “It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any lot or
parcel of land within the area of this plat to comply at all times with the
provisions of the drainage plan as approved for this plat by the Common
Council through its agents, the city engineer and the requirements of all
drainage permits for this plat by the city engineer.” Each lot owner shall
be responsible for maintenance, including replacement or repair, of any
drainage facility situated on the land owner's lot. The maintenance of any
drainage facility located on a common area not owned by any 1 lot owner shall
be the joint and several responsibility of all lot owners located within the
subdivision;



   (B)   “The property shall be graded pursuant to the final
construction plan and may not thereafter be changed without written approval
of the city engineer, whose decision may be appealed to the Common Council;”



   (C)   “No trees or shrubs shall be planted, nor any structure
erected in any drainage easement, unless otherwise approved by the city
engineer.” (When requested in writing, the above covenant may be waived or
modified by the Common Council for good cause);



   (D)   “Drainage swales (ditches) along dedicated roadways and
within the right-of-way, or on dedicated drainage easements, are not to be
altered, dug out, filled in, tiled or otherwise changed without the written
permission of the Brazil Common Council. Property owners must maintain these
swales as sodded grassways, or other non-eroding surfaces. Water from roofs
or parking areas must be contained on the property long enough so that the
drainage swales or ditches will not be damaged by water. Driveways may be
constructed over these swales or ditches only when appropriate sized culverts
are installed;” and



   (E)   “Any property owner altering, changing or damaging these
swales or ditches will be held responsible for that action and will be given
10 days notice by registered mail to repair the damage, after which time, if
no action is taken, the Common Council retains the right to cause the repairs
to be accomplished, and the bill for repairs will be sent to the affected
property owner for immediate payment.”



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.36  INSPECTIONS AND CORRECTIVE MEASURES.



   (A)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Brazil from
taking other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



   (B)   All costs incurred by the City of Brazil in connection
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible, including
reasonable attorney and engineering fees.



      (1)   Inspections. All public and privately owned stormwater
conveyance systems and detention storage facilities may be inspected by
representatives of the City of Brazil bearing the proper credentials and
identifications.



      (2)   Corrective measures. If deficiencies are found by the
inspector, written notice of violation shall be sent to the owner by
certified mail. A time limit of 15 days shall be given for the remedy of the
violation. If the owner fails to correct the noted deficiencies, the City of
Brazil may begin assessing a $500 per day fine until the violation is
corrected. In addition, the City of Brazil reserves the right to undertake
the work and collect the cost of maintenance or repair from the owner using
lien rights if necessary.



      (3)   Enforcement. Enforcement of the ordinance by the City of
Brazil shall be supplemental and in addition to the rights of individual
landowners as provided by law, including private enforcement of restrictive
covenants, or those rights under I.C. 36-9-27.4.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.37  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical
records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur
or stormwater runoff depths may be increased by human-made or natural causes.



   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land uses permitted will be
free from stormwater damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the
part of the City of Brazil or any officer or employee thereof for any damage
which may result from reliance on this chapter or on any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.38  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become effective after its final passage, approval
and publication as required by law.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.39  EXEMPT PROJECTS.



   Any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision (major or minor)
or construction project thereon, which has had its drainage plan approved by
the City of Brazil prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall be
exempt from all of the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.40  PERMIT FEES.



   The Common Council requires that a $1,200 review fee be submitted with
plans and drainage calculations. This $1,200 fee will be used to pay for the
review of the submittal. If the review fee is less than $1,200, the balance
will be returned to the owner. If the review fee exceeds $1,200, the owner
will be responsible for making up the difference between the $1,200 submitted
and the actual review costs.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



§ 51.41  DETAILED DRAWINGS OF DESIGN STANDARDS AND APPENDIX INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE.



   (A)   Technical standards and drawings may be added as appendices to
this subchapter by either the city engineer or as deemed necessary. All
additions will be approved by the city engineer.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



   (B)   The "Appendix and References" set forth in Ord. 01-2000 pages
54 through 76 are incorporated herein by reference. The documents shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and
shall during regular business hours.



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   The City of Brazil may bring suit to enjoin the violation of this
subchapter. If deficiencies are found by the inspector, written notice of the
violation shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. A time limit of 15
days shall be given for the remedy of the violation. If the owner fails to
correct the noted deficiencies, the City of Brazil may begin assessing a $500
per day fine until the violation is corrected. In addition, the City of
Brazil reserves the right to undertake the work and collect the cost of
maintenance or repair from the owner using lien rights if necessary. The
15-day grace period may be shortened by the City of Brazil if deemed
necessary due to emergency considerations.



(Ord. 01-2000, passed 7-18-2000)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   52.001   Purpose and policy



   52.002   Administration



   52.003   Abbreviations



   52.004   Definitions




Sewer Use Requirements




   52.015   Prohibited discharge standards



   52.016   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards



   52.017   State pretreatment standards



   52.018   Local limits



   52.019   City’s right of revision



   52.020   Dilution



   52.021   Owner responsibility to install suitable toilet facilities



   52.022   Costs and expenses; indemnification



   52.023   Connection to public sewers; permit required; fees;
inspection



   52.024   Extension of sewers outside corporate limits



   52.025   Connections by out-of-city properties



   52.026   Separate building sewer required for every building



   52.027   Use of old building sewers with new buildings



   52.028   Size, slope and alignment



   52.029   Elevation; gravity flow



   52.030   Privies, septic tanks, and other facilities



   52.031   Connecting building sewer to private system



   52.032   Compliance with State Board of Health



   52.033   Connecting private sewage disposal system to public sewer



   52.034   Maintenance of private sewage disposal system



   52.035   Noninterference with additional requirements




Pretreatment of Wastewater




   52.045   Pretreatment facilities



   52.046   Pretreatment measures



   52.047   Accidental discharge/slug control plan



   52.048   Hauled wastewater




Reporting Requirements




   52.060   Reports of potential problems




Compliance Monitoring




   52.070   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   52.071   Search warrants



   52.072   Confidential information




Wastewater Treatment Charges and Surcharges




   52.085   Sewer charges based on water usage



   52.086   Sewer charges



   52.087   Strength-of-waste surcharge



   52.088   Billing of service charges



   52.089   Delinquent Accounts




Miscellaneous Provisions




   52.100   Pretreatment charges and fees




Administration and Enforcement




   52.110   Notification of violation



   52.111   Compliance orders



   52.112   Cease and desist orders



   52.113   Emergency suspensions



   52.114   Injunctive relief



   52.115   Remedies nonexclusive



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the city and enables the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R.
Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be
incompatible with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;



      (3)   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;



      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works; and



      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works is subject.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works. This chapter provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the
Superintendent to other city personnel.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



      B.O.D.      Biochemical Oxygen Demand



      C.F.R.      Code of Federal Regulations



      C.O.D.      Chemical Oxygen Demand



      EPA      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency



      ERG      Enforcement Response Guide



      l      liter



      mg      milligrams



      gpd      gallons per day



      mg/l      milligrams per liter



      NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



      POTW      Publicly Owned Treatment Works



      RCRA      Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



      SIC      Standard Industrial Classification



      TSS      Total Suspended Solids



      U.S.C.      United States Code



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The State of Indiana or Regional Administrator of
the US EPA, Region 5.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized
representative shall mean:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation;



         (b)   The manager of 1 or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million, if authority to
sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures;



      (2)   If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole
proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or
proprietor, respectively;



      (3)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local
governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee;



      (4)   The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3)
above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
Superintendent.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or B.O.D. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for 5 days at 20° C., usually expressed as a concentration (such
as, mg/l).



   BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY. The administrative governing body of
the public utilities of the city.



   BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer beginning 4 feet outside the building wall.



   BUILDING.  A building drain which conveys sanitary or industrial
sewage only.



   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building drain which conveys storm water or
other clear water drainage, but no wastewater.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer main or other place of disposal (also called house connection).



   BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.



   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm water or
other clear water drainage, but no wastewater.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the US EPA in
accordance with Sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which
apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40
C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm
or surface water.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH,
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES permit it if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants,
and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. The term
“substantial degree” is not subject to precise definition, but generally
contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental
removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial. Examples
of the additional pollutants which may be considered compatible include
chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus
compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, and fats, oils and greases of
animal or vegetable origin (except as prohibited where these materials would
interfere with the operation of the treatment works).



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.



   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
another.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The US Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division
Director, or other duly authorized official of the agency.



   FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator
of pollution.



   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the city.



   FOG –  FATS, OIL AND GREASE. Any substance such as a vegetable or
animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the cooking or food
preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may
solidify with a change in temperature or due to other conditions.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard
to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building
drains and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited
to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. INFILTRATION
does not include and is distinguished from inflow.



   INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including building
drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders,
clear yards and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water
discharge, drains from springs and swamp areas, manhole covers, cross
connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm
waters, surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage. INFLOW does not
include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.



   INFLOW/INFILTRATION. The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow without distinguishing the source.



   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the city, through
its Common Council, to inspect and approve the installation of building
sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.



   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, does 1 of the following:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge use or disposal
methods.



      (2)   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.



      (3)   Prevents the use of the POW’s sewage sludge or its
sludge disposal method selected in compliance with the following statutory
provisions, regulations, or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state
or local regulations:



         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §
1345).



         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §
6901), including:



            1.   Title 11, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and



            2.   The rules contained in any sate sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. §
6941).



         (c)   The Clean Air act (42 U.S.C. § 7401).



         (d)   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §
2601).



   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration (or
loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from
the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of
the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
ground water.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  The same meaning as defined in and shall not
exceed the limits set forth in the most recent Sewage Rate Ordinance, which
is available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of
the United States pursuant to I.C. 4023 PL 92-500 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.).



   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.



   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (such as,  pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, B.O.D., C.O.D., toxicity, or odor).



   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction in a public treatment works.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 52.015 of this chapter.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A “treatment works,” as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the
city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.



   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer system at
which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.



   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2-inch in any dimension.



   SANITARY SEWER or SANITARY SEWER MAIN. A sewer which caries sanitary
and/or industrial wastes, and to which storm, surface, and ground water are
not intentionally admitted.



   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions
(including polluted cooling water). The 3 most common types of sewage are:



      (1)   SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water
carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.



      (2)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water
carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting
from any trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall
include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water).



      (3)   COMBINED SEWAGE. Wastes including sanitary sewage,
industrial sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to the
wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Applies to:



      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards;



      (2)   Any other industrial user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as significant by the city on the
basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.



      (3)   Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in §
52.015 of this chapter has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response
to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.



   SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 52.015 of
this chapter.



   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.



   STRENGTH-OF-WASTES SURCHARGE. The extra charges for sewerage service
assessed users whose sewage is of such a nature that it imposes upon the
sewage works a burden greater than that covered by the basic user charge.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent/Manager of the Municipal Sewage
Works of the city or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   SURCHARGES. A charge for sewerage services in addition to the basic
user and debt service charges.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.



   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.



   TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants, which upon exposure to or assimilation into any physiological
manifestation, as defied in standards issued pursuant to I.C. 307(a) of PL
92-500 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.).



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.



   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed
to gases or vapors when heated at 550° C. for 15 to 20 minutes.



   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.



   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any water, surface, or underground, within the
boundaries of the state, except confined waters in sewers and tanks.



   WELLED CUSTOMER. Any customer that receives his/her water supply from a
privately-owned well and is not a part of the city water system or any
wholesale customer of the city water system and utilizes the city public
sanitary system.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.015  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified
in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0,
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails,
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(B.O.D., and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F.
(65° C.), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F.
(40° C.);



      (6)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease,
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil
origin, whether emulsified or not, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through or in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F. and 150° F. (0º
C. and 65° C). Processed vegetable and animal origin fats and oils that
cannot solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º and 150° F.
(0º and 65° C.) may be discharged in excess of 100 mg/l, but shall not
exceed 300 mg/l.



      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent in accordance with § 52.048 of this chapter;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, wither singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit;



      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any material received in
the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent for such materials.



      (13)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other waste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent, as necessary, after treatment of
the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or
other public agencies of jurisdictions for such discharge to the receiving
waters.



      (14)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (15)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent. The city shall require the
removal of unpolluted water from any wastewater collection or treatment
facility if the removal is cost-effective and is in the best interest of all
users of those facilities;



      (16)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (17)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (18)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (19)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.



   (C)   Generally.  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited
by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they
could be discharged to the POTW.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.016  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject of a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.017  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   State pretreatment standards located at 327 IAC 5-16 through 327 IAC
5-21 are hereby incorporated.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.018  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable
discharge limits:



      0.02 mg/l      cadmium



      1.0 mg/l       chromium (hexavalent)



      2.0 mg/l       chromium (trivalent)



      3.0 mg/l       chromium (total)



      1.0 mg/l       cyanide



      0.1 mg,/l       lead 1.0 mg/l nickel



      0.50 mg/l       total phenols



      5.0 mg/l       zinc



   (B)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may impose
mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based
limitations above.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.019  CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.020  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.021  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY TO INSTALL SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.



   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby
required at his or her expenses to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within 300 feet of
the property line.



   (B)   The customer shall install and maintain in the city
right-of-way, as close to the property line as practicable, a suitable
cleanout to the lateral sewer.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.022  COSTS AND EXPENSES; INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.



   (B)   The owner of any property connecting to the wastewater utility
shall be responsible for the maintenance of building sewer from the sanitary
sewer main to the structure being served and shall keep this line in good
condition at their expense.



   (C)   Property owner shall, at their expense, at all times keep all
pipes, fixtures and appliances tight and in good working order.



   (D)   The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.



   (E)   For the use of and the service rendered by the sewage works,
rates and charges shall be prepared, billed, and collected by the city in a
manner provided by law and ordinance.



      (1)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or
tenants occupying the properties served, when requested in writing by the
owner, but the billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability
in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties
served, which are occupied by a tenant or tenants, may have the right to
examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of determining
whether bills have been paid by such tenant or tenants, provided that such
examination would be made at the office at which the records are kept and
during the hours that the office is open for business.



      (2)   All rates and charges not paid when due are hereby
declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the rates or
charges shall thereupon attach thereto.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.023  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES; INSPECTION.



   (A)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall tap or drain
either directly or indirectly into any public sewer until a sewer tap permit
has been obtained from the city and until he/her has satisfied his/her
obligation to pay all assessments, reimbursements, or pro rata shares of
sewer extensions cost levied against the property for public sewers installed
to serve it. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Superintendent. A tap permit given in error or sewerage service charges
billed to a property in error shall not operate to nullify any obligation
that has been duly recorded.



   (B)   Sewer tap permit fees shall be as follows:



      (1)   Permit fee for developments for multiple single-family
home sites shall be $1.25 per linear foot of pipe to cover the cost of
reviewing construction drawings, issuing the permit, and conducting periodic
inspections of the construction.



      (2)   Permit fee for site development to connect to mainline
sewer to a building or single-family dwelling shall be as follows:



 


Water Meter Size

 

Tap Fee






3/4 inch or less

 

$600




1-inch

 

$800




1 1/2- inch

 

$1,000




2-inch

 

$1,200




Larger

 

*



* The charge for a tap larger than the 2-inch meter shall be the cost of
labor, materials, power machinery, transportation and overhead cost for
installing the tap, but shall not be less than the charge for a 2-inch meter
tap. Any customer that receives his/her water supply from a privately-owned
well and is not a part of city water system or any wholesale customer of the
city water system and utilizes the city public sanitary system shall be
referred to as welled customer. Residential welled customers shall pay the
tap fee equal to that of 1/4-inch water meter or $600. Any commercial welled
customer tap fee will be charged based on multiple equivalent dwelling units
based on Table 11-1 of the Indiana Administrative Code 327 IAC 3-6-11. One
equivalent dwelling unit equals 300 gallons per day for purposes of this
chapter. Indiana Administrative Code 327 IAC 3-6-11 is to be used to
determine the estimated flow of wastewater based on gallons per day.




 



   (C)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the authority
to require any owner of real property to disconnect from a building sewer
which drains into a sanitary sewer any down spouts, yard drains, or other
drains which carry the run off of natural precipitation. Property owners
shall have 30 days after notice to comply with any requirements. The Board of
Public Works and Safety shall have the authority to authorize the owner of
real property to connect a building sewer which drains into a sanitary sewer
any down spouts, yard drains, or other drains which carry the run off of
natural precipitation if the drains are proved to cause mosquito breeding
ponds, structural damage, or jeopardizes the general health of the public on
a regular basis for a fee established by the Board of Public Works and
Safety. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall not authorize any tap
permit which will cause excess flow, B.O.D., or suspended solid loading of
the wastewater treatment plant, force mains, lift stations, or sewers.



   (D)   The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48
hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.024  EXTENSION OF SEWERS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.



   The installation, construction, or extension of sewers by the city
outside the corporate limits of the city and the connection or extension of
sewers into the city's sewerage system from, by, or for properties located
outside such limits shall be prohibited, except on prior approval by the
Common Council by duly enacted ordinance.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.025  CONNECTIONS BY OUT-OF-CITY PROPERTIES.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 52.024, the Board of Public Works
shall have the authority to permit a property located outside the corporate
limits of the city to connect to an existing sewer which is part of the
city's sewerage system, provided the property abuts, adjoins and is
immediately contiguous to the street, alley, or easement in which the sewer
is located and provided the property owner or occupant has complied with the
conditions set out in § 52.023.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.026  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED FOR EVERY BUILDING.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where 1 building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as 1 building sewer.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



§ 52.027  USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS WITH NEW BUILDINGS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet
all requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



§ 52.028  SIZE, SLOPE AND ALIGNMENT.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the current Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the city.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.029  ELEVATION; GRAVITY FLOW.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.030  PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, AND OTHER FACILITIES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.031  CONNECTING BUILDING SEWER TO PRIVATE SYSTEM.



   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 52.021 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.032  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE BOARD OF HEALTH.



   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of Health. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.033  CONNECTING PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM TO PUBLIC SEWER.



   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system as provided in § 52.021, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter,
and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.034  MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.035  NONINTERFERENCE WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 52.045  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the
time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the Superintendent,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater
to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be
acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of the
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.046  PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow.



   (C)   Fats, oil, grease, and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or
sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential
users.



      (1)   All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.



      (2)   The owner shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal, by appropriate means of the collected material removed from the
fats, oil, grease, and sand interceptors and traps.



      (3)   The owner shall ensure the interceptors and traps are
inspected when pumped to ensure that all fittings and fixtures inside the
interceptors are in good condition and functioning properly. The depth of
grease inside the tank shall be measured and recorded in a maintenance log
during every inspection along with any deficiencies, and the identity of the
inspector.



      (4)   The owner shall determine the frequency at which its
fat, oils, grease, and sand interceptor(s) shall be pumped according to the
following criteria:



         (a)   The interceptor shall be cleaned by a subsurface
sewage disposal cleaner whenever 25% of the operating depth of the
interceptor is occupied by fats, oils, grease, sand and settled solids, or a
minimum of once every 3 months, whichever is more frequent. Cleaning of
interceptors shall include the complete removal of all contents, including
floating materials, wastewater and settled sludge. Decanting back into the
interceptor shall not be permitted. Interceptor cleaning shall include
scraping excessive solids form the wall, floors, baffles and all piping.



         (b)   If the owner can provide data to the
Superintendent demonstrating that less frequent cleaning of interceptor will
not result in a grease level in excess of 25% of the operating depth of the
interceptor, the Superintendent may allow less frequent cleaning. The owner
shall provide data including pumping receipts for 4 consecutive cleanings of
the interceptor, complete with a report from the grease trap/interceptor
cleaner indicating the grease level at each cleaning, and the interceptor
maintenance log.



         (c)   A maintenance log shall be maintained on the
premises, and shall include the following information: date of all
activities, volume pumped, grease depth, grease trap/interceptor cleaner's
name, location of the waste disposal, means of disposal for all material
removed from the interceptor and name of the individual recording the
information. The maintenance log and grease trap/interceptor cleaner's
receipts shall be made available to the Superintendent for inspection on
demand. Interceptor cleaning and inspection records shall be maintained on
file a minimum of 5 years.



      (5)   The interceptors shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the user at their expense.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.047  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLAN.



   At least once every 2 years, the Superintendent shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Superintendent may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall address, at a minimum, the following:



   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;



   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;



   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by this chapter; and



   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and /or measures and equipment
for emergency response.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.048  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW by
state-permitted and licensed commercial waste haulers only at locations
designated by the Superintendent, and at such times as are established by the
Superintendent. The waste shall not violate § 52.015 of this chapter or any
other requirements established by the city. The Superintendent may require
septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The
Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance
with applicable standards.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial waste haulers may discharge loads
only at locations designated by the Superintendent. No load may be discharged
without prior consent of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may collect
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards.
The Superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste
analysis of any load prior to discharge.



   (C)   Wastewater, so received, must have been generated within the
county or licensed commercial waste hauler must have place of business
located within the county.



   (D)   A Manifest of Destination shall be submitted with each septic,
commercial, or industrial tank discharge.



   (E)   Dumping fees, as established by the city shall be paid by the
generator of the waste or waste hauler at time of discharge to the sewer
system or at a time designated by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.060  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but no limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a
discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 52.070  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any
user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued in this chapter.
Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



   (A)   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



   (B)   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the
user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.



   (C)   The Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated once every year to ensure their accuracy.



   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.



   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to
the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.071  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure,
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the Superintendent may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the City Court.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.072  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, and from
the Superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available
to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 C.F.R. §
2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



WASTEWATER TREATMENT CHARGES AND SURCHARGES



§ 52.085  SEWER CHARGES BASED ON WATER USAGE.



   (A)   Water obtained from the municipal water utility.  The sewer
charges made for sewerage service rendered to each lot, parcel of real estate
or building having any connection with the city's sewerage system or
otherwise discharging sewage into that system, either directly or indirectly,
shall be based on the quantity of water presumed to enter the public sewers
after being used in or on the property, as the quantity is measured by the
water meter or meters therein used by the municipal water utility, except as
herein otherwise provided.



   (B)   Water obtained from other sources.  Where the property
obtains any part or all of the water used from sources other than the
municipal water utility, the owner or the tenant may be required by the city
to install and maintain at his or her own expense a meter acceptable to the
city for the purpose of measuring the quantity of water obtained from these
other sources, or the city may determine the quantity of such water by
whatever means and methods it may find practicable.



   (C)   Exempt water.  Where a significant portion of the metered
water does not and cannot enter the sewerage system, either directly or
indirectly, and where the quantity of water entering the premises averages
more than 20,000 gallons (2,674 cubic feet) per month, the person having
charge of the property may request permission from the city to install at his
or her own expense either an approved meter to determine the quantity of
water that cannot enter the sewerage system or an approved sewage-measuring
device or devices to determine the volume of sewage that actually enters the
sewerage system; when appropriate, the city reserves the right to determine
by whatever other means and methods it may find practicable the percentage of
the property's metered water that enters the sewerage system. In any case the
user charge shall be applied to the quantity of water that can or actually
does enter the public sewers.



   (D)   Metering of sewage.  The city may require a user to install
and maintain at his or her own expense an approved device to measure directly
the volumes of wastes discharged to the sewerage system if these volumes
cannot otherwise be determined from the metered-water consumption records.
Any nonresidential user whose monthly water consumption is 2,000 gallons (267
cubic feet) or more shall install a meter. The city shall inspect and approve
the installations and no service, once installed, shall be removed without
the city's approval



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.086  SEWER CHARGES.



   (A)   For the use of and service rendered by the sewage works, sewer
charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building that is or could be connected to the city's sewerage
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or
other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sewerage system of the
city, which sewer charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall
be in an amount determinable as follows:



 


User Charge per 100 Cubic Feet
(748 Gallons)

 

Debt Service and Other Charges per 100 Cubic Feet
(748 Gallons)

 

Total Monthly Sewer Charge per 100 Cubic Feet
(748 Gallons)




$2.35

 

$4.17

 

$6.52




 



   (B)   The minimum monthly charge for any metered user shall be:



 


User Charge

 

Debt Service and Other Charges

 

Monthly Minimum Sewer Charge




$5.87

 

$10.43

 

$16.30




The minimum monthly charge shall include use of up to 250 cubic feet of
metered water




 



   (C)   For the use of and services rendered to the K&H Sewer
District, the sewer charges shall be in an amount determinable as follows:



 


User Charge per 100 Cubic Feet
(748 Gallons)

 

Debt Service and Other Charges per 100 Cubic Feet
(748 Gallons)

 

Total Monthly Sewer Charge per 100 Cubic Feet
(748 Gallons)




$1.01

 

$0.87

 

$1.88




 



   (D)   The minimum charge for any service where the user is not a
metered water user shall be based on the size of the service connection but
no charge shall be less than the minimum monthly or bi-monthly charge.



   (E)   In the event 2 or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into
the city's sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, are users
of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then
in each such case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be
averaged for each user and the minimum charge and the sewage rates and
charges shall apply to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of
real estate, or building served through the single water meter.



   (F)   In the event 2 or more dwelling units, such as trailers,
apartments, or housekeeping rooms, discharging sanitary sewage, water, or
other liquids into the city's sanitary system, either directly or indirectly,
are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by single water
meter, then in such case billing shall be for a single service in the manner
set out elsewhere herein, except that an additional charge shall be added
thereto, in the amount of $1.60 per month for each dwelling unit over 1
served through the single water meter. In the case of trailer parks, the
number of dwelling units shall be interpreted as the maximum capacity for
trailers, in the park, plus any other dwelling units served through the
meter. A dwelling unit shall be interpreted as a room or other living space
or spaces in which cooking facilities are provided.



   (G)   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as
well as for other uses, the city may, in its discretion make adjustments in
the minimum charge and in the sewer charge as may be equitable.



   (H)   For the service rendered to the city, the city shall be
subject to the same sewer charges hereinabove provided or to sewer charges
established in harmony therewith.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.087  STRENGTH-OF-WASTE SURCHARGE.



   (A)   Liability for surcharge.  Each industrial or nonindustrial
user who discharges wastes into the sewerage system shall be subject to a
surcharge, in addition to the regular sewer charges, based on both the
biochemical oxygen demand (or on the chemical oxygen demand where B.O.D.
cannot be determined) and the suspended solids content of the wastes, if
these wastes have a concentration greater than the following:



      (1)   A biochemical oxygen demand of 250 milligrams per liter;
or where B.O.D. cannot be determined, then, in lieu of B.O.D., a chemical
oxygen/demand of 400 milligrams per liter;



      (2)   A suspended solids content of 250 milligrams per liter.



   (B)   Computation of surcharge.  The surcharge shall be determined
as follows: The excess pounds of B.O.D. (or C.O.D.) and of suspended solids
will each be computed by first multiplying the customer's billing sewage
volume measured in units of 100 cubic feet for the current billing period by
the factor 0.0062321 and then multiplying this product by the difference
between the concentrations measured in milligrams per liter of the B.O.D. (or
C.O.D.) and of the suspended solids respectively in the customer's sewage and
the allowed concentrations set out in division (A). The surcharge for each
constituent will then be determined by multiplying the excess pounds of each
constituent by the appropriate rate of surcharge set out in division (C).



   (C)   Rates of surcharge.  The rates of surcharge for each of the
aforementioned constituents shall be as follows:



 


Constituents

 

Per Pound





For Biochemical Oxygen Demand (B.O.D.)
 

$0.12



For Chemical Oxygen Demand (C.O.D) where B.O.D. cannot be determined
 

$0.12



For Suspended Solids
 

$0.12





 



   (D)   Revision of rates of surcharge.  Prior to May 1 of each year,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall submit to the Board of Public Works and Safety a
comparison of the calculated unit costs for removing B.O.D. and suspended
solids from the wastewater treatment plant influent during the previous
calendar year with the unit charges currently in effect in order that the
Board may determine whether the current rate of surcharge are adequate or
should be changed by the Common Council.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



§ 52.088  BILLING OF SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Billing period.  Sewer charges for sewerage service shall be
prepared and billed by the city and shall be due and payable as determined by
the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Liability for payment.  The sewer charges for sewerage
service shall be billed to the person being billed for water service unless,
by contract with the utility, another person assumes such responsibility. If
a tenant is billed, the owner shall in no way be relieved of liability in the
event payment is not made by the tenant as herein required. The owner shall
have the right to examine the city's collection records to as certain whether
such charges have been paid.



   (C)   First billings.  The sewer charges and surcharges fixed in
this subchapter shall be extended to and cover any additional premises
hereafter served without the need for any hearing or notice. If the first
billing to a new customer covers a period other than a full billing period,
then the sewer charges for such billing shall be made in keeping with
standard practice. Subsequent sewerage service billings shall be for periods
coinciding with the billing periods established by the Board of Public Works
and Safety. If the sewer charges or surcharges are changed, the first billing
after the change may also be for a period other than a full billing period.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



§ 52.089  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   How delinquencies arise.  Charges for sewerage service levied
pursuant to this subchapter shall be due and payable on or before the due
dates shown on the bills. Any service charge not paid by the due date
approximately 15 days after the bill is rendered, shall be considered
delinquent. The delinquent charge together with any applied penalty shall be
collectible as hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   Collection through the tax duplicate.  As provided by the
state statutes, delinquent sewerage service charges may be made a lien
against the property served through certification to the Auditor and to the
Recorder of the county. In such case, the delinquent service charges,
together with the mandatory penalty of 10%, shall be placed on the tax
duplicate and be collected in the same manner as regular taxes and
assessments are collected.



   (C)   Collection through court actions.  In addition to the
foregoing remedies, the city shall have the right, as provided by the state
statutes, to foreclose any lien established under the provisions of division
(B), with recovery of the charge, a penalty of 10% and a reasonable
attorney's fee.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 52.100  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include:



   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including
the cost of processing applications;



   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;



   (D)   Fees for filing appeals; and



   (E)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the city.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.110  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter or order issued hereunder, the
Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, provide to
the Superintendent an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Superintendent to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.111  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, or order issued hereunder, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service
may be discontinued. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.112  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate any provision of this chapter, or order issued
hereunder, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.113  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after informal notice to the user, whenever suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to
the environment.



   (B)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has
passed.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 52.114  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may petition the County Court of Competent Jurisdiction
through the City's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The Superintendent may
also seek other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



§ 52.115  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007) 



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, or order issued hereunder, or any other
requirement shall be liable to the city for a fine of at least $1,000 per
day, per violation, in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(vi)A), but no
more than $2,500 per day, per violation for a first violation nor more than
$7,500 per day, per violation for subsequent violations, in accordance with
I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)(13).



   (B)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city.



   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (E)   This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action
for personal injury or property damage available under state law.



(Ord. 2-2007, passed 1-23-2007)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   53.001   Control of Waterworks



   53.002   Definitions




General Regulations




   53.015   Required application, meter deposit and initial charge



   53.016   Term of contract



   53.017   Change of ownership



   53.018   Reviving canceled contracts



   53.019   When rates for service begin to accrue



   53.020   Cancellation of contract and discontinuance of service



   53.021   Service connections and water connection permit fees



   53.022   Repairs, renewals and replacements



   53.023   Size of service connection prescribed



   53.024   Separate service connection for each premise



   53.025   All water sold by meter measurement



   53.026   Minimum charge; on rate and when charged at regular rate



   53.027   Schedule for meter rates for consumers



   53.028   Public fire protection rates



   53.029   Private fire protection service rates per annum




Specific Regulations




   53.040   Installation service



   53.041   Size of service pipe; underwriters pump



   53.042   Number of services



   53.043   Test of fire services



   53.044   Contamination of water supply



   53.045   Inspection; approval of the Fire Chief; guarantees



   53.046   Plans and drawings



   53.047   Extensions of mains and installing public hydrants



   53.048   Monthly readings; bills; complaints



   53.049   Defective meter



   53.050   Meters not registering



   53.051   Consumer responsible for all water registered



   53.052   Disconnection for late payment



   53.053   Setting of meters; disturbing meter



   53.054   Consumers responsible for meters and arranging pipes



   53.055   Access to premises



   53.056   Temporary users



   53.057   Use of fire hydrant



   53.058   Connections to water main on main water pipe; sprinkling



   53.059   Disconnecting the use of water



   53.060   Control of stop cocks



   53.061   Liability of water works



   53.062   Boilers



   53.063   Tapping the water mains



   53.064   City employees to report



   53.065   Fixtures for public use



   53.066   Stop and waste valve



   53.067   Installation, reinstallation or transfer of meters



   53.068   Plumber regulations



   53.069   Duties of the Superintendent



   53.070   Rebate of deposits



   53.071   Superintendent to make contracts



   53.072   Bypass thievery



   53.073   Unlawful use of water service line



   53.074   Delinquent locations



   53.075   Reconnection charge; customer meter deposit



   53.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 53.001  CONTROL OF WATERWORKS.



   (A)   The Department of Waterworks shall be abolished, and the Board
of Trustees of the Department shall be dissolved. The operation of the
Waterworks shall be returned to the Board of Public Works and Safety. The
effective date of the abolition of the Department of Waterworks was February
1, 1964, except that the Board of Trustees of the Department shall have no
authority from the date of passage of this chapter to make any contract,
obligations or promises which will create any liability on the part of the
city, without approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board of Trustees of the Department of Waterworks shall
turn over the possession, care and custody of all assets including real
estate, personal property, books and funds under its control to the Board of
Public Works and Safety. The assets shall include, but not be limited to, all
property turned over to the control of the Board of Trustees of the
Department by Res. 16-1963, passed by the Common Council of the city. All
bank accounts shall be transferred into the name of the Clerk-Treasurer of
the city.



(1982 Code, § 51.01)  (Ord. 1-1964, passed 1-14-1964)



§ 53.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER.  The person, firm, corporation or association having an
interest, whether legal or equitable, sole or only partial, either as owner,
tenant or occupant, in any premise which is or is about to be supplied with
water by the Waterworks.



   PREMISE.  Any building under the same roof and belonging to the same
person, or any single piece of real estate, together with its buildings and
adjuncts, and which belongs to the same person. Each dwelling house together
with its outbuildings and appurtenances shall be considered a single piece of
real estate or a PREMISE within the meaning of this chapter.



   WATER WORKS.  The Brazil City Waterworks, municipally owned by the
city.



(1982 Code, § 51.10)  (Ord. 1-1964, passed 1-14-1964)




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 53.015  REQUIRED APPLICATION, METER DEPOSIT AND INITIAL CHARGE.



   (A)   All persons desiring to be supplied with water from the city
Waterworks at a property now connected with the mains, must apply in person,
or legal representative, at the Waterworks office for water, before using the
same.



   (B)   Each new customer of the Waterworks shall pay a meter deposit
of $25. This deposit is to be held by the city as a guarantee that water
bills will be paid on presentation of monthly or quarterly statements of the
same, the city to pay interest on all deposits at the rate of 5% per annum.
No interest shall be paid for less than 6 months.



   (C)   There shall be a charge of $15 for initiation of service at a
location where a water meter is not in service. No water shall be turned on
to any premises which are indebted to the Waterworks for work done or
material furnished, until the indebtedness has been paid, and provided
further, that no applicant shall be supplied with water for any purpose
whatsoever; who, at the time of application for same, is indebted to the
Waterworks for water previously supplied him or her until indebtedness shall
be have been paid.



(1982 Code, § 51.11)  (Am. Ord. 9-1981, passed 5-26-1981; Am. Ord. 16-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)



§ 53.016  TERM OF CONTRACT.



   Ordinary contracts for water supply service, unless otherwise
specified, expire in 1 year from date of the application, subject to the
following conditions and provisions. Contracts for metered water supply
service expire on the first of the month which follows the end of the first
year from date of application. All contracts shall continue in force by
renewal without act or notice from either party to the other, from year to
year, unless 30 days notice in writing is given by either party to the other
of a desire to terminate the contract.



(1982 Code, § 51.12)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.017  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   In the event of any change of consumer, located at any
premises, connected to the system of the Waterworks for water supply service,
the Waterworks shall be immediately notified, in writing, of the change
giving in notice the name and address of the new consumer, whereupon the
Waterworks shall require the new consumer to make application for water
supply service in the same manner as is provided for new service connections.



   (B)   In absence of an application by a new consumer, the use of the
Waterworks service, may at the option of the Waterworks, to be taken and
presumed to be an acceptance by the new consumer of all the contract
obligations of the preceding consumer with the Waterworks.



   (C)   In the event any consumer fails to notify the Waterworks, in
writing, of a change in occupancy of any premises connected for water supply
service, that consumer shall continue to be liable to the Waterworks for all
rates and charges accrued and accruing for the service, until either the end
of the contract period in which he or she may later notify the Waterworks of
his or her desire to cancel, or the Waterworks shall, of its own volition,
have canceled the contract with the consumer, but this clause shall not
preclude the Waterworks from also demanding, from the new consumer, the
payment of all or any charges and rates which shall, at the time of the
demand, be unpaid or unsecured, without regard to whether the same accrued
prior or subsequent to any change in occupancy or ownership.



   (D)   In no case of change of consumer shall the preceding consumer
be released from any contract obligations to and with the Waterworks until
the expiration of the contract period, properly terminated in accordance with
these rules, except at the option of the Waterworks, evidenced by a written
release from the Waterworks.



(1982 Code, § 51.13)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.018  REVIVING CANCELED CONTRACTS.



   Any contract which has been canceled cannot be revived, nor can service
thereunder, which has been discontinued, be resumed except at the option of
the Waterworks, and then only on further conditions as it may impose, and on
payment to the Waterworks or all charges and rates due and unpaid under the
canceled contract, together with the usual turn-on charges, and on the
payment of the water rates applicable under these rules.



(1982 Code, § 51.14)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.019  WHEN RATES FOR SERVICE BEGIN TO ACCRUE.



   When applications for water supply service is made, the service
together with the charges and rates therefor shall begin in accordance with
these rules on the date the water is turned on by the Waterworks.



(1982 Code, § 51.12)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.020  CANCELLATION OF CONTRACT AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   All contracts shall be subject to cancellation at the option of the
Waterworks, and service thereunder may be discontinued by the Waterworks for
any of the following reasons:



   (A)   For misrepresentations or concealment in the application as to
the premises or fixtures to be furnished with water supply service or the use
to be made of the service;



   (B)   For adding to the premises or fixtures, or to the use to be
made of the water supply service, without notice, in writing, to the
Waterworks, and first obtaining its written assent to the addition;



   (C)   For waste or excessive use of water through improper or
imperfect pipes, fixtures or appliances or in any other manner;



   (D)   For refusal or neglect to make or renew any advance payment,
if any is required by the Waterworks, or to pay bills for service rendered
when due, or for refusal or neglect to comply with any requirements of the
Waterworks as to meter or service connection maintenance, alteration or
renewal, or other requirements relating to the water supply service of the
Waterworks;



   (E)   For the use of water supply service for or in connection with
or for the benefit of any other premises or purpose than that described in
the application, where pipes or plumbing fixtures have been installed without
securing a permit therefor from the Waterworks, or where the arrangements of
the pipes or the plumbing fixtures are not in accordance with the rules of
the Waterworks;



   (F)   For any interference or tampering, whether by act or omission,
with the seals on any meter, or with any meter box or vault, or with service
pipes or valves or any seals thereon, or with the curb stop cock, or with any
appliance of the Waterworks or with any appliance of the owner, which was or
is required by the Waterworks for controlling or regulating the water supply
service. For the purpose of this rule, any interference or tampering by any
person whomsoever with any appliances used in connection with or for
controlling or regulating the water supply service to any premises shall be
construed and taken to be the act or omission of the consumer at the premises;



   (G)   For failure to maintain, protect and safeguard the meter in
working order satisfactory to the Waterworks, where the meter is owned by
either the consumer or the Waterworks;



   (H)   In cases of continued vacancy of the premises;



   (I)   For violation of any rule of the Waterworks;



   (J)   When there has been a change in occupancy of the premises, but
no application from the new consumer has been made and approved by the
Waterworks;



   (K)   When there has been a discontinuance of the use of the water
or of the service of the Waterworks;



   (L)   When the contract has been in any way terminated by the
consumer. Likewise, unless all bills, accounts and charges of the Waterworks
have been paid or until they are properly secured to the satisfaction of the
Waterworks;



   (M)   When any consumer refuses or neglects payment of any bills,
accounts or charges for or on account of the premises;



   (N)   When the consumer commits any act of bankruptcy or makes an
assignment for the benefit of creditors, or has made against him or her an
application for the appointment of receiver;



   (O)   When the Waterworks has been or is being defrauded in any way;
and/or



   (P)   When any consumer becomes irresponsible or on his or her death.



(1982 Code, § 51.16)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.021  SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND WATER CONNECTION PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Service connections shall be installed only with a valid
permit. The service connection means the service pipe beginning at the
coupling on the water main ending at the meter well.



   (B)   The water works shall make the tap in the water main. It shall
be the responsibility of the consumer to expose the water mainline, set
saddle, install corporation stop and pay for the installation of service from
water main.



   (C)   Water connection permit fees shall be as follows:



      (1)   Permit fee for developments for multiple single family
home sites shall be $1.25 per linear foot of waterline to cover the cost of
reviewing construction drawings, issuing the permit and conducting periodic
inspections of the construction.



      (2)   Permit fee for site development to connect to water
mainline to a building or single family dwelling shall be as follows:



 


Size

 

Tap Fee




2 inch or less meter

 

$500




 



      (3)   The charge for a tap larger than the 2 inch meter shall
be the cost of labor, materials, power machinery, transportation and overhead
cost for installing the tap, but shall not be less than the charge for a
2-inch meter tap.



   (D)   Written application for all new service shall be made at City
Hall, specifying that the applicant will use water and pay for same at
scheduled rates of a period of at least 1 year, beginning within 90 days from
date of application; the application to be made on printed forms of the
Waterworks.



(Ord. 7-2005, passed 4-13-2005)



§ 53.022  REPAIRS, RENEWALS AND REPLACEMENTS.



   All repairs, renewals and replacements of small service connections,
originally furnished by the Waterworks, and not otherwise, shall be made by
the Waterworks free of charge, on notice, in writing by the consumer of any
requirement of the repairs, renewal or replacements. Where repairs to service
pipes or water fixture beyond service connections or the curb stop are
necessary, the consumer shall, without delay, employ a plumber licensed by
the Waterworks to do the work. Failure, refusal or neglect of the consumer,
to make repairs within 3 days after notice is sent by the Waterworks, shall
authorize the Waterworks to shut off the water and to discontinue the service
without further notice.



(1982 Code, § 51.18)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.023  SIZE OF SERVICE CONNECTION PRESCRIBED.



   The Waterworks in every instance reserves the right, at its option to
designate and prescribe the size of a service connection, either on original
installation of a new connection or on any renewal or replacement of any old
connection. The service pipe may be extended from the curb by any plumber
licensed by the Waterworks when the necessary permit has been secured.
Reasonable sizes shall be designated and prescribed.



(1982 Code, § 51.19)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.024  SEPARATE SERVICE CONNECTION FOR EACH PREMISE.



   Each separate premise shall have its separate and distinct service
connection, and in no case shall more than 1 premise be furnished with
service from 1 connection, except only in cases where, in the discretion of
the Waterworks, the conditions make this impossible or inadvisable, in which
event the Waterworks may permit the use of 1 service connection.



(1982 Code, § 51.20)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.025  ALL WATER SOLD BY METER MEASUREMENT.



   All water will be sold to consumer by meter measurement at the rate
established by the State Public Service Commission.



(1982 Code, § 51.21)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.026  MINIMUM CHARGE; ON RATE AND WHEN CHARGED AT REGULAR RATE.



   (A)   All metered service shall have a monthly charge of rate,
varying with and based upon the size of the meters installed as follows:



 


Size of Meter

 

Rate per Month






5/8-inch

 

$3.60




3/4-inch

 

$4.80




1-inch

 

$7.20




1-1/2 inch

 

$12.00




2-inch

 

$18.00




3-inch

 

$28.00




4-inch

 

$36.00




6-inch

 

$54.00





 



(1982 Code, § 51.22)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   If the whole amount of water used by the consumer in any 1
month does not, when charged at the regular schedule rate, amount to as much
as the minimum charge, the consumer shall pay the minimum charge for that
month and shall not be liable for any other charges for water consumed during
the month. When the amount of water used by any consumer in 1 month, charged
at the regular rate, amounts to as much or more than the minimum charge for
the meter through which the water is used, then the consumer shall pay for
the amount of water used at the regular rate and shall not be liable to the
Waterworks for any minimum charges for that month.



(1982 Code, § 51.23)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.027  SCHEDULE FOR METER RATES FOR CONSUMERS.



   (A)   Each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance with the
following applicable size of meter installed for which the user will be
entitled to the quantity of water set out in the below schedule of rates.



 


Metered Rates per Month

 

Rate per 100 Cubic Feet





First 500 cubic feet
 

$1.44



Next 1,500 cubic feet
 

$1.28



Next 2,500 cubic feet
 

$1.12



Next 7,500 cubic feet
 

$0.96



Next 18,000 cubic feet
 

$0.72



Next 20,000 cubic feet
 

$0.56



Over 50,000 cubic feet
 

$0.40





 



   (B)   The net rate shall be charged if bills are paid by the
fifteenth day of the month, following the month in which service is rendered,
otherwise the gross rates shall be charged.



   (C)   If a person, firm, company or corporation is using water from
more than 1 meter, each meter shall be figured separately and not less than
the minimum rate shall be charged for each meter.



(1982 Code, § 51.24)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 9-1981,
passed 5-26-1981)



§ 53.028  PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION RATES.



   (A)   The amount to be paid by the city for fire hydrant rental per
year is $ 200 per year.



   (B)   When the city desires water for flushing a city sewer which
has become clogged, and satisfactory notice is given the Waterworks by a city
official, that the water is desired, the Waterworks will send 1 of its people
to open a fire hydrant and put a hose valve on the same so that the water can
be controlled by the city employees without using the main valve on the fire
hydrant. The fire hydrant must be opened by an employee of the Waterworks. No
charge will be made for the water or the service.



(1982 Code, § 51.25)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 9-1981,
passed 5-26-1981)



§ 53.029  PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE RATES PER ANNUM.



   (A)   The following rates for private fire protection service are
based on the size of the service pipe entering the building or grounds and
which, in any way, are used for private fire protection such as hose
connection to stand-pipes, stand-pipes and fire hydrants.



   (B)   The rates for yearly service, payable in advance are:



 


Fire Protection System

 

Per Year





1-1/2-inch connection
 

$90



2-inch connection
 

$126



2-1/2-inch connection
 

$151



3-inch connection
 

$180



4-inch connection
 

$234



6-inch connection
 

$363





 



   (C)   The amount to be paid for private fire hydrant service shall
be $200 per hydrant per year.



(1982 Code, § 51.26)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 9-1981,
passed 5-26-1981)




SPECIFIC REGULATIONS




§ 53.040  INSTALLATION SERVICE.



   All private fire protection service will be installed by the Waterworks
which will ascertain the best location for same and lay the pipe from the
street main to a point just inside the wall of the building or within the
building line of open yards, where buildings are set back from the building
line. The consumer will be charged for time and materials. The service will
be so installed that the water used therefrom will not flow through the meter
but will be separate and apart from the regular water service.



(1982 Code, § 51.27)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.041  SIZE OF SERVICE PIPE; UNDERWRITERS PUMP.



   In all cases the Waterworks shall decide the size of the service pipe.
In all cases where underwriters pumps are to be installed, a suction pipe
sufficient internal area to deliver a quantity of water equal to the full
rated capacity of the pipe will be allowed, and no enlargement of the suction
pipe inside the premises will be permitted. If, however, this service pipe is
run to a surge tank placed in close proximity to the pump, the full size of
the suction which the pump calls for may be run from the pump to the tank.



(1982 Code, § 51.18)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.042  NUMBER OF SERVICES.



   One service only will be allowed to any 1 building or premises unless
in the opinion of the Waterworks the general public fire protection will not
be jeopardized and more than 1 is absolutely necessary for the proper
protection of the premises. All fire equipment connected to the Waterworks
service shall be confined within the application, and where 2 or more
connections are made for 1 building or premises, they shall be kept
separated, unless special permission is obtained from the Waterworks to
connect the same in a manner to approved by it.



(1982 Code, § 51.29)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.043  TEST OF FIRE SERVICES.



   Whenever a fire service system is to be tested under the regulations of
the fire insurance underwriters, the consumer must notify the Waterworks of
the proposed test, naming the day and hour when the same is intended to be
made so that, if desired, the Waterworks may have an inspector present during
the test.



(1982 Code, § 51.30)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.044  CONTAMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY.



   Any fire protection system supplied with water from the Waterworks
service shall be supplied exclusively with the water, and no connection will
be allowed with any other system drawing its supply from any other source
whereby the Waterworks water supply may be contaminated by the failure to
close valves or leaking check valves, and no auxiliary or secondary suction
pipe to any underwriters pump taking water from wells, streams or other
sources whatever will be permitted. Any fire protection system using water
from wells, streams or sources other than the Waterworks service shall be
kept separate from any system supplied from the Waterworks service.



(1982 Code, § 51.31)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.045  INSPECTION; APPROVAL OF THE FIRE CHIEF; GUARANTEES.



   (A)   All fire service shall be subject to inspection by the
Waterworks from time to time, and the consumer shall give the inspectors all
reasonable facilities for making the inspections and any information
concerning the same that the inspector or the Waterworks may require. Care
will always be taken that inspections will be made with as little
inconvenience to the consumer or occupant as possible.



(1982 Code, § 51.32)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   All applications for private fire protection shall be subject
to the written approval of the Chief of the Fire Department, who, in the
approval, shall state that in his or her opinion the public fire protection
will not be endangered by the connection proposed to be made by the
Waterworks when properly safeguarded by the placing of an indicator post
valve as near the main as possible, the valve to be under the control and
orders of the Chief of the Fire Department, at time of fires, with full
authority to close the valve.



(1982 Code, § 51.33)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   (1)   The Waterworks in no manner guarantees to furnish a
proper quantity of water through the fire protection service nor does it
undertake to guarantee anything relative to the services, but it will
endeavor to maintain the efficiency of its service under all conditions.



      (2)   The granting of a permit for private fire protection is
under the express condition that the Waterworks shall not be considered or
deemed in any manner to have undertaken to extinguish fire or to protect any
person or property against loss or damage by fire or otherwise; the
Waterworks is not an insurer of persons or property and it shall be free and
exempt from any and all claims for damage on account of any injury to persons
or property by reason of fire, water, failure to supply water or pressure, or
for any other cause whatsoever, and, in the event of the destruction of the
premises of the consumer, the contract between the Waterworks and the
consumer shall immediately cease.



(1982 Code, § 51.34)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.046  PLANS AND DRAWINGS.



   The consumer will furnish an accurate sketch showing the pipes, valves,
hydrants, connections and appurtenances on the premises of the consumer and
connected with the mains of the Waterworks and also an accurate sketch of any
other water pipe system and fixtures that may exist on the premises.



(1982 Code, § 51.35)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.047  EXTENSIONS OF MAINS AND INSTALLING PUBLIC HYDRANTS.



   (A)   On receipt of written instruction from the city, the
Waterworks will extend its water mains in graded streets and install fire
hydrants, all at its own expense, 1 fire hydrant to be installed,
approximately, for every 300 feet of water mains so ordered and extended.



   (B)   The Waterworks will extend its main in graded streets,
adjoining existing mains, when there is sufficient new business,
satisfactorily guaranteed in writing, to give an additional revenue of  $50
per annum for a period of 3 years for every 300 feet of mains so extended, in
making up the $50 for every 300 feet, the Waterworks will not include any
existing business or any premises that can be supplied from existing mains.
Under this arrangement the city may transfer fire hydrants from other
portions of the city, by paying the actual costs of moving the hydrants and
connecting the same to the new mains, and the city shall pay the rental for
the hydrants in their new locations instead of in the original locations.



   (C)   The Waterworks will also extend its mains into subdivision
where satisfactory arrangements can be made with realty companies or owners,
who are promoting the sale of real estate, on the basis of a guaranteed
return of $17.50 per annum, for a period of 5 years for each 100 feet of main
pipe extended.



(1982 Code, § 51.36)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.048  MONTHLY READINGS; BILLS; COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   Meters will be read monthly in the last week of each month,
and all bills shall become due and payable the first day of the following
month.



(1982 Code, § 51.37)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   (1)   All persons regarding themselves overcharged can, by
applying to the Waterworks office within 15 days after their bills are due,
have their premises inspected or meter tested, examined and reread, but all
bills against which no complaints have been entered within the time shall be
considered correct, and must be paid without any change in the amount of same.



      (2)   All persons making complaints are required to get a
written acknowledgement of same from the Waterworks office showing the nature
and amount of the complaint. Without the written acknowledgement no complaint
will be considered.



(1982 Code, § 51.38)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.049  DEFECTIVE METER.



   No bills will be calculated on the registration of any meter the
setting of which and the quality thereof has not met the approval of the
Waterworks, and the Waterworks reserves the right at any time to test any
meter in actual service. Should, on any test, a meter prove to be defective
it will be taken out of service at once and the charge for the water will be
adjusted by estimate.



(1982 Code, § 51.39)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.050  METERS NOT REGISTERING.



   If any meter stops registering the consumer will be charged for the
month, the average for the corresponding period in preceding years or months.



(1982 Code, § 51.40)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.051  CONSUMER RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL WATER REGISTERED.



   (A)   The consumer supplied through meter will be held responsible
for all water registered by the same and no reduction will be allowed on
account of leaks or wastage.



   (B)   There shall be no waste of water either to prevent freezing or
for any other purpose. Water will not be furnished where there are leaky
pipes or fixtures.



   (C)   When the conditions are found to exist, the supply will be
shut off until repairs are made.



(1982 Code, § 51.41)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.052  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:



      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or
in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of
utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer's complaint.



   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
turn-on charge in the sum of $20.



(1982 Code, § 51.42)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 9-1981,
passed 5-26-1981)



§ 53.053  SETTING OF METERS; DISTURBING METER.



   (A)   (1)   All meters shall be put in and connected up under the
direction and in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Waterworks,
whether placed on premises, in basement or in the street, the Waterworks
reserves the right to decide the location.



      (2)   When placed in premises where a hot water tank is used,
the meter must not be placed nearer than 20 feet of the hot water tank and a
good check valve must be placed in the supply pipe between the hot water tank
and the meter.



      (3)   If this rule is not complied with the consumer will be
charged with all damages to the meter caused by hot water.



(1982 Code, § 51.43)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   (1)   No person, unless authorized by the Waterworks, shall
connect, disconnect, remove or repair or otherwise disturb any meter. The
Waterworks will repair all meters 2 inches and less in size free of charge.



      (2)   Actual cost of repairs on all meters larger than 2
inches will be charged to consumers having the meters.



(1982 Code, § 51.44)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.054  CONSUMERS RESPONSIBLE FOR METERS AND ARRANGING PIPES.



   (A)   Consumers will be held responsible for any damage meters may
sustain from freezing (except where set in tree row), hot water or steam
settling back from the boiler or from any other cause, and any necessary
repairs resulting from the cause will be made at the expense of the consumer,
the charges to be paid to the Waterworks before water is turned on.



(1982 Code, § 51.45)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   Before any meter is placed by the Waterworks, the consumer
shall, at his or her own expense, have pipes so arranged that all water will
pass through the meter.



   (C)   Consumers shall provide ready and easy access to their meters
so that they may frequently be read and examined by the Waterworks.



(1982 Code, § 51.46)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.055  ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   Through its proper officers the Waterworks shall, at all reasonable
hours, have a free access to all parts of premises to which water is supplied
for the purpose of making necessary examinations.



(1982 Code, § 51.47)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.056  TEMPORARY USERS



   All water furnished to temporary users on an unmetered basis shall be
charged for on the basis of the listed consumption rates as estimated by the
Waterworks Superintendent.



(1982 Code, § 51.48)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 9-1981,
passed 5-26-1981)



§ 53.057  USE OF FIRE HYDRANT.



   No person, except a duly authorized agent of the Waterworks or Fire
Department, shall open, for public or private use, any fire hydrant or take
water from any outlet whatever, unless the person shall first obtain
permission from the Superintendent of the Waterworks.



(1982 Code, § 51.49)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.058  CONNECTIONS TO WATER MAIN ON MAIN WATER PIPE; SPRINKLING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a duly authorized
agent of the Waterworks, to make or attempt to make any extension of, or
connection with, or tap to any main, distributing pipe or service pipe of the
Waterworks system by which water is furnished by the Waterworks to any
consumer, whether the main or pipe is owned by the city or private
individuals.



(1982 Code, § 51.50)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   (1)   The use of water for sprinkling purposes must be
limited to 4 hours per day, from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. and from 5 p.m. to 8
p.m. in the evening. The use of water for sprinkling purposes outside of
these hours is positively prohibited. Sprinkling shall be by hand only and
the use of automatic sprinklers or a hose fixed on a support is positively
prohibited.



      (2)   During all alarms of fire and while the fire pressure is
on the pipe, the use of water for yard or street sprinkling is positively
prohibited, and violation of either of these rules will forfeit the right to
use of the water at the option of the Waterworks.



(1982 Code, § 51.51)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.059  DISCONNECTING THE USE OF WATER.



   Persons desirous of discontinuing the use of the water must give notice
to the Waterworks office prior to the stopping thereof or they will be
charged until the notice is given.



(1982 Code, § 51.52)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931) 



§ 53.060  CONTROL OF STOP COCKS.



   (A)   (1)   Stop cocks will be placed at the curb of property
line and shall be under the exclusive control of the Waterworks.



      (2)   No person shall, without written authority from the
Waterworks, turn on the water to any service.



   (B)   This rule shall not prevent plumbers from testing their work,
but they must not in any case leave the water turned on without special
permit.



(1982 Code, § 51.53)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.061  LIABILITY OF WATER WORKS.



   In no case will the Waterworks be liable for damage for shutting off
the water to any consumer either while making repairs to mains or service
pipes, or for any violation of the rules and regulations of the Waterworks.



(1982 Code, § 51.54)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.062  BOILERS.



   (A)   Steam boilers and gas engines taking a supply of water
directly from the service pipe depending on the pressure of the pipe system
of the Waterworks for supplying the boilers under working pressure, will do
so at the risk of parties making attachments as the Waterworks will not be
responsible for any accident or damages.



   (B)   House boilers for domestic use must in all cases be provided
with vacuum valves to prevent collapsing when the water is cut off from the
distributing pipes, and for accidents or damages from the imperfect action of
the valves, the Waterworks will not be responsible in any case.



(1982 Code, § 51.55)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.063  TAPPING THE WATER MAINS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person except a properly qualified agent
of the Waterworks to enter on any alley or street, within the city, for the
purpose of laying service or distributing pipes or to do any plumbing in
connection with the Waterworks or the city in the streets or alleys, or dig
in any street or alley, for the purposes or to do plumbing in connection with
the Waterworks or to make any connection with any main distribution service
or other pipe belonging to or forming a part of the Waterworks system of the
city, until the person has procured a permit so to do.



(1982 Code, § 51.56)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.064  CITY EMPLOYEES TO REPORT.



   It shall be the duty of everybody, and especially all city employees,
to report to the Waterworks all cases of leakage or waste of water or any
violation of the provisions of this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 51.57)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.065  FIXTURES FOR PUBLIC USE.



   Attachments of whatever kind made to the water pipes or other fixtures
belonging to the Waterworks, and intended for public use, shall be subject to
the same supervision, rules and regulations as are made for the protection of
the Waterworks against abuse, destruction and unnecessary use or waste of
water.



(1982 Code, § 51.58)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.066  STOP AND WASTE VALVE.



   All persons taking water must provide a stop and waste valve properly
located inside of building and have pipes so arranged that water can be drawn
from them in case of danger from frost.



(1982 Code, § 51.59)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.067  INSTALLATION, REINSTALLATION OR TRANSFER OF METERS.



   (A)   Installation. The following rates are established as charges
for installation of meters:



 


Meter Size (Inch)

 

Rate






5/8-inch

 
$200



3/4-inch

 
$200



1-inch

 
$250



1-1/2-inch

 
$300



2-inch

 
$350



3-inch

 
$800



4-inch

 
$1,200




 



   (B)   Reinstallation. When a meter is installed and ordered taken
out within 6 months from the date of the installation, a charge of $1,000
will be made for reinstalling the meter for the same customer.



   (C)   Transfer. The charge for transfer of a meter from 1 location
to another for use by the same customer is $15.



(1982 Code, § 51.53)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 16-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)



§ 53.068  PLUMBER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No plumber shall be authorized to carry on the business of
plumbing in connection with the Waterworks until he or she has given
satisfactory bond in the sum of $1,000 and received a license as provided by
ordinance affecting plumbers.



   (B)   Plumbers will be required to have their bonds renewed on or
before January 1 of each year, otherwise their license will become
inoperative.



   (C)   No plumber shall lay any service pipe or do any kind or work
in connection with the introduction and supply or water without first having
obtained a written permit from the Waterworks for each separate job of
plumbing work which he or she may wish to perform. All plumbing must be done
subject to the approval of the Waterworks. Water closets and urinals must be
provided with self-flushing valves unless supplies through a meter.



   (D)   Plumbers shall make a full and complete return of the use for
which water is supplied under any permit granted. The return must be made by
the plumber doing the work within 48 hours after the completion of any work.



   (E)   If a plumber, in making an attachment or in shutting off or
turning on water, should not properly replace the curb box or in any way
injure any of the property of the Waterworks, he or she shall be charged with
the expense of making all necessary repairs. On his or her failure to report
the damage or pay the charges he or she shall be refused further permits
until the damages are paid.



   (F)   After testing any work, the plumber shall turn off the water
from the premises except where the work is a simple extension or addition
attachment on a service then in use and where a permit has been obtained to
make the same. Where water is turned off previous to making any alterations
or repairs, plumbers shall not leave water turned on when work is completed.



   (G)   Plumbers are particularly cautioned to leave curb cocks in the
condition in which they find them, either on or off. Disregard of this rule
will result in forfeiture of license.



   (H)   Plumbers shall report in writing to the Waterworks all repairs
to any water service within 48 hours after completion of the repairs. The
above specifically includes leaks.



   (I)   Plumbers shall not loan or sell any valve keys.



   (J)   All pipes used must be either standard weight cast iron,
properly coated, galvanized wrought iron or extra heavy lead. The use of
block wrought iron or steel pipe is prohibited.



   (K)   All work shall be inspected before being covered up, if
underground, and the plumber doing the work shall give and Waterworks at
least 2 hours notice that the work will be ready for inspection.



   (L)   Where services are metered no connection shall be made between
meters and curb box.



   (M)   Plans for fire protection lines or other special or unusual
uses shall be submitted to the Waterworks for approval before any work is
done in connection therewith.



   (N)   The cross connection of one premises with another, whether
owned by the same person or not, is strictly prohibited. Each property must
have its own individual curb cock.



   (O)   Any plumber violating any of the Waterworks rules and
regulations governing the introduction, supply and consumption of water or
who shall either voluntarily or at the request of any consumer or subscriber
introduce any pipe, hydrant, bath or fixture which is prohibited by the
Waterworks will be prosecuted and shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided and may, at the option of the Waterworks Committee, be
required to forfeit his or her license to do plumbing.



(1982 Code, § 51.61)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.069  DUTIES OF THE SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   The Superintendent, under the direction of the Waterworks
Committee and the Common Council, shall have charge of the City Waterworks.



   (B)   It shall be his or her duty to see that all rules and
regulations are complied with; that the conditions of all contracts by or
with the city relating to the Waterworks are faithfully complied with; he or
she shall audit all accounts and claims and submit the same to the Waterworks
Committee with the information that will enable them to act advisedly
thereon; with authority from the Waterworks Committee; he or she shall
purchase all supplies for the City Waterworks.



   (C)   He or she shall keep a correct account of all persons using
water; he or she shall see that the accounts are kept according to the rules
of the State Public Service Commission, and report to it at least once a
year; he or she shall collect all the water rents and deposit same with the
City Clerk-Treasurer at least once each week.



(1982 Code, § 51.62)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.070  REBATE OF DEPOSITS.



   (A)   When the water is turned off, a rebate of the deposit made by
the consumer will be given after all bills of the Waterworks have been paid.
If the consumer moves out owing bills, the deposit will be used as a payment
of the bills. The deposit receipt must in all cases accompany the application
for rebate.



   (B)   The Superintendent shall pay the rebate due the depositor and
take a receipt for the same, and on filing a claim, with a receipt attached,
the Common Council shall reimburse the Superintendent for the money advanced
by him or her.



(1982 Code, § 51.63)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.071  SUPERINTENDENT TO MAKE CONTRACTS.



   The Superintendent is authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of
the city, all contracts for water and other contracts provided for in this
chapter, the same to be executed according to the terms and conditions
specified in this chapter. In the absence of a Superintendent the contracts
shall be executed by a duly authorized agent of the city.



(1982 Code, § 51.64)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.072  BYPASS THIEVERY.



   Any person found to have constructed or installed any device to
circumvent the metering of water flow shall be fined $2,500.



(1982 Code, § 51.66)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 53.073  UNLAWFUL USE OF WATER SERVICE LINE.



   (A)   Any person found to have used a city water service line or the
water therefrom without having the line or water metered and acting without
written permission of the City Waterworks Department in violation of this
section shall be fined $2,500; this section shall not preclude the Board of
Public Works and Safety from collecting from the person a reasonable sum for
water used in violation of this section, in addition to the fine herein
established.



   (B)   Any person violating this section, shall have his or her water
service discontinued until proper application for water service and meter has
been made and approved.



(1982 Code, § 51.67)  (Ord. 16-1981, passed 10-12-1981)



§ 53.074  DELINQUENT LOCATIONS.



   Any person making application for water service for a location from
which previous water or sewage accounts may be payable to the Waterworks
shall pay the account on the location prior to the provision of service to
the location in the name of the new account.



(1982 Code, § 51.68)  (Ord. 16-1981, passed 10-12-1981)



§ 53.075  RECONNECTION CHARGE; CUSTOMER METER DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Reconnection charge.



      (1)   To establish a new service connection or to re-establish
service for an account or customer that had not previously had service
disconnected for non-payment within the previous 12-month period prior to the
request-$15.



      (2)   To re-establish service for an account or customer who
previously had the service discontinued because of non-payment within the
previous 12-month period prior to the request-$35.



      (3)   For each re-establishment of service within a 12-month
period for non-payment the service re-establishment charge shall increase by
$35 for each subsequent re-establishment after disconnection for non-payment
within a 12-month period.



      (4)   When the service is turned off for non-payment of bill
or whenever for any reason, beyond the control of the Waterworks, a
re-establishment of services is required by any 1 customer, the charge will
be made by the Waterworks to cover the cost of discontinuance and
re-establishment of service. The charge together with any arrears due the
Waterworks shall be paid by the customer before service will be
re-established.



   (B)   Customer meter deposit; lawn meter fee.



      (1)   A customer making application for service and who shall
be responsible for the monthly billings shall pay a "meter deposit" in the
amount of $60.



      (2)   A customer making application for service and who shall
be responsible for the monthly billings who has never before been a customer
for service shall pay a meter deposit in the amount of $100, $40 of which
shall be refunded after 1 year of continuous service.



      (3)   For all customers making application for service and who
shall be responsible for the monthly billings, any deposit paid less any
amount of the current and/or delinquent bill owing shall be refunded to the
customer at a time as the customer requests disconnection or termination of
respective service.



      (4)   In regard to "lawn meters" the fee for a lawn meter
shall be $100, $50 of which shall be refunded to the customer when the lawn
meter is returned to the city at disconnection or termination of services in
regard to the use of lawn meters.



(Ord. 11-2004, passed 5-25-2004)



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense.



(1982 Code, § 51.68)  (Ord. 21-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



      72.   MOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATION DEFERRAL PROGRAM



      73.   TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Generally




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Police Department’s duty to enforce traffic regulations



   70.03   Obedience to Police Department officials required



   70.04   Notification of violation; filing of citation



   70.05   Parking in certain areas restricted




Speed Bumps and Other Speed Modifications




   70.15   Mandatory procedures governing speed control modifications



   70.16   City agencies involved



   70.17   Content of written requests and role of affected residents



   70.18   Design and construction of speed control modifications



   70.19   Notice and hearing requirements of Board initial
determination



   70.20   Role of Board of Public Works and Safety



   70.99   Penalty




GENERALLY




§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire Department, state
and county and municipal police departments, and ambulances when on emergency
calls, shall be considered authorized emergency vehicles.



   INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACE.  A portion of the paved surface of the
street of sufficient length or depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a
vehicle to be parked, as shall be specified and marked off by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of 2 or more
streets or highways which join one another at an angle whether or not 1 of
the streets or highways crosses the other.



   OPERATOR.  Any person in actual control of any vehicle.



(1982 Code, § 70.01)



   PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle on a street whether the vehicle is
occupied or not and whether the vehicle is occupied or not by an operator for
a period of time in excess of 2 minutes.



(Ord. 6-1980, passed 5-2-1980)



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   SILENT POLICE OFFICER.  Any suitable device, safety zone, post, sign,
standard or automatic signal light placed within any street or public place
as a warning or for control or direction of traffic.



   TRAFFIC OFFICE.  The police headquarters of the city.



(1982 Code, § 70.01)



   VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer,
semitrailer, truck tractor, bus, school bus, recreational vehicle,
construction vehicle, tractor and bicycle.



(Ord. 8-1984, passed 10-23-1984)



§ 70.02  POLICE DEPARTMENT'S DUTY TO ENFORCE TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department of this city to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the Police Department are
authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or
audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided
that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Departments may direct
traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Police Department is empowered to make and enforce
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter, to
make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies.



(1982 Code, § 70.10)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 70.03  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or to fail to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.



(1982 Code, § 70.11)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.04  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION; FILING OF CITATION.



   (A)   Whenever a member of the Police Department shall observe
violations by the operator of any vehicle of §§ 70.03, 71.01 through 71.04,
73.01 through 73.13 and Ch. 74, Sch. II, the officer shall notify the
operator in writing by the issuance to the violator a citation stating the
violation, the license number plus make and year of the vehicle, the
violator's name and address, the violator's drivers license number, the date
and location of the violation and the date of initial court appearance. The
original citation shall be filed in the Clay County Superior Court or any
other proper court of competent jurisdiction to hear ordinance violations in
the City of Brazil. A copy of the citation shall also be filed in the office
of the City Clerk-Treasurer who will forward the same to the city attorney
for prosecution.



   (B)   Whenever a member of the Police Department shall observe
violations by any person of any other provisions of this title not
specifically set forth in division (A) above, the officer shall notify the
operator in writing by the issuance to the violator a citation stating the
violation, the license number plus make and year of the vehicle, the
violator's name and address (if available) and the date and location of the
violation. The original citation shall be filed at the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer. The violator shall present himself or herself with the copy
of the citation at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer for the purpose of
paying the proper penalty within 72 hours after the date of issuance. If the
violator fails to appear and pay the appropriate penalty, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall notify the city attorney who shall file, or cause to be filed, in the
Clay County Superior Court or other court of competent jurisdiction to hear
ordinance violations, an affidavit charging the violator with the violation
specified in the citation.



   (C)   Whenever a member of the Police Department shall observe
violations of any provisions of Chapter 73 of the Brazil Code, the violators
and citations shall be processed pursuant to the provisions of division (A)
above.



(Ord. 7-2002, passed 5-14-2002)



§ 70.05  PARKING IN CERTAIN AREAS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   Parking of certain types of trailers as hereinafter defined on
the streets within the corporate limits of the city, with a zoning district
designation as an “R District-Residential” as provided for under the
Zoning Code is restricted in that no person shall stop, stand or park certain
types of trailers as defined herein, upon any street within an “R
District-Residential” area designation under the Zoning Code and within the
corporate limits of the city, except as follows:



      (1)   While expeditiously loading or unloading passengers,
freight, materials or merchandise between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.;



      (2)   While affecting emergency repairs when a vehicle is so
disabled as to render it unsafe to proceed further;



      (3)   Vehicle and equipment engaged in street construction,
maintenance and repair, or the construction, maintenance or repair of public
service utilities;



      (4)   Vehicles serving as emergency vehicles.



   (B)   The term semi-trailer as used in this section, applies to
semi-trailers defined as a trailer that is in excess of 25 feet in length and
is the type of trailer that has wheels only at the rear, requiring the front
end to be supported by a towing vehicle, which is not an automobile, a van, a
mini-van, SUV, or a pickup truck. Measurements for length shall be the
overall length of the trailer, including the hitch, if it extends beyond the
trailer body.



   (C)   Any trailer as defined herein found stopped, standing or
parked in violation of any provision of this section is subject to being
removed and impounded at the owner's expense.



   (D)   This section incorporates by reference Chapter 74, which may
further restrict parking in regard to the streets contained within the
corporate limits of the city. Further, parking may further be restricted by
the rest and remainder of the sections contained in this title.



(Ord. 14-2006, passed 4-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 70.99




SPEED BUMPS AND OTHER SPEED MODIFICATIONS




§ 70.15  MANDATORY PROCEDURES GOVERNING SPEED CONTROL MODIFICATIONS.



   The following procedure must be strictly followed before a speed bump
or other traffic or speed control modifications of the surface or grade of
any public street or alley way can be constructed or made by any elected or
appointed officials of the City of Brazil, and any employee or agent of the
City of Brazil or by any contractor or citizen of the City of Brazil.



(Res. 3-1992, passed 12-22-1992)



§ 70.16  CITY AGENCIES INVOLVED.



   A written request shall be submitted by the Supervisor of the City
Street Department to the Board of Public Works and Safety (hereinafter
referred to as "Board.") Prior to submission, the request shall be submitted
to the Chief of the Police Department for investigation and approval. The
Chief shall sign the request either approving or disapproving the request,
and state the reasons therefore if the Chief determines or desires to
recommend modifications or alternative to the written request, he or she may
do so thereon prior to signing the same.



(Res. 3-1992, passed 12-22-1992)



§ 70.17  CONTENT OF WRITTEN REQUESTS AND ROLE OF AFFECTED RESIDENTS.



   (A)   The request shall state the actual location of the proposed
placement or removal of the speed bump or speed control modification, and the
reason therefor.



   (B)   Accompanying the request shall be a written approval for the
proposed placement, removal or modification signed by at least 75% of the
residents located within the block of the proposed modification plus those
located at least 1 block of either side of the affected block.



(Res. 3-1992, passed 12-22-1992)



§ 70.18  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF SPEED CONTROL MODIFICATIONS.



   Any speed bump or speed control modification must be so designed and
constructed that a traveling vehicle may proceed over the same at the speed
of at least 20 mph without causing damages to the vehicle or severe jarring
of the driver thereof, or, in the alternative, in compliance with state or
nationally approved design requirements therefor.



(Res. 3-1992, passed 12-22-1992)



§ 70.19  NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS OF BOARD INITIAL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Upon the submission of the written request, the Board shall
advertise for and hold a public hearing on the request which shall be open to
the public. Published notice of the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1.



   (B)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Board shall
determine whether to approve or deny the request and so indicate its reasons
for its decision. A majority of the Board is necessary for approval of the
request.



(Res. 3-1992, passed 12-22-1992)



§ 70.20  ROLE OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   Following 6 months after the placement, removal or modification of the
street or alleyway as approved by the Board, the Board shall advertise for
and hold a public hearing which shall be open to the public to review its
initial determination and to receive public input regarding that
determination. Following that hearing, the Board may reverse, modify or
affirm its initial determination if it determines that the public welfare and
safety are adversely affected thereby.



(Res. 3-1992, passed 12-22-1992)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this title shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $12. The violator shall also be responsible for
court costs for any violations filed in court in addition to the civil
penalty.



   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that
a violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Any vehicle illegally parked shall be subject to being
removed, towed and stored at the owner's expense.



(Ord. 7-2002, passed 5-14-2002)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   71.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   71.02   Traffic-control signal legend



   71.03   Interference with official traffic-control devices prohibited



   71.04   Establishment of safety zones, bus stop zones and taxicab
stands



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any official traffic sign, or signal placed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.



(1982 Code, § 70.20)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.02  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   (A)   At all places where the silent police officers are placed,
drivers or operators of vehicles shall be controlled by the warning or
direction given thereby.



   (B)   Whenever traffic at an intersection is alternately directed to
proceed and to stop by the use of automatic colored lights or the words "GO"
or "CAUTION" and "STOP" these lights are terms shall indicate as follows:



      (1)   GREEN or GO.  Traffic facing the signal may proceed,
except that vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and
vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection at the time the
signal was exhibited.



      (2)   CENTER or MIDDLE YELLOW or CAUTION.  When shown
following the green or "GO" signal. Traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the intersection unless so close to the intersection that a
stop cannot be made in safety.



      (3)   RED or STOP.  Traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the intersection and remain standing until the green or "GO"
signal is shown.



(1982 Code, § 70.21)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 71.03  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move,
obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.



(1982 Code, § 70.22)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see 71.99



§ 71.04  ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES, BUS STOP ZONES AND TAXICAB STANDS.



   (A)   The Common Council's Committee on Public Safety is empowered
to establish safety zones of a kind and character and at places as they may
deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.



   (B)   Safety zones shall be marked off and indicated by painted
lines, discs, standards or loading platforms.



   (C)   The Committee shall also have the power to establish bus stop
zones and taxicab stands.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle at any time
to drive the same through or over or to the left of any safety zone so
established as herein provided.



(1982 Code, § 70.23)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined subject to a civil penalty of
not less than $65 and not more than $200.



   (B)   The penalty for the first violation shall be $65; for the
second violation $100; and for each subsequent violation $200.



   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that
a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 6-1994, passed 5-24-1994)



CHAPTER 72:  MOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATION DEFERRAL PROGRAM



Section



   72.01   Program User Fund



   72.02   Program established



   72.03   User fees established



   72.04   Payment of Traffic Violation Deferral Program fees



   72.05   Usage of funds from the Program



   72.06   Duration of Program



§ 72.01  PROGRAM USER FUND.



   There is created a Moving Traffic Violation Deferral Program User Fund
within the City's Department of Law Budget.



(Ord. 8-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



§ 72.02  PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.



   It is the desire of the city attorney in agreement with the Brazil
Police Department to create and establish a Moving Traffic Deferral Program
pursuant to I.C. 34-28-5-1, whereby any person charged with a moving traffic
violation pursuant to the ordinances of the City of Brazil may enter the
Deferral Program by executing a written deferral agreement and paying
required user fees in lieu of admitting the violation or having the violation
tried before the court in which the violation charge is filed.



(Ord. 8-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



§ 72.03  USER FEES ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to I.C. 34-28-5-1 and 33-39-1-8 any person charged with a
moving traffic violation pursuant to the ordinances of the City of Brazil and
agreeing to enter into the Deferral Program shall be required to pay an
initial user's fee of $50 and a monthly user's fee of $10 as part of the city
attorney's Deferral Program agreement.



(Ord. 8-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



§ 72.04  PAYMENT OF TRAFFIC VIOLATION DEFERRAL PROGRAM FEES.



   (A)   The initial and monthly user's fees shall be collected by the
court in which the violation is filed pursuant to I.C. 34-28-5-1.



   (B)   The Clerk of the Court shall transfer collected Deferral
Program user's fees to the City Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days after they are
collected pursuant to I.C. 33-37-5-17, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit
those fees into the Moving Traffic Violation Deferral Program User Fund
created by this chapter.



(Ord. 8-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



§ 72.05  USAGE OF FUNDS FROM THE PROGRAM.



   The city attorney shall have control over the use of the collected
Deferral Program user fees in the fund. At his or her discretion, the funds
may be dispersed therefrom to fund requested needs and equipment for the
Brazil Police Department or the Department of Law in the administration of
the Deferral Program or the prosecution of moving traffic violation
ordinances.



(Ord. 8-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



§ 72.06  DURATION OF PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Moving Traffic Violation Deferral Program User Fund shall
be perpetual until terminated at the request of the city attorney pursuant to
this chapter.



   (B)   This fund may be terminated at the request of the city
attorney by the enactment of an ordinance and any fund balance in that fund
shall be transferred to the city's general fund to be used for any purposes
lawfully allowed.



(Ord. 8-1997, passed 5-13-1997)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section




Generally




   73.01   Stop required before emerging from an alley, private drive
or building



   73.02   Overtaking and passing vehicles



   73.03   Operating vehicles on approach of emergency vehicle



   73.04   Hanging on or attaching to vehicles



   73.05   Crossing fire hoses



   73.06   Soliciting rides prohibited



   73.07   Driving through funeral or other processions prohibited



   73.08   Following emergency vehicles restricted



   73.09   Load limits



   73.10   Traction engines and heavy machine restrictions and
requirements; liability



   73.11   Obstructing traffic and open exhaust or cut-outs prohibited



   73.12   Crossing streets, turn and U-turn regulations



   73.13   Riding on sidewalks restricted




Speed Limit Regulations




   73.25   Maximum speed limits established



   73.26   Unlawful to exceed maximum speed limits




Truck Route Regulations




   73.40   Findings by the City of Brazil



   73.41   Role of the Common Council



   73.42   Authority to establish regulations addressing truck routes



   73.43   Specific truck routes established



   73.44   State Road 59 and U.S. 40 truck traffic




Emergency Vehicle Lanes




   73.55   Purpose



   73.56   Definitions



   73.57   Designation and establishment procedures



   73.58   Stopping, standing and parking prohibited



   73.99   Penalty




GENERALLY




§ 73.01  STOP REQUIRED BEFORE EMERGING FROM AN ALLEY, PRIVATE DRIVE OR
BUILDING.



   It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle from any alley, driveway
or building into any public street without first bringing the vehicle to a
full stop at or immediately before the edge of the improved surface of the
street.



(1982 Code, § 71.01)  (Ord. 10-1970, passed 10-13-1970)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.02  OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass on the
left of any street or interurban car proceeding in the same direction,
whether actually in motion or temporarily at rest.



   (B)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking any street or interurban
car stopped or about to stop for the purpose of receiving or discharging any
passenger shall stop the vehicle at a distance not less than 6 feet from the
rear thereof and shall keep the vehicle stationary until any passenger has
boarded the vehicle or reached a place of safety, except that where a safety
zone has been established, a vehicle need not be stopped before passing any
vehicle, but may proceed past the vehicle with due caution for the safety of
pedestrians.



   (C)   The drivers in meeting other vehicles shall pass to the right
thereof and in overtaking other vehicles shall pass on the left side of the
vehicle overtaken.



(1982 Code, § 71.02)  (Ord. 10-1970, passed 10-13-1970)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.03  OPERATING VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE.



   (A)   Authorized emergency vehicles are given the right-of-way over
all other vehicles.



   (B)   On the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving
audible signal by bell/horn or siren and/or having its emergency lights
flashing, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or
curb of the highway, clear of any intersection.



   (C)   The operator/driver shall stop and remain in that position
until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have passed, unless otherwise
directed by a Police or Fire Department officer.



   (D)   The operator/driver shall not drive the same into any street
intersection if Police or Fire Department or other authorized emergency
vehicle are approaching the street intersection within 500 feet thereof.



(1982 Code, § 71.03)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.04  HANGING ON OR ATTACHING TO VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling on any bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to, or
attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle
on any highway in the city.



(1982 Code, § 71.05)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931;)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.05  CROSSING FIRE HOSES.



   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private driveway to be used at any
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.



(1982 Code, § 71.06)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.06  SOLICITING RIDES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a highway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.



(1982 Code, § 71.07)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.07  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, or bus to drive
the same between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or any
authorized civic, military or public procession while the vehicles comprising
the procession are in motion, provided that the vehicles are conspicuously so
designated.



(1982 Code, § 71.03)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.08  FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to follow closer
than 300 feet to any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or
to drive into or stop any vehicle within 1 block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



(1982 Code, § 71.09)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.09  LOAD LIMITS.



   During the months of February, March and April of each year, the Board
of Public Works and Safety is authorized and instructed to have posted load
limits imposed on certain streets in the city as is appropriate to prevent
damage from being done to the street from heavy vehicles.



(1982 Code, § 71.10)  (Ord. 11-1966, passed 4-26-1966)



§ 73.10  TRACTION ENGINES AND HEAVY MACHINE RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS;
LIABILITY.



   (A)   It is made unlawful for any person in charge of any traction
engine, or other heavy machine likely to injure any paved street in the city,
to drive or run the same on, over or along any paved street in the city,
except as provided this section.



   (B)   When it shall become necessary in the movement of any traction
engine, or other heavy machine, to pass the same over any paved street
crossing, the person in charge of the same shall apply to the city engineer
for a permit to run the engine or machine over the paved crossing.



   (C)   The engineer, before permitting the passage of the engine or
machine over a paved crossing shall require the person in charge thereof to
lay heavy planks over the crossing on which the engine or machine shall be
moved and the same shall be done in a manner so as to effectually protect the
paved crossing from injury and should injury occur to any paved street or
crossing by reason of an engine or machine passing over the same, then the
owner of the engine or machine shall be liable to the city for the injury,
notwithstanding the permit.



(1982 Code, § 71.11)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.11  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC AND OPEN EXHAUST OR CUT-OUTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   All vehicles traveling or being driven at a slow rate of speed
shall keep as near as possible to the proper side of the street so that other
vehicles driven at a higher rate of speed may pass the same on the left-hand
side without inconvenience and so as to obstruct as little of the side of the
street as is reasonably possible, and facilitates public travel.



   (B)   The driving of a motor vehicle with the exhaust or cut-out
open and unmuffled is strictly forbidden.



(1982 Code, § 71.12)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.12  CROSSING STREETS, TURN AND U-TURN REGULATIONS.



   The drivers of motor vehicles and other vehicles shall not cross any of
the streets or turn a vehicle therein, except at street intersections, and
complete, full or U-turns shall not be made on National Avenue at its
intersection with the following named streets: Forest Avenue, Washington
Street, Sherfey Street, Walnut Street, Franklin Street and Meridian Street.



(1982 Code, § 71.13)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.13  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse or mule,
or to drive any wagon or other vehicle hitched to any horse, or mule, or to
run or drive any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle, or to ride
any bicycle on, along or across any sidewalk in the city, unless the same be
done in the necessary act of crossing the sidewalk, and it shall also be
unlawful for any person to hitch any animal in a manner as that the same may
get on any sidewalks.



(1982 Code, § 71.14)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
73.99




SPEED LIMIT REGULATIONS




§ 73.25  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The maximum speed limit for any motor vehicle being operated
on any public street, alley or public way located within the corporate limits
of the City of Brazil, shall be 25 mph, unless otherwise posted.



(Ord. 10-1997, passed 5-27-1997)



   (B)   A 20 mph speed zone is established for vehicular traffic on
Jackson Street, from Vandalia Street east to the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 2-1987, passed 2-24-1987)



   (C)   The speed zone for vehicular traffic in Forest Park and George
Craig Park shall be 5 mph.



(Ord. 7-1987, passed 7-14-1987)



   (D)   There shall be a 20 mph speed zone on Hendrix Street from
State Road 59 to Murphy Avenue; and on Murphy Avenue from Hendrix Street to
U.S. 40, with the Street Department installing proper speed zone signs.



(Ord. 16-1988, passed 6-28-1988)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.26  UNLAWFUL TO EXCEED MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operation a motor
vehicle on any public street in excess of 25 mph, unless a different speed is
otherwise posted.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle
on any public street, alley or public way located within the corporate limits
of the City of Brazil in excess of the posted speed limit.



(Ord. 10-1997, passed 5-27-1997)  Penalty, see § 73.99




TRUCK ROUTE REGULATIONS




§ 73.40  FINDINGS BY THE CITY OF BRAZIL.



   The City of Brazil has determined that the streets and roads within the
corporate limits of the city are not capable of handling commercial truck
traffic.



(Ord. 1-1990, passed 2-13-1990)



§ 73.41  ROLE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL.



   The Common Council of the City of Brazil deems it appropriate to
designate certain streets within the city limits of the City of Brazil under
the jurisdiction of the Common Council of the City of Brazil to be used for
commercial truck traffic.



(Ord. 1-1990, passed 2-13-1990)



§ 73.42  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH REGULATIONS ADDRESSING TRUCK ROUTES.



   The Common Council of the City of Brazil has the authority to establish
a truck route pursuant to I.C. 9-20-1-3.



(Ord. 1-1990, passed 2-13-1990)



§ 73.43  SPECIFIC TRUCK ROUTES ESTABLISHED.



   A truck route is established within the City of Brazil whereby
commercial trucks weighing in excess of 3 tons shall be limited to the use of
Hendrix Street east of Waterworks Road to Murphy Avenue and Murphy Avenue
south of Hendrix Street to U.S. 40; U.S. 40 west to Alabama Street, south on
Alabama Street to Pinckley Street and Pinckley Street west to Chicago Avenue;
then north to 40, then east to Depot Street and north on Depot Street to
Hendrix Street.



(Ord. 1-1990, passed 2-13-1990)



§ 73.44  STATE ROAD 59 AND U.S. 40 TRUCK TRAFFIC.



   This subchapter shall in no way supersede laws of the State of Indiana
in regard to the use of State Road 59 or U.S. 40 for the purposes of truck
traffic.



(Ord. 1-1990, passed 2-13-1990)




EMERGENCY VEHICLE LANES




§ 73.55  PURPOSE.



   It is deemed necessary for the public health and safety that emergency
vehicle lanes be designated and properly marked and posted at or adjacent to
buildings being used or occupied for multi-family residences, or for business
or commercial purposes; that nonemergency type vehicles be prevented from
being parked or left standing in a designated emergency vehicle lanes so that
police, fire and other emergency or rescue vehicles have free and
unobstructed access to bush buildings in order to perform their respective
emergency functions either being impaired by other vehicles parked adjacent
to these buildings as they normally contain large numbers of people who may
quickly need emergency service or evacuation from them during an emergency.



(1982 Code, § 72.20)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 4-13-1981; Am. Ord. 17-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)



§ 73.56  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING BEING USED OR OCCUPIED FOR MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCES OR FOR
BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.  Any apartment, condominium, high-rise
building or structure used for multi-family housing; any building or
structure used for business office, wholesale or retail and industrial
purposes; and any shopping center or mall project.



   EMERGENCY or EMERGENCY SITUATION.  Any occurrence or event which
endangers the health and safety of persons which results in personal injury
damage to real or personal property, and which violates the personal rights
and privileges of innocent people, including but not necessarily limited to
the commission of any crime or law violation, a working fire in or near a
building or structure, any occurrence which necessitates immediate medical
attention or first aid treatment and any occurrence which necessitates the
evacuation of persons from any building or structure to avoid personal injury.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Any police patrol car or investigation vehicle,
police prisoner (paddy) wagon, police explosive protection truck and any
other vehicle owned by the City Police Department used for responding to
police emergencies or calls, any fire truck, aerial ladder, pumper or snorkel
fire suppression truck or other fire suppression apparatus, fire
investigation or prevention automobile or truck, and rescue truck owned by
the City Fire Department used for responding to working fires and other
fire-related emergencies; any ambulance, emergency medical or paramedic
vehicle, county police vehicle, state police vehicle, volunteer fire
department vehicle or apparatus, civil defense vehicle and Red Cross vehicle
used for responding to emergency situations.



(1982 Code, § 72.21)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 4-13-1981; Am. Ord. 17-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)



§ 73.57  DESIGNATION AND ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Whenever the owner, manager, tenant or occupant of any
building being used or occupied for multi-family residences, or for business
or commercial purposes desires to establish adjacent to the building
designated emergency vehicle lanes, or the Fire Chief, after investigation
determine that emergency vehicle lanes are vital and necessary for the
protection of the building and the health and safety of persons therein, the
Fire Chief shall inspect the location and determine the areas thereof to be
designated as emergency vehicle lanes and notify the owner, manager, tenant
or occupant of the building as to location thereof as well as the proper
method of designating the location of signs to notify the public of the
existence of the emergency vehicle lanes.



   (B)   The owner, manager, tenant or occupant of the building must
first request in writing to the Fire Chief his or her desire to establish
emergency vehicle lanes at the building and an inspection for the purpose of
determining the necessity, feasibility and location of lanes.



   (C)   Following an inspection, the Fire Chief shall determine the
need for emergency vehicle lanes and notify in writing the owner, manager,
tenant or occupant of the building as to the proper location of the lanes.



   (D)   The owner, manager or tenant of the building shall be
responsible for having the curb (if one exists in the designated emergency
vehicle lane area) painted yellow, along with the posting and maintenance of
signs placed at or within the emergency vehicle lane area at least 5 feet
high which indicate that the area is an emergency vehicle lane, the exact
location of the lane and that the stopping or parking of a vehicle in that
area is prohibited except for emergency vehicles.



   (E)   The owner, manager, tenant or occupant of the building is
responsible for requesting in writing to the Police Chief that the officers
of the Police Department patrol the area of the building and the designated
emergency vehicle lanes, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter
pertaining to the prohibition of any nonemergency vehicle from stopping or
parking in the lanes if the lanes are located on private property. The Police
Department has no authority to enter on private property for purposes of
enforcing this subchapter without this written permission of the owner,
manager, tenant or occupant thereof.



(1982 Code, § 72.22)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 4-13-1981; Am. Ord. 17-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)



§ 73.58  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any vehicle, other
than emergency vehicles responding to an emergency situation, to stop, stand,
park or remain in any designated emergency vehicle lane established pursuant
to this subchapter obstructing the access and free passage of any emergency
vehicle responding to an emergency situation or performing an emergency
function.



   (B)   A person operating a non-emergency vehicle may stop or park
the vehicle for a period not to exceed 10 minutes for the sole purpose of
loading or unloading a handicapped or otherwise physically incapacitated
person, and once the loading or unloading of a person has been accomplished,
the vehicle must be removed from the area.



(1982 Code, § 72.23)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 4-13-1981; Am. Ord. 17-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99



   (B)   Speed limits. Any person violating the provisions of §§
73.25 or 73.26 shall be fined a civil penalty of $12 plus court costs as
established by the court pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 10-1997, passed 5-27-1997)



   (C)   Truck routes. A fine of not less than $10 and not more than
$100 shall be levied against operators of any commercial vehicle violating
§§ 73.40 through 73.44.



(Ord. 1-1990, passed 2-13-1990)



   (D)   Emergency vehicle lanes.



      (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 73.55
through 73.58 shall be guilty of a Class C infraction and subject to a
penalty of $5 and any vehicle so illegally parked shall, at the officer's
discretion, be subject to being removed, towed and impounded at the owner's
expense.



      (2)   If the penalty is not paid within 10 days from the date
of the offense, the penalty shall be $10.



      (3)   If the penalty is not paid within 30 days from the date
of the offense, the violator shall be summoned into court and be subject to a
fine of up to $500.



      (4)   If a person is issued a second or subsequent citation
for violation of §§ 73.55 through 73.58 within a period of 1 year, the
vehicle shall be towed at the owner's expense and impounded.



(1982 Code, § 72.99)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 4-13-1981; Am. Ord. 17-1981,
passed 10-12-1981)



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Handicapped/disabled parking



   II.   Loading zones and parking areas



   III.   Municipal parking lots; restricted parking times and areas



   IV.   Parking prohibited at all times



   V.   Parking prohibited at limited times



   VI.   Loading zones



   VII.   Bus zones (commercial and school)



   VIII.   Parallel parking



   IX.   Restricted parking in congested areas



   X.   Parking clearance



SCHEDULE I.  HANDICAPPED/DISABLED PARKING.



   (A)   (1)   The following locations shall be designated as
"Handicapped Parking Only," and it shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle in an area designated for handicapped parking only unless that
person has been issued a valid handicapped person license plate or other
lawful handicapped designation located thereon.



      (2)   A designated handicapped parking only location shall be
identified by the placement of 1 sign at the beginning of the designated
location stating "HANDICAPPED PARKING ONLY" and the curb shall be painted
blue, indicating the length of the designated parking space.



(Ord. 14-2005, passed 6-16-2005)



   (B)   The following locations shall be designated as a handicapped
parking location, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle
in these locations unless that vehicle has a valid handicapped license plate
or other lawful handicapped designation located thereon or therein.



 


Street

 

Location





Lambert Street
 
One parking space in front of 621 S. Lambert Street


South Lambert
 
In from 603 South Lambert Street


South Sherfey Street
 
First parking space on west side, south of US 40 intersection


South Sherfey Street
 
Last parking space on the west side before intersection with Jackson Street


East Tennessee Street
 
On the south side of Tennessee, located on the north side of 855 North Forest
Avenue


East Vermont Street
 
On the north side in front of 426 East Vermont Street


Walnut Street
 
One parking space in front of 1126 N. Walnut Street




 



(Ord. 4-1999, passed 4-27-1999)  (Ord. 26-2004, passed 10-12-2004)  (Ord.
14-2005, passed 6-16-2005; Am. Ord. 13-2006, passed 4-11-2006; Am. Ord.
24-2006, passed 8-8-2006)



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of this schedule for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined a civil penalty of not
less than $65 and not more than $200.  The penalty for the first violation
shall be $65; for the second violation $100; and for each subsequent
violation $200.



      (2)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that a violation occurs or continues.



      (3)   Any vehicle illegally parked shall be subject to being
removed, towed and stored at the owner's expense.



(Ord. 4-1999, passed 4-27-1999)



SCHEDULE II.  LOADING ZONES AND PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Loading zones; how designated. The Board of Public Works and
Safety is authorized and empowered to designate certain spaces or zones on
the streets and thoroughfares on the city, to be designated as loading zones.



(1982 Code, § 72.01(A))  (Ord. 2-1957, passed 4-23-1957)



   (B)   Restricted parking in loading zones.



      (1)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing whether
occupied or not, within the boundaries of marked-off areas, designated as a
loading zone, unless the driver of that vehicle is making a delivery of, or
providing repairs or services for the premises of business places, or
receiving items of merchandise or personal property used in the normal course
of business by merchants or business persons within the city block wherein a
loading and unloading zone is located.



      (2)   Parking shall not be deemed to be within the meaning of
this section, unless that motor vehicle is left standing for a period of time
longer then is necessary to accomplish the purpose of loading and unloading.



(1982 Code, § 72.01(B))  (Ord. 2-1957, passed 4-23-1957)



   (C)   Angle parking. In parking motor vehicles and other vehicles
along the side of all streets and avenues in the city, parking shall be
parking flat along and within 1 foot of the curb.



 


Street

 

Side

 

Between

 

Requirement



Harrison Street
 
West
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 
See division (C) above


Alabama Street
 
Both
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 
In addition to division (C) above, shall be parked with the front end to the
curb, at an angle of 35 degrees with the curb.



 



(1982 Code, § 72.10)  (Ord. 9-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 3-1935,
passed 4-9-1935)



   (D)   Double parking and parking for repairs along street restricted.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle double in the
city, or to park any vehicle on any of the streets or avenues of the city in
any other manner than as specifically provided for in this chapter.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for the purpose
of repairs or service at any point along National Avenue in the city if and
when repairs shall render the motor vehicle unable to be moved away under its
own power.



      (3)   These provisions are enacted for the purpose of
providing greater safety and to prohibit unnecessary fire hazards.



(1982 Code, § 72.12)  (Ord. 9-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  (Am. Ord. 3-1935,
passed 4-9-1935)



   (E)   Parking prohibited on any tree row. No motor vehicle shall be
parked on any tree row in the city.



(1982 Code, § 72.13)  (Ord. 9-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (F)   Prohibited parking areas.



 


Streets

 

Location

 

Prohibition





East Pinckley Street
 
Between South Lambert Street and Batchelor Drive
 
Prohibited at all times


Walnut Street
 
Beginning at intersection Walnut Street and Kruzan Street, on the westside of
Walnut Street, to a point 40 feet of that intersection
 
Prohibited at all times


Walnut Street
 
All other points of the intersection for a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection
 
Prohibited at all times


Kruzan Street
 
All other points of the intersection for a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection
 
Prohibited at all times


Depot Street
 
East side; between Jackson Street and the railroad tracks situated south of
Jackson Gardens
 
Prohibited at all times


McDonald Street
 
North side; between Washington Street and Forest Avenue
 
Prohibited except on Saturdays and Sundays


McDonald Street
 
North side; between Washington Street and Forest Avenue extending 35 feet
west of that point
 
Prohibited at all times


Blaine Street
 
Between the streets of Walnut and Meridian
 
Prohibited at all times


National Avenue
 
Between Washington Street and the first alley extended southward running
north and south west of Washington Street
 
Prohibited at all times; except temporary parking in the south side of the
street for commercial passenger buses


Blaine Street
 
South side; between streets of Walnut and Meridian
 
Prohibited at all times




 



   (G)   Parking meter fund and fees.



      (1)   All parking meter fees and license fees collected from
mechanical parking devices, commonly known as parking meters, used and
operated in the city, shall continue to be deposited with the
Clerk-Treasurer, to the credit of the city, in a special fund, which the
special parking meter fund shall be disbursed and paid out only under the
orders and directions of the Board of Public Works and Safety or the Common
Council.



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be entitled to receive, and
shall be paid, additional compensation for keeping records and handling
parking meter fees collected and expended; which compensation shall be in
addition to all other compensation received by the Clerk-Treasurer. The
additional compensation shall be paid solely and only out of the special
parking meter fund.



      (3)   All other monies in the parking meter fund shall
continue, as heretofore, to be used an expended solely and only for the
payment of the cost of parking meters, the maintenance and repair of parking
meters and the repair and maintenance of any of the public streets and
highways, where any parking meters are used, and all other public streets and
highways connected therewith in the city.



      (4)   All of the parking meter funds received by the city are
appropriated for the uses and purposes provided in this section.



(1982 Code, § 72.02)  (Ord. 4-1953, passed 7-21-1953)



   (H)   Penalties for parking in prohibited areas.



      (1)   Any person violating the provisions of division (D)
above or Schedule I of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C infraction
and shall be subject to a penalty of $5, and any vehicle in violation thereof
shall be subject to being removed, towed and impounded, at the owner's
expense.



      (2)   If the above penalty is not paid at the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days from the date of the violation, the penalty
shall be $10.



      (3)   If the penalty is not paid within 30 days form the date
of the violation, the violator shall be summoned into court and be subject to
a judgment of up to $500.



(Ord.13-1992, passed 9-8-1992)



SCHEDULE III.  MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS; RESTRICTED PARKING TIMES AND AREAS.



   (A)   Restricted parking.



 


Parking

 

Restriction



Public parking by any vehicle on 4 parking spaces
 
Limited to 30 minutes between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, except holidays



 



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle on the municipal parking lot
whether the vehicle is occupied or not, and whether the of 2 is occupied or
not by an operator.



      VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck,
trailer, semi-trailer, truck-trailer, bus, school bus, recreational vehicle,
construction vehicle, tractor and bicycle.



   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates any provisions of this schedule
shall be fined the sum of $25. A public offense shall be deemed committed for
each violation that occurs or continues to occur for a period in excess of 2
hours and a vehicle illegally parked shall be subject to being removed, towed
and stored at the owners expense.



(Ord. 2-1985, passed 4-9-1985)



SCHEDULE IV.  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.



   (A)    The following is a list of locations where parking is
prohibited at all times in the City of Brazil, Indiana.



 


Street

 

Between

 

Side

 

Ord. No.





Alabama Street
 
National Avenue and Kruzan Street
 

East

 

9-1931



Blaine Street
 
Washington Street and the alley east of Walnut Street
 

South

 

1-1970



Blaine Street
 
Alabama Street and Forest Ave. (State Road 59)
 

South

 

23-1980



Blaine Street
 
Walnut and Meridian
 

South

 

3-1984



Blaine Street
 
Between Walnut and Meridian
 

North

 

10-1984



Church Street
 
North Franklin Street and North Washington Street
 

North

 

13-1948



Colfax Street
 
Morton Street and Kruzan
 

East

 

22-1972



Depot Street
 
Jackson Street and the railroad tracks south of Jackson Gardens
 

South

 

7-1986



East Morton Street
 
Washington and Forest Ave. from the alley to a point 50 feet east of the alley
 

North

 

27-1978



East Pinckley Street
 
South Lambert and Batchelor Drive
 

Both sides

 

13-1992



Forest Avenue
 
National Avenue and Kruzan Street
 

East

 

9-1931



Franklin Street
 
Jackson Street and State Street
 

West

 

9-1931



Franklin Street
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 

East

 

2-2006;



1-24-2006



Jackson Street
 
Intersection with South Alabama Street and a point 80 feet east
 

South

 

4-1966



Jackson Street
 
Forest Avenue and Depot Street
 

North

 

2-1968



Jackson Street
 
Forest Avenue and Washington Street
 

South

 

13-1968



Jackson Street
 
U.S. 40 and McQuire Street
 

South

 

5-1969



Jackson Street
 
Alabama Street and the east property line of IGA store lands
 

South

 

5-1969



Jackson Street
 
Forest Avenue and Vandalia
 

North

 

5-1969



King Avenue
 
Fast Pinkley street and Ivan Fuqua Drive, except for 40 feet along the east
property line at 712-1/2 South Forest Ave. which abut King Avenue
 

West

 

3-1981



Kruzan Street
 
North Meridian Street and North Forest Avenue
 

North

 

1-1957



Kruzan Street
 
North Forest Avenue and North Lambert Street
 

South

 

1-1957



Kruzan Street
 
Forest Avenue and Lambert Street
 

South

 

1-1970



Kruzan Street
 
Forest Avenue and the first alley east
 

North

 

10-1975



Kruzan Street
 
State Road 59 and Alabama Street
 

South

 

2-1975



Kruzan Street
 
At all points of the intersection of Walnut and Kruzan for a distance of 30
feet
 

-

 

3-1988



Lambert Street
 
U.S. 40 and Coal Street
 

East

 

2-1979



McDonald Street
 
Walnut Street and Franklin Street
 

South

 

3-1972



McDonald Street
 
Washington Street and Forest Ave (Indiana Hwy 59)
 

North

 

13-1985



Meridian Street
 
East National Ave. and West Church Street
 

Both

 

1-1957



Meridian Street
 
National Ave. and Jackson Street
 

West

 

9-1931



Meridian Street
 
National Ave. and an alley located between National Ave. and Church Street
 

West

 

25-1972



Montgomery Street
 
Depot Street and Lincoln Street
 

South

 

7-1973



Montgomery Street
 
Depot Street and Franklin Street (except for 162 feet off of Franklin Street
on the north side) and 122 feet off of Depot Street on the north side
 

North

 

38-2005; 12-14-2005



National Avenue
 
A point 20 feet west of the intersection of the first north and south alley
west of Washington Street and a point 68 west thereof (Subject to privileges
in Sch. VIII)
 

North

 

2-1966



National Avenue
 
A point 22 feet east of the intersection of Sherfey Street and a point 45
feet east thereof (subject to priveleges in Sch. VIII)
 

South

 

2-1966



National Avenue
 
Washington and first alley southward running north and south west of
Washington
 

Both

 

9-1931



North Calfax Street
 
The intersection with West State Street and a point 100 feet north of the
intersection
 

East

 

5-1980



North Depot Street
 
National Avenue and Church Street
 

East

 

10-1964



North Depot Street
 
National Avenue and Church Street
 

West

 

10A-1964



North Franklin Street
 
National Avenue and Church Street (subject to loading procedures in Sch. VII)
 

Both

 

12-1948



North Franklin Street
 
Church Street and Kruzan Street
 

West

 

4-1963



North Lambert Street
 
National Avenue and Kruzan Street
 

East

 

3-1966



North Meridian Street
 
State Street and McDonald Street
 

East

 

8-1962



North Meridian Street
 
State Street and Hendrix Street
 

East

 

12-1970



North Walnut Street
 
The south side of West McDonald Street and the first alley south of the
public library
 

West

 

2-1962



North Walnut Street
 
The north side of East Church Street and a point 10 feet north of the
driveway of the Maruer-Wood Clinic
 

East

 

2-1962



North Walnut Street
 
Church Street and Hendrix Street
 

East

 

12-1970



North Washington Street
 
Kruzan and Blaine Street
 

West

 

1-1970



North Washington Street
 
Blaine Street Logan Street
 

East

 

9-1980



Ridge Street
 
Forest Avenue and Franklin Street
 

North

 

9-1949



Ridge Street
 
Forest Avenue and Alabama Street
 

North

 

3-1968



So. Alabama Street
 
Intersection with East Jackson Street and a point 80 feet south
 

East

 

4-196



So. Alabama Street
 
East Pinckley Street and the south city limits
 

East

 

20-1968



So. Alabama Street
 
East Pinckley Street and the south city limits
 

West

 

20-1972



South Depot Street
 
Jackson Street and Montgomery Street
 

East

 

38-2005;



12-14-2005



So. Franklin Street
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 

Both

 

12-1948



So. Franklin Street
 
Jackson Street and Pennsylvania R.R.
 

East

 

9-1949



So. Franklin Street
 
Ridge Street and Posey Street
 

East

 

10-1975



South Leavitt Street
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 

West

 

9-1949



South Leavitt Street
 
U.S. 40 South and Jackson Street
 

West

 

5-1969



South Walnut Street
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 

East

 

30-1980



State Street
 
Franklin Street and Meridian Street
 

North

 

8-1962



Walnut Street
 
A point beginning on the south side of an east-west alley between U.S.
Highway 40 and Church Street thence south exactly 47 feet
 

West

 

8-1972



Walnut Street
 
From a point beginning at the intersection of Walnut Street and Kruzan Street
to a point 40 feet of the intersection
 

West

 

3-1988



Walnut Street
 
At all points of the intersection for a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection of Walnut and Kruzan
 

-

 

3-1988



Washington Street
 
East National Avenue and East Kruzan Street
 

West

 

1-1957



Washington Street
 
National Avenue and Blaine Street
 

East

 

9-1931



Washington Street
 
National alley and first alley south
 

East

 

9-1931



W. Church Street
 
North Depot Street and the first alley east of Depot Street
 

South

 

10-1964





 



   (B)   Parking is also prohibited:



      (1)   Within 20 feet of the curb line of any street as the
same would exist if projected across the intersecting street;



      (2)   Within 10 feet of any fire plug of the city; and



(1982 Code, Sch. I)



      (3)   On any tree row. (See Sch. II(E) above)



(1982 Code, § 72.13)  (Ord. 9-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this schedule shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $12. The violator shall also be responsible for
court costs for any violations filed in court in addition to the civil
penalty, pursuant to this schedule.



(Ord. 2-2006, passed 1-24-2006)



SCHEDULE V.  PARKING PROHIBITED AT LIMITED TIMES.



   (A)   The following is a listing of locations where parking is
prohibited at limited times in the City of Brazil, Indiana.



 


Street

 

Between

 

Time

 

Side

 

Ord. No.





E. National Ave.
 
Cass Street and Alabama Street
 
2 hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, except
holidays
 

South

 

3-1963



Franklin Street
 
Jackson Street and Church Street
 
1 hour between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and Saturdays
between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
 

East

 

4-1945



In front of any bank or trust company
 

-

 
15 minutes, between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Sunday and holidays
 

-

 

3-1935



In front of any theater
 

-

 
Between 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.
 

-

 

3-1935



Meridian Street
 
Jackson Street and Church Street
 
1 hour between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and Saturdays
between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
 

East

 

4-1945



National Avenue
 
Cass Street and Depot Street
 
3 hours, between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except Sundays and legal holidays
 

Both

 

9-1931



National Avenue
 
Cass Street and Sherman Street
 
1 hour, between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and
Saturdays between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays
 

Both

 

3-1935



Sherfey Street
 
National Ave. and Jackson
 
1 hour, between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and
Saturdays between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays
 

Both

 

4-1945



S. Alabama Street
 
The north right-of-way of the Pennsylvania R.R. and a point 80 feet south of
the southeast corner of the intersection of South Alabama Street and East
Jackson Street
 
30 minutes
 

East

 

4-1966



S. Alabama Street
 
East National Avenue and East Jackson Street
 
2 hours, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except
holidays
 

West

 

3-1963



Walnut Street
 
Church Street and Jackson Street
 
1 hour, between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Sunday and Saturdays, 1 hour
parking from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 

Both

 

3-1935





 



   (B)   Parking is also limited in municipal parking lots to a period
of 30 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Monday through
Saturday except holidays. (See Sch. III above)



Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE VI.  LOADING ZONES.



 


Street

 

Description

 

Side

 

Ord. No.





North Franklin Street
 
Certain marked-off spaces, solely for the purpose of loading or unloading
articles, materials or merchandise for places of business
 

East

 

12-1948



South Sherfey Street
 
East side of street starting from the northeast corner of the east-west alley
located between East Jackson Street and National Avenue abutting South
Sherfey Street from the east, thence a distance of 40 feet in a northerly
direction along the east side of South Sherfey Street from the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m, Mondays through Fridays
 

East

 

Res. 1-1999; 10-12-99



South Washington Street
 
Beginning 15 feet north of the alley thence north along the street 75 feet
between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. for motor carriers of newspapers only
 

West

 

9-1931



Yesterday's Pub
 
Loading zone for vehicles making deliveries to the business known as
"Yesterday's Pub"
 

-

 

Res. 1-1999 10-12-99





 



SCHEDULE VII.  BUS ZONES (COMMERCIAL AND SCHOOL).



   (A)   The following is a listing of areas where commercial bus
parking is permitted in the City of Brazil, Indiana.



 


Street

 

Description

 

Side

 

Ord. No.



National Avenue
 
Beginning at a point 20 feet west of the intersection of the north side of
National Avenue with the west side of the first north and south alley west of
Washington Street; thence running west along the north side of National
Avenue 68 feet
 

North

 

2-1966



National Avenue
 
Beginning at a point 22 feet east of the intersection of the east side of
Sherfey Street with the south side of National Avenue; thence running east 45
feet
 

South

 

2-1966




 



   (B)   The following is a listing of areas where school bus parking
is permitted in the City of Brazil, Indiana.



 


Street

 

Description

 

Side

 

Ord. No.



Kruzan Avenue
 
Certain marked-off spaces to be used only for loading and unloading of school
children
 

South

 

1-1957




 



SCHEDULE VIII.  PARALLEL PARKING.



   In parking motor vehicles and other vehicles on the sides of the
following named streets, the same shall be parked flat parallel with the curb.



 


Street

 

Between

 

Side

 

Ord. No.





Church Street
 
Franklin Street and Washington Street
 

Both

 

9-1931



Forest Avenue
 
Jackson Street and Kruzan Street
 

West

 

9-1931



Franklin Street
 
Jackson Street and Church Street
 

Both

 

9-1931



Jackson Street
 
Sherman Street and Harrison Street
 

Both

 

9-1931



Kruzan Street
 
Walnut Street and Lambert Street
 

South

 

9-1931



Meridian Street
 
Jackson Street and Church Street
 

East

 

9-1931



Sherfey Street
 
National Avenue and Jackson Street
 

Both

 

9-1931



Walnut Street
 
Jackson Street and Church Street
 

Both

 

9-1931



Washington Street
 
National Avenue and Kruzan Street
 

West

 

9-1931





 



SCHEDULE IX.  RESTRICTED PARKING IN CONGESTED AREAS.



   These streets shall be declared a congested traffic area, and the
Common Council determines that because of the flow of traffic on the streets
or portions of the streets within this area that parking therein shall be
subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized and
directed to designate and mark off individual parking spaces as it deems
proper along the streets in the congested traffic area for the parking of
vehicles. At each place where individual parking spaces are so marked off,
each vehicle shall be parked entirely within an individual parking space; and



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or
suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, any person to
be parked in any individual parking space within the congested traffic area
for a period of more than 2 consecutive hours, during the hours of 8:30 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m., inclusive, and between the days of Monday through Friday,
inclusive, except holidays.



 


Street

 

Between

 

Location





National Avenue
 

Alabama and Sherman Streets

 

-



Walnut Street
 

-

 

Within 1 block of National Avenue



Sherfey Street
 

-

 

Within 1 block of National Avenue





 



(1982 Code, Schedule X)  (Ord. 24-1966, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE X.  PARKING CLEARANCE.



   No motor vehicle or other vehicles shall be parked on the following:



 


Street

 

Clearance Restriction



National Avenue
 
Will not permit a clearance of 11 feet between the rear of the vehicles and
the nearest rail of the track of the Terre Haute, Indianapolis, and Eastern
Traction Company.



 



(1982 Code, Schedule X)  (Ord. 24-1966, passed - -)



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   One-way flow of traffic designations



   II.   One-way designations renamed 2-way flow of traffic designations



   III.   Stop streets



   IV.   Yield streets



   V.   One-way streets and alleys



   VI.   Restricted turn areas



   VII.   Trucks



   VIII.   Through streets



   IX.   Truck routes



SCHEDULE I.  ONE-WAY FLOW OF TRAFFIC DESIGNATIONS.



   The following streets shall be changed with the Street Department and
ordered to post 1-way signs and do not enter signs at the appropriate
locations.



 


Street

 

Location

 

Runs; Between

 

Change



Alley
 
South of Church Street
 
North and south; Church Street to the south and running perpendicular
(“T”)  to an adjacent alley
 
From 2-way to a 1-way southerly flowing alley


Alley
 
North of U.S. 40
 
East and west; Walnut to the east and Franklin Street to the west
 
From 2-way to a 1-way; westerly flow



 



(Res. 3-1991, passed 3-26-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II.  ONE-WAY DESIGNATIONS RENAMED 2-WAY FLOW OF TRAFFIC
DESIGNATIONS.



 


Street

 

Between; Location

 

Change





Blaine Street
 
Alabama Street and Meridian Street
 
2-way whereby traffic may travel in either a westerly or easterly direction;
required to proceed on the right-hand side of the street when traveling in
either direction


Church Street
 
From Walnut Street to the north and Franklin Street to the south
 
2-way public street; Street Department ordered to change street signs to
reflect 2-way designation


Blaine Street
 
Walnut Street and Meridian Street
 
2-way, leaving Blaine Street between Walnut and Alabama a 1-way with traffic
flow in a westerly direction only




 



(Ord. 2-1991, passed 2-12-1991)  (Ord. 3-1984, passed 6-12-1984)



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this schedule
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Blaine Street (between Alabama and Meridian). Any person
violating this provision shall be guilty of a Class C infraction and subject
to a penalty of $5, and any vehicle in violation thereof shall be subject to
being removed, towed and impounded at the owner's expense. If the penalty is
not paid within 10 days from the date of the violation, the penalty shall be
$10. If the penalty is not paid within 30 days from the date of the
violation, the violator shall be summoned into court and be subject to a
judgment of up to $500.



(Ord. 22-1921, passed 12-22-1992)



SCHEDULE III.  STOP STREETS.



   (A)   The following is a listing of stop streets in the City of
Brazil, Indiana, where it shall be a violation for any person to operate on
the designated stop street without first coming to a complete stop.



 


Street

 

At Intersection With

 

Ord. No.; Passage Date





Alabama Street
 
Jackson Street
 

10-1960



Alley north of National Ave. running east and west between Alabama St. and
Lambert Street
 
Alley west of Alabama Street running north and south between National Avenue
and Church Street
 

10-1967



Alley west of Alabama Street running north and south between National Ave.
and Church Street
 
Alley north of National Avenue running east and west between Alabama Street
and Lambert Street
 

-



Beech Street
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



Brazil Street
 
South Chicago Avenue
 

25-1983



Brazil Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

25-1983



Center Street
 
Franklin Street
 

2-1973



Center Street
 
South Chicago Avenue
 

25-1983



Center Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

25-1983



Center Street
 
South Walnut Street
 

24-1997; 11-10-1997



Chicago Avenue
 
Jackson Street
 

10-1960



Church Street
 
Manatee Street
 

1-1974



Church Street
 
Sherman Street
 

6-1962



Coal Street
 
Alabama Street
 

41-2006; 1-9-2007



Compton Street
 
Harrison Street
 

9-1975



Compton Street
 
North Alabama Street
 

24-1997; 11-10-1997



Daniel Biggs Drive
 
Meridian Street
 

33-2006; 11-14-2006



Daniel Biggs Drive
 
Walnut Street
 

33-2006; 11-14-2006



Davis Avenue
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



Deloss Street
 
South Chicago Avenue
 

25-1983



Deloss Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

25-1983



Deloss Street
 
South Walnut Street
 

24-1997; 11-10-1997



Depot Street
 
Jackson Street
 

10-1960



Depot Street
 
Logan Street
 

10-1960



Drexel Street
 
East Hendrix
 

9-1975



East Blaine Street
 
North Alabama Street
 

3-1993; 2-9-1993



East Coal Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

12-1983



East Compton Street
 
North Columbia Street
 

6-1995; 4-25-1995



East Jackson Street
 
South Vandalia Street
 

19-1980



East Jackson Street
 
South Wheeler Street
 

15-2003; 12-30-2003



East Illinois Street
 
(For westbound traffic) North Alabama Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993



East Lennox Street
 
North Sycamore Street
 

21-1972



East Logan Street
 
North Indiana Street
 

3-1993; 2-9-1993



East Maple Street
 
(For westbound traffic) South Alabama Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993



East Maple Street
 
South Alabama Street
 

2-1994; 1-22-1994



East Maple Street
 
South Lambert Street
 

14-1998; 8-25-1998



East Mechanic Street
 
Ringo Street
 

5-1995; 4-25-1995



East Pinckley Street
 
South Alabama Street
 

23-1996; 21-1972



Fairway Drive
 
St. Andrews Glen Drive
 

36-2005; 10-26-2005



First alley south of East National Avenue
 
South Vandalia Street
 

29-1980



Forest Avenue
 
Hendrix Street
 

10-1960



Franklin Street
 
Pinckley Street
 

10-1960



Franklin Street
 
Jackson Street
 

1-1974



Fred Schultz Drive
 
Parking lot of Forest Park Plaza
 

7-2006; 3-14-2006



Harrison Street
 
Compton Street
 

1-1975



Harry Sherer Drive
 
Country Road 900 North
 

26-2005; 8-23-2005



Hendrix Street
 
Forest Avenue
 

10-1960



Hendrix Street
 
Meridian Street
 

10-1960



Hendrix Street
 
Vandalia Street
 

10-1960



Indiana Street
 
West Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



Jackson Street
 
Alabama Street
 

10-1960



Jackson Street
 
Chicago Avenue
 

10-1960



Jackson Street
 
Depot Street
 

10-1960



Jackson Street
 
Franklin Street
 

1-1974



Jackson Street
 
Lambert Street
 

11-1992; 8-11-1992



Jackson Street
 
Walnut Street
 

10-1960



Jackson Street
 
Williamson Street
 

1-1974



John Street
 
Mechanic Street
 

18-2005; 6-26-2005



Joseph Street
 
Meridian Street
 

33-2006; 11-14-2006



King Street
 
Deloss Street
 

2-1975



Kruzan Street
 
Lambert Street
 

8-1971



Kruzan Street
 
Walnut Street
 

8-1971



Lambert Street
 
Jackson Street
 

11-1992; 8-11-1992



Lambert Street
 
Kruzan Street
 

8-1971



Leavitt Street
 
Knight Street
 

19-2005; 6-26-2005



Lennox Street
 
Pine Street
 

6-1962



Logan Street
 
Depot Street
 

10-1960



Luther Street
 
Knight Street
 

23-2006; 8-22-2006



Manatee Street
 
Church Street
 

1-1974



Manatee Street
 
Olive Street
 

4-2005; 4-13-2005



Maple Street
 
Franklin Street
 

21-2006; 8-8-2006



McDonald Street
 
Meridian Street
 

33-2006; 11-14-2006



McGuire Street
 
Jackson Street
 

39-2005; 11-9-2005



Mechanic Street
 
Vandalia Street
 

10-1960



Meridian Street
 
Hendrix Street
 

10-1960



Montgomery Street
 
South Lincoln Street
 

27-1983



Morton Street
 
Walnut Street
 

33-2006; 11-14-2006



National Avenue and Church Street
 
Alley west of Alabama Street running north and south
 

10-1967



North Alabama Street
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Charles B. Hall Dr.
 
(For southbound traffic) East Olive Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993



North Colfax Street
 
West Hendrix
 

4-1993; 2-9-1993



North Columbia Street
 
East Compton Street
 

6-1995; 4-25-1995



North Depot Street
 
West Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Epworth Avenue
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Harrison Street
 
East Coal Street
 

12-1983



North Harrison Street
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Indiana Street
 
East Collins Street
 

2-1999; 3-3-1999



North Indiana Street
 
East Halbert
 

2-1999; 3-3-1999



North Leavitt Street
 
West North Street
 

13-1983



North Pine Street
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Sycamore Street
 
East Lennox Street
 

23-1966



North Street
 
Hoosier Street
 

5-1996; 2-27-1996



North Walnut Street
 
Collins Street
 

17-1992; 10-27-1992



North Walnut Street
 
West Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Warren Street
 
West Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



North Washington Street
 
East Collins
 

2-1999; 3-3-1999



North Washington Street
 
East Halbert Street
 

2-1999; 3-3-1999



Northwood Drive
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



Ohio Street
 
South Chicago Avenue
 

25-1983



Ohio Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

25-1983



Pell Street
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



Pinckley Street
 
Franklin Street
 

10-1960



Pinckley Street
 
South Chicago Avenue
 

25-1983



Pine Street
 
Lennox Street
 

6-1962



Posey Street
 
South Chicago Street
 

25-1983



Posey Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

25-1983



Posey Street
 
South Walnut Street
 

24-1997; 11-10-1997



Ringo Street
 
East Mechanic Street
 

5-1995; 4-25-1995



Robinson Street
 
Depot Street
 

9-1975



Robinson Street
 
Walnut Street
 

33-2006; 11-14-2006



Sand Trap Drive and Fairway Drive
 
St. Andrews Glen Drive
 

36-2005; 10-26-2005



Sherman Street
 
Church Street
 

6-1962



South Alabama Street
 
East Pinckley Street
 

21-1972



South Hoosier Street
 
West Knight Street
 

14-1998; 8-25-1998



South Sherman Street
 
West Center Street
 

14-1998; 8-25-1998



South Vandalia Street
 
East Mechanic Street
 

4, 1984; 7-6-1984



South Wheeler Street
 
East Jackson Street
 

15-2003; 12-30-2003



St. Andrews Glen
 
Bent Grass Way and St. Andrews Glen Drive
 

36-2005; 10-26-1005



Turner Street
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



Vandalia Street
 
Hendrix Street
 

6-1962



Vandalia Street
 
Mechanic Street
 

10-1960



Walnut Street
 
Jackson Street
 

10-1960



Walnut Street
 
Kruzan Street
 

8-1971



West Brazil Street
 
South Grant Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993



West Compton Street
 
North Depot Street
 

14-1998; 8-25-1998



West North Street
 
North Leavitt Street
 

14-1992; 9-8-1992



West Northwood Drive
 
East Hendrix Street
 

9-1975



West Ohio Street
 
South Grant Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993



West Posey Street
 
South Grant Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993



West William Street
 
South Grant Street
 

14-1993; 12-14-1993; 1-1999; 3-23-1999



West William Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

1-1999; 3-23-1999



William Street
 
South Chicago Avenue
 

25-1983



William Street
 
South Leavitt Street
 

25-1983



Williamson Street
 
Jackson Street
 

1-1974





 



   (B)   The City of Brazil, having received a petition for the
installation of stop signs on Franklin Street at Church Street, Franklin
Street at Dr. Daniel C. Biggs Drive and Franklin Street at Morton Street, and
having reviewed the same orders the Brazil City Street Department to install
stop signs at those locations.



(Ord. 3-1991, passed 5-28-1991)



   (C)   The City of Brazil, having received a petition for the
installation of stop signs, and having reviewed the same, makes the following
resolution to place those signs.



 


Direction

 

Sign On

 

At





Eastbound
 
Morton Street
 
Franklin Street


Westbound
 
Morton Street
 
Franklin Street


Eastbound
 
Church Street
 
Franklin Street


Westbound
 
Church Street
 
Franklin Street


Eastbound
 
West State Street
 
Franklin Street


Eastbound
 
Dr. Daniels Biggs Drive
 
Franklin Street


Westbound
 
Dr. Daniel Biggs Drive
 
Franklin Street


Southbound
 
Franklin Street
 
Dr. Daniel Biggs Drive


Northbound
 
Franklin Street
 
Dr. Daniel Biggs Drive


Eastbound
 
Hendrix Street
 
Colfax Street


Westbound
 
Hendrix Street
 
Colfax




 



(Ord. 3-1991, passed 6-25-1991)  (Ord. 8-1991, passed 7-9-1991)



   (E)   Kruzan Street at State Road 59 (Forest Avenue) shall be a stop
street and all vehicular traffic shall stop at that intersection on Kruzan
Street before entering State Road 59 (Forest Avenue), and all vehicular
traffic on Kruzan Street shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic on State
Road 59 (Forest Avenue).



(Ord. 25-1988, passed 10-25-1988)



   (F)   Stop signs shall be placed at the intersection of Short Street
and Lambert Street requiring vehicular traffic eastbound and westbound to
stop on Short Street before entering onto Lambert Street.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-23-1988)



   (G)   All traffic eastbound and westbound on Collins Street shall be
required to stop at the intersection of Collins Street and Walnut Street, and
all traffic northbound on Walnut Street shall be required to stop at the
intersection of Walnut Street and Collins Street.



(Ord. 8-1985, passed 8-13-1985)



   (H)   All traffic eastbound and westbound on Halbert Street shall be
required to stop at the intersection of Halbert Street and Walnut Street, and
all traffic northbound and southbound on Walnut Street shall be required to
stop at the intersection of Walnut Street and Halbert Street.



(Ord. 7-1985, passed 8-13-1985)



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any vehicle in an
easterly or westerly direction into the intersection of the following streets
located within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil, Indiana, without
first bringing that vehicle to a full and complete stop:



      (1)   Indiana Street; and



      (2)   Park Street.



(Ord. 8-1984, passed 10-23-1984)



   (J)   It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any vehicle in a
northerly or southerly direction into the intersection of the following
streets located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Brazil,
Indiana, without first bringing the vehicle to a full and complete stop:



      (1)   South Vandalia Street; and



      (2)   East Mechanic Street



(Ord. 7-1984, passed 10-23-1984)



   (K)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $12 and court costs as set forth in § 70.99.



(Ord. 15-2003, passed 12-30-2003)



SCHEDULE IV.  YIELD STREETS.



   (A)   The following is a listing of yield streets in the City of
Brazil, Indiana, where it shall be a violation for any person to operate on
the designated yield street without first yielding:



 


Street

 

At Intersection With

 

Ord. No./Passage





Blaine Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Burn Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Church Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Coal Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Colfax Street
 
Halbert Street
 

9-1975



Collins Street
 
Meridian Street
 

9-1975



Compton Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Halbert Street
 
Meridian Street
 

9-1975



Hoosier Street
 
Church Street
 

4-1986



Hoosier Street
 
Noble Street
 

4-1986



Illinois Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Knight Street
 
Sherman Street
 

3-1975



Kruzan Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Leavitt Street
 
Knight Street
 

7-1975



Midland Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Oak Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978



Tennessee Street
 
North Harrison Street
 

25-1978





 



   (B)   Yield signs shall be stalled at the following intersections:



 


Intersection

 

Requirements



Hoosier Street and Church Street
 
Eastbound and westbound traffic to yield the right of way to traffic on
Hoosier Street


Hoosier Street and Noble Street
 
Eastbound traffic to yield the right of way to traffic on Hoosier Street



 



(Ord. 4-1986, passed 1-28-1986)



   (C)   Yield signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations by
the Street Department consistent with the provisions of this schedule.



(Ord. 4-1986, passed 1-28-1986)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE V.  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   The following is a listing of 1-way streets and alleys in the City of
Brazil, Indiana, where it shall be a violation for any person to operate on
the designated street or alley in the wrong direction.



 


Street

 

Between

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.; Passage





Alley
 
Meridian Street and Forest Avenue West lying immediately south of National
Avenue
 

West

 

9-1931



Alley
 
Meridian Street and Forest Avenue East lying immediately north of National
Avenue
 

East

 

9-1931



Alley
 
South of Church Street which runs north and south between Church Street to
the south and running perpendicular ("T") to the adjacent alley
 

-

 

Res. 3-1991



Alley
 
North of U.S. 40 which runs east and west between Walnut to the east and
Franklin Street to the west
 

-

 

Res. 2-1991



Church Street
 
North Franklin Street and North Washington Street
 

East

 

13-1948



Davis Avenue
 
Olive Street and National Avenue
 

South

 

6-1960



East Church Street
 
Alabama Street and Lambert Street
 

West

 

36-1983



Harrison Street
 
U.S. Hwy 40 and Jackson Street
 

South

 

1-1974



King Avenue
 
East Pinckley Street and Ivan Fuqua Drive
 

North

 

3-1981



Kruzan Street
 
Meridian Street and Alabama Street
 

East

 

21-1980



Meridian Street
 
National Avenue and Hendrix Street
 

North

 

14-1964



North Warren Street
 
National Avenue and Church Street
 

South

 

21-1978



Sherfey Street
 
Jackson Street and U.S. Hwy 40
 

South

 

12-1977



South Alabama Street
 
East Pinckley Street south and the corporate limits
 

South

 

20-1972



South Wheeler Street
 
East National Avenue and East Jackson Street
 

South

 

16-2003;



12-30-2003





 



SCHEDULE VI.  RESTRICTED TURN AREAS.



   The following is a listing of areas where turns are restricted in the
City of Brazil, Indiana, where it shall be a violation for any person to turn
in violation of this schedule at those locations.



 


Street

 

Description

 

Direction

 

Ord. No.



Jackson Street
 
No left turn onto Forest Avenue (State Road 59) between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
 

West

 

19-1980



Jackson Street
 
No left turn onto Forest Avenue (State Road 59) between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
 

East

 

19-1980




 



SCHEDULE VII.  TRUCKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any truck to pass another truck traveling in
the following.



 


Direction

 

Street

 

Exception



Same direction
 
Anywhere on National Avenue in the city
 
No violation shall occur if either the truck passing or being passed is a
1/2-ton or 3/4 pickup truck, and no violation shall occur if the truck being
passed is stopped in the right-hand lane for any reason other than to obey a
traffic signal.



 



(1982 Code, Schedule X)  (Ord. 24-1966, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE VIII.  THROUGH STREETS.



   (A)   The streets and avenues referred to in this schedule are
declared to be through or preferential streets for the purpose of regulating
traffic on or crossing the same and every operator of a vehicle or other
conveyance traveling on any street or roadway intersecting any through
street. Operators/drivers shall bring their vehicle to a full complete stop
at the place where the street meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of a through street, subject, however, to the direction of any official
traffic-control sign or signal or the directions of any police officer at the
intersection.



   (B)   The operator of any vehicle who has come to a full stop as
required above, on entering the through street, as well as operator of
vehicles on a through street, shall be subject to the usual right-of-way rule
prescribed by state law governing the meeting of vehicles at street or
highway intersections.



   (C)   The Common Council's Committee on Public Safety is authorized
to place and maintain or cause to be place of maintained on each and every
street intersecting a through street as designated above, and at or near the
property line of the through street, appropriate signs on or near the street
(and in addition thereto may place and maintain any appropriate device or
mark in or near the highway)  signs, devices or marks to bear the word
"STOP" or the legend "STOP THRU STREET" or the legend "STOP THRU STREET,
POLICE ORDERS."



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
disobey any signs, signals or devices erected by order of the Committee of
the Common Council.



(1982 Code, § 71.04)  (Ord. 8-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (E)   The following streets and parts of streets are declared to
constitute through streets.



 


Street

 

Description





National Avenue
 

-



Forest Avenue
 

-



Walnut Street
 
Between National Avenue and Logan Street


Meridian Street
 
Between National Avenue and Compton Street


Hendrix Street
 
Between Alabama and Meridian Streets, both inclusive, except at Forest Avenue




 



(1982 Code, Schedule X)  (Ord. 24-1966, passed - -)



SCHEDULE IX.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   The City of Brazil has determined that the streets and roads
within the corporate limits of the city are not capable of handling heavy
commercial and semitrailer truck traffic, and the Common Council deems it
necessary to designate certain streets within the corporate limits of the
City of Brazil under the jurisdiction of the city to be used for commercial
truck traffic.



   (B)   A truck route is established within the corporate limits of
the City of Brazil whereby commercial trucks and semi-tractor-trailer trucks
shall be limited to the use of the following.



 


Weight

 

From

 

To





3 tons
 
Water Works Road
 
Hendrix Street


3 tons
 
Hendrix Street east of Water Works Road
 
Murphy Avenue


3 tons
 
Murphy Avenue south of Hendrix Street
 
Highway U.S. 40 (National Avenue)


3 tons
 
South Alabama Street south of Highway U.S. 40
 
East Jackson Street


3 tons
 
Jackson Street east of Jackson Street
 
South Vandalia Street


3 tons
 
South Vandalia Street from Jackson Street
 
The road leading to the Morris Manufacturing Plant Facility




 



   (C)   This section shall in no way affect or supercede laws of the
State of Indiana or the United States regarding the use of Highway U.S. 40 by
truck traffic.



   (D)   Any person operating a truck on streets other than those
designated in division (B) above shall be a violation of this section and
shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in § 70.99.



   (E)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of this title
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $12, unless otherwise specified in
this section. The violator shall also be responsible for court costs for any
violations filed in court in addition to the civil penalty.



      (2)   Whoever violates any provision of this schedule shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $200. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that a violation occurs or continues.



      (4)   Any vehicle illegally parked shall be subject to being
removed, towed and stored at the owner's expense.



(Ord. 13-2003, passed 11-11-2003)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



      91.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      92.   HOUSING



      93.   ANIMALS



      94.   PUBLIC NUISANCES



      95.   UNSAFE BUILDING REGULATIONS



      96.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU



      97.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      98.   CEMETERIES



CHAPTER 90:  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   City’s authority to regulate



   90.02   Authority to establish a Police and a Fire Department



   90.03   City’s authority to regulate air and sound



   90.04   Authority to regulate public gatherings



   90.05   Offenses against public health, order and decency



   90.06   Resisting official action




Refuse, Garbage and Trash Regulations




   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   Prohibiting accumulation of open trash and garbage



   90.22   Monthly trash collection procedure; fee



   90.23   Trash collection fund



   90.24   Monthly reporting to Common Council



   90.25   Periodic review of collection fee required



   90.26   Weekly trash collection



   90.27   Bi-annual heavy trash collection



   90.28   Trash container regulations



   90.29   Excluded entities



   90.30   Hours of operation for commercial, industrial and/or
business entities




Burning Regulations




   90.40   Definitions



   90.41   Open burning prohibited



   90.42   Recreational or ceremonial fires



   90.43   Violations



   90.44   Burning of trash, garbage, refuse and leaves prohibited



   90.45   Exceptions




Miscellaneous Regulations




   90.60   Firing gun within city; exceptions



   90.61   Giving false alarm in public place prohibited



   90.62   Littering regulations



   90.63   Control of public assemblies and groups



   90.64   Disturbances of the peace



   90.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.01  CITY'S AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.



   The city may regulate the conduct, or use or possession of property
which might endanger the public health, safety or welfare of its citizens.



§ 90.02  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH A POLICE AND A FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The city may establish, maintain and operate a police and law
enforcement system to preserve public peace and order and may provide
facilities and equipment for that system.



   (B)   The city may establish, maintain and operate a fire fighting
and fire prevention system and may provide facilities and equipment for that
system.



§ 90.03  CITY’S AUTHORITY TO REGULATE AIR AND SOUND.



   The city may regulate the introduction of any substance or odor into
the air, or any generation of sound.



§ 90.04  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE PUBLIC GATHERINGS.



   The city may regulate public gatherings such as shows, demonstrations,
fairs, conventions, sporting events and exhibitions.



§ 90.05  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, ORDER AND DECENCY.



   All offenses against public health, order and decency not addressed by
this code shall be governed by applicable state statute.



§ 90.06  RESISTING OFFICIAL ACTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly or
intentionally interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any city
official or employee in the performance of his or her official duties.



Penalty, see § 90.99




REFUSE, GARBAGE AND TRASH REGULATIONS




§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HEAVY TRASH.  Any discarded matter which cannot be adequately placed
or wrapped in commercially manufactured plastic garbage or trash bags because
of its size or weight and shall include but not necessarily be limited to
appliances, water heaters, furniture, mattresses, box springs, bicycles,
furnace or air conditioning units, metal duct or pipe, large tree limbs, all
other items which are either too large or too heavy to be securely wrapped in
bags as described above herein. Specifically excluded from this definition
are tires, rocks and building or construction materials such as roofing,
bricks, concrete blocks, lumber and automotive parts.



   TRASH or GARBAGE.  Any discarded matter including but not necessarily
limited to household refuse, paper, glass, food containers, edible food or
portions thereof, waste materials, cut grass, weeds or tree limbs or leaves,
wrappings, metal items or other items of personal property.



(Ord. 9-1992, passed 7-21-1992)



§ 90.21  PROHIBITING ACCUMULATION OF OPEN TRASH AND GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or rents private
residential property, multi-family dwellings or mobile homes within the
corporate limits of the city to permit or allow the accumulation of open
trash and garbage on the property.



(1982 Code, § 93.11)  (Ord. 55-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 18-1981,
passed 10-26-1981)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  MONTHLY TRASH COLLECTION PROCEDURE; FEE.



   (A)   Effective February 1, 2007 (utility bills due February 10,
2007), every person who either owns or rents residential property,
multi-family dwelling units or mobile homes within the corporate limits of
the city, whose property lies outside the corporate limits and along North
Murphy Avenue to Hendrix Street, Hendrix Street, Hendrix Street to Murphy
Avenue, all property in Deer Creek Subdivision, or any other property located
in the corporate limits of the city with the approval of the Board of Public
Works and Safety shall be charged a monthly trash collection fee in the
amount of $10.50 per household to be added as a separate charge on his or her
monthly water bill and payable at the City Waterworks office.



(Ord. 29-2004, passed 11-24-2004; Am. Ord. 39-2006, passed 12-28-2006)



   (B)   Excluded from this fee are business and commercial concerns,
and governmental entities.



   (C)   (1)   If a residential owner or occupant does not pay the
monthly trash collection fee within 60 days after it becomes due, the city
shall discontinue the collection service to that residential unit, and it
will be the obligation of the owner or occupant to either make other
arrangements for trash collection and removal or pay the past due fees plus a
continuation of service charge of $10 for resumption of city service to that
residence.



      (2)   Failure to pay the collection fee for a period of 18
months after it becomes due shall result in the city attaching a lien on the
applicable real estate as an additional assessment to the property taxes
applicable thereto.



(1982 Code, § 93.12(B)(C))



   (D)   No person shall place, put or deposit any trash, garbage,
waste or rank elements, either placed in any type of container or bag, or any
empty trash container or bag in any tree row, street or on that person’s
property or residence in a manner so that it is visible from a public street,
except for the designated collection day each week or the designated heavy
trash collection day and no earlier than the day before any designated
collection day.  Furthermore, all containers or empty trash containers shall
be removed from the tree rows, sidewalks, street or on that person’s
property or residence in a manner so that it is visible from a public street
by the end of the person’s normally or re-scheduled trash collection day if
the trash collection day falls during the week of a city authorized and
approved holiday.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 2-9-2005)



§ 90.23  TRASH COLLECTION FUND.



   (A)   The collected fees shall be deposited in a separate fund and
identified as the Trash Collection Fund, and only the costs of operation and
maintenance, of the service shall be paid from the fund.



   (B)   Any net accumulated surplus after payment of operational and
maintenance costs shall be retained to pay for future increases in costs,
replacement of or additions to trash collection equipment or future
reductions of the trash collection fee by ordinance.



(1982 Code, § 93.12(D))



§ 90.24  MONTHLY REPORTING TO COMMON COUNCIL.



   The City Waterworks shall receive an amount equal to 6% of the total
monthly fee collected to cover its costs of collection, computation and
billing and a monthly report to the Common Council of customers in arrears in
their payments and discontinuations in services.



(1982 Code, § 93.12(E))



§ 90.25  PERIODIC REVIEW OF COLLECTION FEE REQUIRED.



   The amount of the monthly trash collection fee shall be periodically
reviewed by the Common Council and the Mayor and no more than 24 months shall
elapse without a review.



(1982 Code, § 93.12(F))  (Ord. 18-1981, passed 10-26-1981; Am. Ord. 5-1982,
passed - -)



§ 90.26  WEEKLY TRASH COLLECTION.



   For residential premises and all multi-family dwelling units and mobile
homes located and situated inside the corporate limits of the city, trash
collection by the city shall occur once each week.



(1982 Code, § 93.13(A))



§ 90.27  BI-ANNUAL HEAVY TRASH COLLECTION.



   (A)   Heavy trash collection shall occur a minimum of twice each
year, once during the spring of the year and once during the fall, plus at
any other time deemed necessary by the Mayor.



   (B)   Collection will occur for 1 week for each quadrant of the city
after proper advertisement in a local newspaper at least 7 days prior to the
designated day.



   (C)   Residents wishing heavy trash collection shall notify the
Waterworks office by telephone at least 24 hours prior to the designated
heavy trash collection day.



(Ord. 9-1992, passed 7-21-1992)



§ 90.28  TRASH CONTAINER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All ordinary and usual trash and garbage to be collected shall
be packed and securely contained in commercially available plastic bags and
be light enough in weight for 1 person to conveniently lift, and the maximum
of 10 bags will be collected from any 1 residence or residential unit.



   (B)   Garbage or trash in paper sacks, wrapped in paper, or in
cartons shall not be collected.



   (C)   Loose and open trash and garbage shall not be collected.



(1982 Code, § 93.13(C))



§ 90.29  EXCLUDED ENTITIES.



   Trash collection shall not be made at business or commercial
establishments and non-city governmental entities, including but not limited
to county hospitals and schools.



(1982 Code, § 93.13(D))  (Ord. 19-1981, passed 10-26-1981)



§ 90.30  HOURS OF OPERATION FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND/OR BUSINESS
ENTITIES.



   Every person, firm, corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship
engaged in the business of hauling, carrying and/or collecting trash, debris,
garbage, or rubbish from commercial, industrial, and/or business entities
(including apartments) that lies adjacent to any property zoned for R-1, R-2,
or R-3 uses or any property that is zoned T but whose use is that of a
residential nature, shall conduct the business within the city's corporate
limits between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  The  business shall
not be conducted after 10:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 17-2006, passed 6-13-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.99




BURNING REGULATIONS




§ 90.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADEQUATE FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT.  Equipment sufficient and
appropriate under the circumstances to extinguish a fire.



   CEREMONIAL FIRE.  A fire set for the purpose of celebrating an event,
such as an athletic victory, special church holiday or other special
occasion; an example being a bonfire.



   CLEAN PETROLEUM PRODUCTS.  An uncontaminated refined petroleum
product, such as kerosene, lighter fluid, charcoal lighter fluid or diesel
fuel, not previously used in any application.



   CLEAN WOOD PRODUCTS.  Wood or wood products, including vegetation,
that are not coated with stain, paint, glue or other coating material.



   GARBAGE.  All organic household waste, offal, animal and vegetable
matter whose prepared or intended use is as food, condemned foodstuffs and
materials, and substances, materials and things ordinarily disposed of in
containers and/or incinerators by hotels, restaurants, stores, hospitals,
apartment houses and private dwellings.



   MATERIALS CONTAINING ASBESTOS.  Materials such as asphalt, roofing
shingles, vinyl siding, insulation, plastics, wiring, floor tile or any other
matter or material with which asbestos is attached to, added to or made a
part of that matter or material.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the air without passing
through a stack, chimney, duct or pipe, from an enclosed chamber, and
includes above ground or underground smoldering fires, including, but not
limited to, household trash, garbage, refuse, outdoor waste, foliage,
branches, leaves, plastic and building materials, waste materials and waste
substances, tires, treated wood, materials containing asbestos, clean
petroleum products, clean wood products, paper and charcoal.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  An occurrence, act, course of conduct or use of
property, which interferes with the rightful use and enjoyment of the
property of others, or injurious to health, or indecent or offensive to the
senses of persons within the neighborhood, the entire community or the public
generally.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set for the purpose of a cookout, barbeque
or a fire set for the purpose of cooking or preparing food for human
consumption, or a campfire used for Boy or Girl Scouting purposes or in
relation with scouting activities or historical re-enactments.



   TREATED WOOD.  Wood or wood products coated or saturated with arsenic,
chromium, copper or creosote.



(Ord. 5-2002, passed 6-11-2002)



§ 90.41  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The open burning of household trash, garbage, refuse, outdoor
waste, foliage, branches, leaves, plastic and building materials, waste
materials and waste substances, tires, treated wood and materials containing
asbestos, within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil, Indiana is
hereby declared a public nuisance and is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   No fire intended or used as a recreational or ceremonial fire,
as authorized in § 90.42 below shall be used for the purposes of disposing
of any household trash, garbage, refuse, outdoor waste, foliage, branches,
leaves, plastic and building materials, waste materials and waste substances,
tires, treated wood or materials containing asbestos.



(Ord. 5-2002, passed 6-11-2002)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.42  RECREATIONAL OR CEREMONIAL FIRES.



   (A)   Recreational or ceremonial fires, such as fires for outdoor
cooking, barbeques, campfires, fires for scouting activities or other social
activities of organizations, such as schools, fraternal or church
organizations, shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the City of
Brazil, Indiana subject to the following terms and conditions.



      (1)   These fires shall be fueled only by clean wood products,
paper, charcoal or clean burning petroleum products, such as lighter fluid.
An electric lighter device, a charcoal chimney or newspaper may be used as
lighting aids.



      (2)   Fires must be attended at all times by a person at least
18 years of age until it is completely extinguished.



      (3)   If at any time, a recreational or ceremonial fire
creates a public nuisance, such as a pollution problem, a threat to public
health, a dangerous fire hazard to nearby structures, persons, trees, foliage
or utility lines, the fire shall be immediately extinguished.



      (4)   No burning of any kind shall be conducted during
unfavorable weather or meteorological conditions such as high winds,
temperature inversions or air stagnation, or when a pollution alert or ozone
action day has been declared by the appropriate governmental agency.



      (5)   All permitted open burning shall comply with other
federal and state laws and regulations.



      (6)   Adequate firefighting or suppression equipment shall be
on-sight of any recreational or ceremonial fire sufficient to extinguish the
fire.



      (7)   Fires shall not be ignited prior to 2 hours before the
recreational or ceremonial activity is to take place, and they shall be
extinguished completely at the conclusion of the activity.



      (8)   The wood or other proper substance used as fuel for a
recreational fire used for cooking or barbeques, or as a campfire, shall be
less than and no greater than 2 feet in height and 4 feet in diameter.



      (9)   Any ceremonial fire shall be less than and no greater
than 1,000 cubic feet.



      (10)   Only 1 fire sight may be burning at a time at a
location.



      (11)   A ceremonial fire shall not take place within 500 feet
of any fuel storage area or pipeline, within 100 feet of a frequently
traveled street or roadway.



   (B)   Any person desiring to have a recreational or ceremonial fire
pursuant to this section shall register with the Brazil Police Department
dispatch personnel on duty and state the name of the person or organization
conducting the fire, the purpose of the fire, the location of the fire and
the starting and ending times of the activity associated with the fire.



   (C)   Any member of the Police Department or the Fire Department
shall have the right to inspect the location of any recreational or
ceremonial fire, the size of the fire, the supervision of the fire and the
effect of the fire on the adjoining or nearby residents and the general
neighborhood of the fire, and the compliance with this section, with or
without a complaint being registered regarding the fire.



   (D)   The Fire Department may extinguish or authorize the
extinguishing of any recreational or ceremonial fire which violates any
provision of this chapter or any other federal, state or local law,
regulation or rule, or is creating a public nuisance.



(Ord. 5-2002, passed 6-11-2002)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.43  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for
any person, group, organization, including school, fraternal or church
organization, to cause, have, conduct or allow open burning within the
corporate limits of the City of Brazil, Indiana in violation of § 90.41.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any
person, group, organization, including school, fraternal or church
organization, to cause, have, conduct or allow an open burning recreational
or ceremonial fire within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil,
Indiana, in violation of § 90.42 above.



(Ord. 5-2002, passed 6-11-2002)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.44  BURNING OF TRASH, GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LEAVES PROHIBITED.



   The burning of trash, garbage, refuse, foliage, branches, leaves or
waste materials or waste substances within the City of Brazil, Indiana is
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.



(Ord. 9-1984, passed 11-13-1984)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.45  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter shall not be enforced against any person or
persons engaged in burning of any type of charcoals, woods or other type of
combustible product for the purpose of cooking, home heating or social
activities of school, fraternal or church organizations.



   (B)   These regulations shall not be enforced against any person who
first gives written notice to the City of Brazil and the city fails to pick
up trash, refuge, foliage, branches, leaves and other waste materials within
5 days of notice.



   (C)   This exclusion from prohibition does not pertain to persons
engaged in business within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil at his
or her place of business, or an employee thereof.



(Ord. 9-1984, passed 11-13-1984)




MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS




§ 90.60  FIRING GUN WITHIN CITY; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person to fire any gun or
pistol in the city.



   (B)   This provision shall not be construed to extend to any police
officer, nor to any peace officer while in the performance of any duty in
pursuance of any ordinance, or in obedience to any law of the state.



(1982 Code, § 130.03)  (Ord. 16-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.61  GIVING FALSE ALARM IN PUBLIC PLACE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to strike a match, or to cry out
"fire" in a church, hall or theater, while the church, hall or theater is
occupied by a public assemblage, or to utter any cry tending to create a
panic in the city.



(1982 Code, § 130.04)  (Ord. 12-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.62  LITTERING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The City of Brazil, having received complaints from the
residents of the City of Brazil concerning certain litter violations
occurring in and on city streets, a $500 fine shall be the penalty for any
person who litters on a street located in the City of Brazil.



   (B)   The City Street Department is directed to install sign
locations giving notice of anti-littering regulations on each U.S. 40 city
limit west, U.S. 40 city limit east, Indiana 59 city limit north and Indiana
59 city limit south.



(Ord. 6-1991, passed 8-13-1991)



§ 90.63  CONTROL OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES AND GROUPS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, proprietor, manager or
person in control of any theater, opera, moving picture show, public
entertainment or public assembly, to keep the aisles and ways of ingress and
egress to and in the room where people are assembled, by chairs, persons or
other unobstructed obstructions of any kind or character, so in case of that
fire or any other emergency, the aisles in the room and the exits therefrom
will be unobstructed, and thereby facilitate the escape of persons from the
room. The failure to perform that duty is declared unlawful.



   (B)   It is declared unlawful for any person to obstruct the aisles
in any theater, opera, moving picture show public entertainment or other
public assembly, or the exits therefrom, by congregating or standing therein,
or in any other manner, to the end that aisles and exits shall be free and
unobstructed so that persons in the room in case of fire or other emergency,
may escape therefrom without any delay.



   (C)   In every room used for theatrical, operatic or moving picture
show purposes, or for public entertainments or public assemblies, the word
"Exit" shall be painted in plain English language, not less than 8 inches in
length, over each door or place of egress, and every word "Exit" shall have
over the same a red light at times when the room is being used for public
gatherings. The light shall be in relation to the word "Exit" that the light
will be reflected thereon, so that the word "Exit" may be seen by all persons
in the room whenever the room is in use for any of the purposes aforesaid.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of every owner, proprietor, manager or
person in control of any moving picture show to cause to be constructed and
maintained from the film room, in which the films are operated, an air tight
flue or duct 14 inches in diameter to the outside of the auditorium or
assembly room in order that all fumes and smoke may pass through the duct or
flue from the film room to the outside of the auditorium or assembly room in
case of fire, and not escape into the auditorium or assembly room, so that
the danger of persons breathing the poisonous fumes and gases and smoke will
be prevented, and it shall be unlawful to conduct any moving picture show or
operate any film unless the room in which the film is operated shall be
connected with the outside of the auditorium or assembly room by and with a
flue or duct and it be so arranged and constructed that the fumes and smoke
and gases resulting from the burning of the film, or other matter in the film
room, will pass through the duct to the outside of the auditorium or assembly
room and not escape into the auditorium or assembly room.



(1982 Code, § 130.05)  (Ord. 20-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.64  DISTURBANCES OF THE PEACE.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person to congregate, scuffle,
wrestle, box or to be guilty of any other boisterous or disorderly conduct on
any sidewalk in front of any plate glass window in any building in the city,
or to sit or lean against a window, or to loiter, or sit in or in any manner
to obstruct any public stairway in any business building in the city, or to
sit or loiter on the steps or in the entrance to any building.



   (B)   It shall be and is declared unlawful for any person or persons
to idle or loiter in any public place, park, shed, car, car shop, outhouse,
street, alley, railroad depot or switch house in the city.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be found begging in the
city or lying or sleeping in, along or on any public street, alley, park or
public place or grounds, or in any stable, outhouse, building, warehouse,
shed, railroad depot or railroad car, or in or about any yard, mill or
factory in the city, without having the permission of the owner or occupant
thereof to sleep or be in that place.



   (D)   Any person who, within the limits of the city, shall
unnecessarily make any loud and unusual noise and clamor, or commit any
unseemly and boisterous conduct, to the disturbance of the peace and quiet of
the city shall be deemed guilty of disorderly and unlawful conduct, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined.



(1982 Code, § 130.06)  (Ord. 71-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   If a citation is issued, whoever violates any
provision of §§ 90.20 through 90.29 shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100.



      (2)   For violations of §§ 90.20 through 90.29, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or
continues.



(Ord. 13-1999, passed 8-24-1999; Am. Ord. 20-2006, passed 6-27-2006)



   (B)   Every person, firm, corporation, partnership, or sole
proprietorship who violates any provision of § 90.30 shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $250 for the first offense and $500 for the second and all
subsequent offenses.



(Ord. 13-1999, passed 8-24-1999; Am. Ord. 13-1999, passed 8-24-1999; Am. Ord.
20-2006, passed 6-27-2006)



   (C)   (1) Whoever violates any provision of this §§ 90.40 through
90.45 shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for the first violation
thereof, and $500 for the second and all subsequent violations. A separate
violation shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or
continues.



      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be issued a citation by a city police officer setting forth the
violation committed, the date, time and location of the violation, and inform
the violator that he or she has 10 days after being issued the citation to
pay the penalty at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, or the violator
will summoned into court.



(Ord. 9-1984, passed 11-13-1984; Am. Ord. 5-2002, passed 6-11-2002)



   (D)   (1)   Guns/weapons. Whoever violates any provision of §
90.60 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $10.



(1982 Code, § 130.99(B))  (Ord. 16-1931 passed 9-22-1931)



      (2)   False alarms. Whoever violates any provision of § 90.61
shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $25.



(1982 Code, § 130.99(C))  (Ord. 12-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



      (3)   Assemblies. Whoever violates any provision of § 90.63
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $100.



(1982 Code, § 130.99(D))  (Ord. 20-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



      (4)   Disturbing of peace. Whoever violates any provision of
§ 90.64 shall be fined not more than $10.



(1982 Code, § 130.99(E))  (Ord. 71-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to § 10.99.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 6-27-2006)



CHAPTER 91: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Persons exempted from regulations



   91.03   Offenses



   91.04   Recycling containers exempted



   91.05   Signs posted



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Has the same meaning as set forth in I.C.
7.1-1-3-5, or a liquid or solid that is, or contains, 0.5% or more alcohol by
volume; is fit for human consumption; and is reasonable likely, or intended,
to be used as a beverage.



   CAR.  A motor vehicle, that, in common usage, is referred to as a CAR.
Common elements of a CAR include 4 tires, front and back seats that do not
provide room for standing and the names "sedans" and "convertibles."



   CONTAINER.  Has the same meaning as set forth in I.C. 7.1-1-3-13, or a
receptacle in which an alcoholic beverage is immediately contained and with
which the alcoholic beverage contained in it is in immediate contact.



   IMMEDIATE AREA.  For vans, shall be defined as the interior area of
the van, which is located behind the area farthest to the back of the van
where a seat can be affixed, regardless if the seat is, in fact, affixed. For
station wagons and other cars without trunks, shall be defined as the total
area of the interior of the car, except the area to the rear of the seat
which is located the farthest to the back. For cars with trunks, shall be
defined as the total interior area of the car. For recreational vehicles,
shall be defined as the interior area encompassing the front seats. This area
includes the area between the driver's and front passenger doors, the glove
compartment, dashboard, interior windshield area and any cavities in the
driver's door and front passenger door. For all other types of motor vehicles
including all types of trucks, shall be defined as the total interior of the
motor vehicle.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Has the same meaning as set forth in I.C. 9-13-2-105.
This definition shall, for the purpose of this chapter, mean a vehicle that
is self-propelled, and shall include motorcycles and motorized bicycles that
are self-propelled.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Has the meaning as set forth in I.C.
9-13-2-150. For the purpose of this chapter, the definition of RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE shall not include vans.



   TRUCK.  Has the meaning as set forth in I.C. 9-13-2-188.



   VAN.  A motor vehicle that, in common usage, is referred to as a VAN.
Included within this definition are motor vehicles commonly referred to as
"converted vans," "mini-vans" and "passenger vans." This definition applies
to all VANS, whether or not back seats are affixed.



(Ord. 11-1993, passed 9-29-1993)



§ 91.02  PERSONS EXEMPTED FROM REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The following individuals shall be exempt from this chapter:



      (1)   A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is
operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for
passengers and the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to I.C.
9-24-1-2;



      (2)   A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid
chauffeur's license pursuant to I.C. 9-24-1-2; and



      (3)   A passenger in a recreational vehicle.



   (B)   The exemption in division (A)(3) above shall not apply to any
passenger located in the immediate area.



(Ord. 11-1993, passed 9-28-1993)



§ 91.03  OFFENSES.



   (A)   Any person who knowingly consumes an alcoholic beverage or
possesses a container that has been opened, that has a broken seal or from
which some of the contents have been removed, while in a motor vehicle that
is being operated on a public street within the city commits a violation of
this chapter with the following exception: a person may possess a container
that has been opened, that has a broken seal or from which some of the
contents have been removed, if the container is possessed solely for the
purpose of transporting the same or storage, are not consumed in the motor
vehicle, are not present in the immediate area, and are otherwise allowed to
be possessed under state law.



   (B)   The operator or owner of a motor vehicle who, while the motor
vehicle is in operation, knowingly keeps or allows to be kept in the
immediate area of the motor vehicle a container that has been opened, that
has a broken seal, or from which some of the contents have been removed,
commits a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 11-1993, passed 9-28-1993)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  RECYCLING CONTAINERS EXEMPTED.



   This chapter shall not be applicable to containers in generally
recognized trash bag, trash containers or recycling containers in a motor
vehicle if the operator is in the process of transporting same to a recycling
facility or other facility used for the deposit of solid waste materials,
including landfills.



(Ord. 11-1993, passed 9-28-1993)



§ 91.05  SIGNS POSTED.



   Signs giving notice of this prohibition of open alcoholic beverage
containers shall be posted giving notice of this chapter at all locations
deemed appropriate by the Chief of Police or his or her designee to give the
public adequate notice hereof.



(Ord. 11-1993, passed 9-28-1993)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter and who has been issued an ordinance violation citation by any
officer of the City of Brazil Police Department shall be fined the sum of $50.



   (B)   For each subsequent citation issued to that person, the fine
imposed shall be not less than $100 and not more than $2,500 as determined by
a court of competent jurisdiction over ordinance violations.



(Ord. 11-1993, passed 9-28-1993)



CHAPTER 92: HOUSING



Section



   92.01   Policy statement



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Unlawful practices



   92.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   92.05   Discrimination in residential real estate; related
transactions



   92.06   Provision of brokerage services; discrimination



   92.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   92.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   92.09   Exemptions



   92.10   Administrative enforcement of chapter



§ 92.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the City of Brazil, Indiana to provide,
within constitutional limitation, for fair housing through its corporate
limits as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended
the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and
I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 11-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  Includes any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that a person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   COMMISSION.  The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to
I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.



   COMPLAINANT.  A person, including the Commission, who files a
complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   DISABILITY.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits 1 or more of a person's major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having an impairment;



         (c)   Being regarded as having an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or



         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C.
22-9.5-2-10.



      (2)   The term DISABILITY shall not include current illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in § 802 of Title
21 of the United States Code, I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(b); nor does the term
DISABILITY include an individual solely because that individual is a
transvestite.



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.  An act that is unlawful under §§
92.04, 92.05, 92.06, 92.07 or 92.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5-5.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by 1
or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building
or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by 1 or more families.



   FAMILIAL STATUS.  Discrimination on the basis of familial status means
discrimination because the person is (1) pregnant; (2) domiciled with an
individual under the age of 18 years of age in regard to whom the person is
(a) the parent or legal custodian or (b) has the written permission of the
parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or (3) in the
process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than 18 years of
age.



   FAMILY.  Includes a single individual, with the status of the family
being further defined in the definition FAMILIAL STATUS.



   PERSON.  Includes 1 or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers and
fiduciaries.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



   TO RENT.  Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the right to occupy the premises not owned by the
occupant.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 92.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.



   Subject to division (B) below, § 92.09 and I.C. Title 22-9.5-3,
prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set
forth I.C. Title 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 92.04 shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and
I.C. Title 22-9.5-3; and



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below nothing in §
92.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than 3 single-family houses at
any 1 time; provided that in the sale of a single-family house by a private
individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or who was not
the most recent resident of the house prior to the sale, the exemption shall
apply to 1 sale within any 24-month period. The private individual owner may
not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on his or her behalf,
title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than 3 single-family houses at any 1 time. The sale or rental
of any single-family house shall be excepted from application of this section
only if the house is sold or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or of any employee or agent of a broker, agent or salesperson or person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of section 4(c) of
this ordinance, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than 4 families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies 1
of the living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in 3 or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in 2 or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or



      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, 5 or more families.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 92.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 92.03 and except as exempted by § 92.03(B)
and § 92.09, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
familial status or national origin;



   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial
status or national origin or any intention to make any preference, limitation
or discrimination;



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when a dwelling is in fact so
available;



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin; or



   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to
otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because
of a disability of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling, because of a
disability of:



         (a)   That person;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (3)   For purposes of this section, discrimination includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to
be occupied by a person if modifications may be necessary to afford a person
full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the
landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises
to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and
tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices or services, when accommodations may be necessary
to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1988, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in a manner so that the public use and common use portions of the
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; all the
doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within dwellings
are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs;
and all premises within dwellings contain the following features of adaptive
design:



            1.   An accessible route into and through the
dwelling;



            2.   Light, switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



            3.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow
later installation of grab bars; and



            4.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that an
individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements, Americans
With Disabilities Act of 1990, and of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically disabled people (commonly cited as
"ANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of division (3)(b)3.



      (5)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 92.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE ; RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available a transaction, or in the
terms or conditions of a transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing
or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property.



   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability or
familial status.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.06  PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES; DISCRIMINATION.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or
national origin.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted
or protected by §§ 92.03, 92.04, 92.05 or 92.06.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by
force or threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or
attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with:



      (1)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion,
sex, disability, familial status or national origin and because he or she is
or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting
or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or



      (2)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order
to intimidate a person or any other person or any class of persons from:



         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities
described in subsection 15(a); or



         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate;



      (3)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order
to discourage a citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national
origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities
described in division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or
peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.



   (B)   Any person violating this section  shall be fined not more
than $1,000 if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $2,500.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 92.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. Title 22-9.5-3 et
seq. shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to persons, unless membership in a religion is restricted on account of race,
color or national origin.



      (2)   Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private
club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary
purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of lodgings
to its members or from giving preference to its members.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status
shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.



      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means
housing:



         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that
the Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the state civil rights commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal
program); or



         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62
years of age or older; or



         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least 1
person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



§ 92.10  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commission as set
forth in division (B) below shall be vested in the Mayor.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the City of
Brazil, because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
divisions of this section by complaints to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission or administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. Title
22-9.5-6, and the Mayor of the City of Brazil shall refer all complaints to
the Commission as provided for under division (A) above to the Commission for
purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for
under I.C. Title 22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All city departments, boards and commissions of the City of
Brazil, shall administer their departments, programs and activities relating
to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the
purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the Mayor and the
Commission to further those purposes.



   (D)   The Mayor or the designee, shall provide information on
remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting
information.



(Ord. 3-1994, passed 3-22-1994)



CHAPTER 93:  ANIMALS



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Restraint required



   93.03   Apprehension, impoundment and violation notice; fees



   93.04   Breach of shelter



   93.05   When dogs to be muzzled



   93.06   Euthanizing dogs



   93.07   Vicious dogs



   93.08   Barking dogs and noisy animals prohibited



   93.09   Pigs as pets; acreage requirements for swine



   93.10   Stable, pen and kennel regulations



   93.11   Removal of dead animals



   93.12   Regulations governing the sale of young animals and fowl



   93.13   Name tags required



   93.14   Animal care



   93.15   Removal of animal waste required



   93.16   Keeping wild animals restricted



   93.17   Enforcement procedures



   93.18   Kennel/cattery permits



   93.19   Permit for grandfathered owners of kennel/cattery permit



   93.20   Kennel/cattery permit procedures and fee



   93.21   Inspections



   93.22   Appeal; denial or revocation of permit



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERED ANIMAL.  An animal that has been operated on to prevent it
from procreating.



   ANIMAL.  Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. For purposes
of all sections herein, ANIMAL shall include dogs and/or cats, or any other
animal commonly kept as a pet.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed 4-12-1988)



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any facility operated by a humane society or
municipal agency, or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.



   CATTERY.  Any person or group of persons, partnership or corporation
engaged in keeping more than 1 unaltered cat over the age of 6 months or more
than 6 cats total.



   HUMANE OFFICER.  Any person designated by the State of Indiana, a
municipal government or a humane society as a law enforcement officer, who is
qualified to perform duties under the laws of this state.



   KENNEL.  Any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation
engaged in the keeping of more than 1 unaltered dog over the age of 6 months
or more than 4 dogs, or the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting
for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs.



   OWNER.  Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring 1 or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it
is fed or sheltered for 3 or more consecutive days.



   PET.  Any animal kept for pleasure, and not denied by state law or
ordinance of the city.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Any animal which:



      (1)   Runs at large;



      (2)   Attacks other animals;



      (3)   Molests passers-by or passing vehicles;



      (4)   Barks, whines or howls in any excessive, continuous or
untimely fashion;



      (5)   Damages private or public property.



(1982 Code, § 90.01)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980; Am. Ord. 12-2006,
passed 4-11-2006)



§ 93.02  RESTRAINT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall allow any cattle, sheep, swine, fowl, dog or
other domestic animal to run at large in the city.



   (B)   No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his
or her animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.



   (C)   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a
building or secure enclosure in a manner so that a female dog or cat can not
come into contact with another animal except for supervised or planned
breeding.



(1982 Code, § 90.02)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.03  APPREHENSION, IMPOUNDMENT AND VIOLATION NOTICE; FEES.



   (A)   Unrestrained dogs and nuisance animals shall be taken by the
police or Humane Officer and impounded in an animal shelter and there
confined in a humane manner.



   (B)   After an animal has been held unredeemed at the animal shelter
for a period of 3 days, it shall be disposed of by the Humane Officer, by
adopting it to some person who will provide the animal a suitable home, or by
destroying it in a manner permitted by law.



   (C)   If, by a license tag or another means, the owner of an
impounded animal can be identified, the Humane Officer shall immediately on
impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or certified mail.



   (D)   The animal shelter shall be open to inspection at reasonable
times for owners to search for and reclaim animals.



   (E)   (1)   In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal
found at large, the Animal Control Officer, Humane Officer or police may
issue to the known owner of the animal a notice of ordinance violation.
Notice shall impose on the owner a penalty of $25 which is to be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Brazil, Indiana within 48 hours, in full
satisfaction of the assessed penalty.



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide the Humane Officer
with the prescribed form for notice of violations and the Humane Officer
shall inform and deliver to the Brazil Clerk-Treasurer the original form
which shall contain the name of the owner of the animal, his or her address,
the location of the animal when found astray, and the time and date of the
impoundment.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed 4-12-1988)



§ 93.04  BREACH OF SHELTER.



   No person other than the manager of the animal shelter or a Humane
Officer shall liberate any impounded animal. No person shall commit a breach
of a shelter or interfere with the taking of animals by the Humane Officer.



(1982 Code, § 90.05)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1988)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.05  WHEN DOGS TO BE MUZZLED.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever the Clay County Board of Health determines
that there is danger of the existence or spread of hydrophobia within or near
the city, it may issue an order requiring any person owning, possessing or
having the care and control of any dog, either to confine or muzzle the
animal for a term not less than 30 days, nor more than 60 days, ensuing the
date of the order.



      (2)   Any person subject to the order shall, during the period
of time specified therein, confine the animal so as to prevent it from biting
any other animal or being bitten thereby, or shall securely and effectively
muzzle it in a manner so as to make it impossible for it to bite any person
or any other animal.



      (3)   No muzzle is lawful unless it is of a form, material and
strength, and so attached and fastened, as to effectively prevent the animal
from biting, and any dog which is found running at large within the city
without a muzzle during the time specified in the order is declared to be a
nuisance.



   (B)   The order of the Clay County Board of Health, as provided for
herein, shall be published in 1 issue of a daily newspaper published in the
city, or a printed copy thereof shall be posted in at least 3 public places
in the city.



(1982 Code, § 90.06)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.06  EUTHANIZING DOGS.



   On the issuing and publishing of the order of the Clay County Board of
provided for in § 93.05 and after the expiration of 24 hours from the
publication, the law enforcement authorities shall kill any dog running at
large within the city during the time specified in the order, unless it is
securely and effectively muzzled as required by this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 90.07)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)



§ 93.07  VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   Any dog which has bitten or attacked any person shall be
considered vicious and shall be impounded for a period of 10 days, or so long
as the Clay County Board of Health shall otherwise determine.



   (B)   In lieu of impounding at the animal shelter, the owner, at his
or her expense, may provide for the dog to be delivered by the Humane Officer
to a commercial kennel operated by a licensed veterinarian, for that period.



   (C)   After that period, the animal shall be released or disposed
of, pursuant to the rules and policies of the impounding facility. No person
shall keep or permit any vicious animal within the city unless the same shall
be secured by a chain on his or her or muzzled to prevent him or her from
biting.



   (D)   Any animal believed to be vicious found running at large,
unmuzzled, may be destroyed by law enforcement authorities.



(1982 Code, § 90.08)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)



§ 93.08  BARKING DOGS AND NOISY ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep within the city, any animal which by loud and
frequent barking, howling, yelping or other animal noises, disturbs the peace
and quiet or annoys any citizens.



(1982 Code, § 90.10)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.09  PIGS AS PETS; ACREAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR SWINE.



   No person shall keep, feed or maintain any pig, hog or swine of any
kind within the corporate limits of the city, except for Vietnamese
pot-bellied pigs so long as they are kept as pets and confined within the
household, and except swine temporarily in shipping pens for shipment to
market or elsewhere, or swine kept on tracts of land of 5 acres or more in
extent, which are used exclusively for farming purposes.



(Ord. 9-1993, passed 8-10-1993)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  STABLE, PEN AND KENNEL REGULATIONS.



   No person shall keep within the city any pig sty, kennel, stable or
other animal pen or shelter in a manner so as to create or cause any
offensive or noxious smell or condition, or maintain or use any animal pen or
shelter constructed in a manner as to permit the contents of filth therein to
run or wash on the premises owned or occupied by another, or on any street,
alley or other public place.



(1982 Code, § 90.11)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.11  REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any person who becomes apprised of the death of any animal
owned by him or her within the city shall, within 6 hours thereafter, cause
the same to be removed and buried or disposed of so as not to become a
nuisance.



   (B)   When the animal is killed by any other person than its owner,
if the person so killing it is known, the owner shall not be compelled to
remove it as provided above, but it shall be removed by the person killing it.



(1982 Code, § 90.12)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.12  REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SALE OF YOUNG ANIMALS AND FOWL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale,
raffle or offer or give as a prize, premium or advertising device, or display
in any store, shop, carnival or other place, any chick, duckling, gosling or
rabbit that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale,
raffle or offer to give as a prize, premium or advertising device, any
chicks, ducklings or goslings younger than 4 weeks of age, in quantities of
less than 12 birds to each individual person.



   (C)   All stores, shops, vendors and other offering chicks,
ducklings or goslings for sale shall provide and operate brooders or other
heating devices that may be necessary to maintain the chicks, ducklings or
goslings in good health, and shall keep adequate food and water available to
the birds at all times.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to raffle, offer or give
as a prize, premium or advertising device, any live vertebrate animal.



   (E)   This section shall not prohibit the lawful sale of animals,
where proper precautions are made for the health and safety of the animals,
and the sale of the same conducted in a manner so as not to create a public
nuisance.



(1982 Code, § 90.13)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.13  NAME TAGS REQUIRED.



   No owner or person having custody of any dog or cat shall allow a dog
or cat to be on the streets of Brazil, Indiana or other public places, unless
the dog or cat is wearing a name tag which shall clearly identify the name of
the owner of the dog or cat, and the address of the owner. Any person found
violating this section shall be fined pursuant to § 93.03.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed 4-12-1988)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.14  ANIMAL CARE.



   (A)   No owner or person responsible shall fail to provide his or
her animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter
and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering and humane care and treatment.



   (B)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any
dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans.



   (C)   No owner of an animal shall abandon an animal.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly expose any known poisonous
substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable
to be eaten by any animal. It shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on
his or her own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable
substances.



(1982 Code, § 90.15)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.15  REMOVAL OF ANIMAL WASTE REQUIRED.



   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta deposited by his or her animals on public walks, recreation areas or
private property.



(1982 Code, § 90.16)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.16  KEEPING WILD ANIMALS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his or her
premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes,
whether gratuitously or for a fee.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological
parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.



(1982 Code, § 90.17)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.17  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Designated officers of the impounding facility shall be issued
special police powers in order that they will have the authority to issue
notices of ordinance violations.



   (B)   Persons wishing to register a complaint for the violation of
any section of this section shall contact the impounding facility.



   (C)   However, persons are advised that registering a complaint does
not mean automatic prosecution for the offense.



   (D)   In order to obtain redress, the offended party shall file a
formal complaint with the City Attorney.



(1982 Code, § 90.98)  (Ord. 26-1980, passed 11-10-1980)



§ 93.18  KENNEL/CATTERY PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person owning or harboring more than 1 unaltered dog or 1
unaltered cat over the age of 6 months must apply for a kennel/cattery
permit. At no time shall the number of dogs exceed 4, number of cats exceeds
6, or the total number of dogs and cats exceed 6, at 1 residential property.



   (B)   Any person engaging in the business of boarding, breeding,
buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling cats or dogs must
apply for a kennel/cattery permit.



   (C)   Animals owned or harbored and exceeding the ownership limits
of this section at the time of passage of this law may be registered with the
Office of the Clerk-Treasurer within 120 days of passage to be exempted from
ownership limits. Animals owned or harbored in excess of these limits and not
registered within this time frame will not be considered exempt.



   (D)   The County Humane Society shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 12-2006, passed 4-11-2006)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.19  PERMIT FEE FOR GRANDFATHERED OWNERS OF KENNEL/CATTERY PERMIT.



   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation who has
applied to be exempt from the ownership requirements of § 93.18 of this
chapter shall pay an annual fee to the Clerk-Treasurer in the amount of $25.



(Ord. 12-2006, passed 4-11-2006)



§ 93.20  KENNEL/CATTERY PERMIT PROCEDURES AND FEE.



   (A)   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation shall
submit and complete an application with the Clerk-Treasurer. Except as
provided in § 93.18(C), the location of the kennel/cattery shall only be
placed in/on property zoned for local business use.



   (B)   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation
subject to this section, shall pay, except as provided in § 93.18 (C), an
application fee of $100 annually to the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 12-2006, passed 4-11-2006)



§ 93.21  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation is
subject to the requirements of §§ 93.18(A) (B), 93.20 or 93.22, shall be
subject to the right of inspection by the Humane Officer for a minimum of 1
inspection and a maximum of 4 inspections annually, to determine compliance
with this chapter. The inspections may be made in accordance with the
provisions of division (C).



   (B)   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation is
subject to the requirements of §§ 93.18(C) or 93.19, may be subject to the
right of inspection by the Humane Officer for a minimum of 1 inspection
annually, to determine compliance with those sections. The inspections may be
made in accordance with the provisions of division (C).



   (C)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this chapter or when
there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or
upon any premises, any violation of the provisions of this chapter or state
law, the Animal Control Officer, Health Officer or police officer is
authorized at all reasonable times to inspect the same for compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or any state law; provided that:



      (1)   If the property is occupied, the officer shall first
present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining
reasons therefore; and



      (2)   If the property is unoccupied, the officer shall make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having control of the
property and request entry explaining the reasons therefore.



   (D)   In the event the Animal Control Officer, County Health or
police officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or
maintaining of an animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require
immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety,
the officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry,
explaining the reasons therefore. If entry is refused or cannot be obtained
because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property
cannot be found after reasonable search, the officer shall have recourse to
secure lawful entry and inspection of the property.



(Ord. 12-2006, passed 4-11-2006)



.§ 93.22  APPEAL; DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation that
is subject to this chapter, whose permit is revoked, shall have at least 48
hours to correct any deficiencies before any revocation of permit.



   (B)   Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation who
is denied a permit or whose permit is revoked may appeal the denial or
revocation to the Board of Public Works and Safety within 14 days of the date
of the denial or revocation of the permit.



   (C)   All requests for appeals must be in writing and addressed to
the Mayor; whereupon, the Mayor shall set the appeal for hearing within 30
days of the receipt of the written request.



(Ord. 12-2006, passed 4-11-2006)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation who
violates any provisions of §§ 93.04 through 93.13 or §§ 93.16 and 93.17
of this chapter, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25 for the first
offense and $50 for the second and all subsequent offenses.



   (B)   Any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation, who
violates any provisions of §§ 93.02, 93.03 or 93.14 of this chapter, shall
be subject to a civil penalty of $25 for the first offense for any altered
animal and $50 for the second and all subsequent offenses. Likewise, any
person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation who violates any
provisions of §§ 93.02, 93.03, or 93.14 of this chapter, shall be subject
to a civil penalty of $40 for the first offense for any unaltered animal and
$80 for all subsequent offenses. Any person, group of persons, partnership,
or corporation, may have all penalties for an unaltered animal or this
section waived 1 time during the life of the animal in violation of §§
93.02, 93.03 or 93.14, if the owner chooses to have the animal altered within
30 days of the alleged violation. This option is purely voluntary on the part
of the owner of the animal at issue and it shall be the responsibility of the
owner to provide the Humane Officer the appropriate documentation that the
animal has been altered.



   (C)   Any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation who
violates any of the provisions of §§ 93.18 through 93.21 of this chapter,
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for the first offense and $500
for the second and all subsequent offenses.



   (D)   Any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation, who
violates the provisions of § 93.15 of this chapter, shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $500.



   (E)   Should any person violating any provision of this chapter not
pay the designated civil penalty at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer within
10 days after being served with the citation, the violator shall be summoned
into court.



   (F)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that
a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 12-1999, passed 8-24-1999; Am. Ord. 12-2006, passed 4-11-2006; Am. Ord.
18-2006, passed 6-27-2006)



CHAPTER 94:  PUBLIC NUISANCES



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Violations



   94.03   Inspection; notice



   94.04   Failure to abate



   94.05   Excessive noise



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  All organic household waste, offal, animal and vegetable
matter prepared or intended use of food, condemned foodstuffs and materials
and substance, materials and things ordinarily disposed of in containers and
incinerators by hotels, restaurants, stores, hospitals, apartment houses and
private dwellings.



   LOT or PARCEL OF REAL ESTATE.  Includes, in addition to those grounds
within their respective boundaries, all of the grounds lying to the center of
the street or alley where the street or alley is not improved.



   TRASH AND OTHER RANK ELEMENTS.  Any and all rubbish, junk, debris and
refuse including, but not limited to, glass bottles and containers, broken
glass, aluminum cans, paper products, plastic products, rubber products,
metals, rags, weed clippings, grass clippings, tree toppings or leaves, which
is harmful to the general public health and welfare or detracts from the
appearance and sanitary safety of the neighborhood.



   WEEDS, UNCUT GRASS AND OTHER UNSIGHTLY VEGETATION.  Any weeds or uncut
grass of more than 8 inches in height or any bush, brush or shrub, which has
not been planted, but comes forth naturally or is in an untrimmed or
un-maintained condition, which is harmful to the general public health and
welfare or detracts from the appearance and sanitary safety of the
neighborhood.



(Ord. 12-2005, passed 4-27-2005; Am. Ord. 20-2006, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 94.02  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or lessee of any
lot within the corporate limits of the city to allow, suffer or permit any
garbage as defined in § 94.01 above; weeds, uncut grass or other unsightly
vegetation as defined in § 94.01 above; or any trash or rank elements as
defined in § 94.01 above to be deposited on, grow on or remain on any lot.



   (B)   Whenever and wherever any garbage as defined in § 94.01
above; weeds, uncut grass and other unsightly vegetation as defined in §
94.01 above; or, any trash or other rank elements as defined in § 94.01
above that is deposited on, grows on or remains on any lot within the
corporate limits of the city, the same shall be a nuisance and a violation of
this chapter.



(Ord 12-2005, passed 4-27-2005; Am. Ord. 20-2006, passed 6-27-2006) 
Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  INSPECTION; NOTICE



   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of any city department, and
specifically the duly appointed Planning and Zoning Administrator, to inspect
from time to time the various lots lying within the corporate limits of the
city, and if it is found that garbage, as defined in § 94.01; weeds, uncut
grass and other unsightly vegetation as defined in § 94.01; or any trash or
other rank elements as defined in § 94.01 that is deposited on, grows on or
remains on any lot, it shall be the duty of the city official to report the
same to the duly appointed Planning and Zoning Administrator for the City of
Brazil, Indiana. The duly appointed Planning and Zoning Administrator shall
verify the condition of the lot in question that has been reported, upon
verification and concurrence in regard to a potential violation of city
ordinance, shall ascertain the names of the owners, occupants or lessees of
the city lot.



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall then notify
the owners, occupants or lessees, in writing, that the lot is in violation of
Ch. 94, Title IX of the City of Brazil Code of Ordinances in regard to
garbage; weeds, uncut grass and other unsightly vegetation; or trash and
other rank elements. The written notice shall be specific in regard to the
condition alleged to be in violation of Ch. 93. Notice shall also inform the
owner, occupant or lessee that the condition of the lot is to be remedied
within 7 days from the date of notice. Notice shall be personally served on
the owner of record or shall be sent to the owner of record as the name and
address appears on the records of the County Auditor, by certified mail,
regular mail, and a copy placed on the lot or parcel in question.  When
personal service is obtained, that shall constitute date of notice.  When
service is by certified mail, regular mail, and placing notice on the lot or
parcel at issue, these notice procedures shall be done on the same day which
is then deemed the date of notice.



   (B)   (1)   Consistent with the duty of owners, occupants and
lessees of lots or parcels of real estate located within the corporate
boundaries of the city, to keep same free of public nuisances, the City
Planning and Zoning Administrator, may utilize the inspection; notice
provisions of this sub-section for “continuing violations and continued
failure to abate.”



      (2)   In regard to the first violation of §§ 94.01 through
94.04, for any specific “lot” or “parcel of real estate” in a given
calendar year, the inspection and notice procedures shall be as outlined in
subsections (A)(1) and (2). In regard to this first alleged violation
occurring in any given calendar year, where the owner, occupant or lessee
fails to abate the nuisance and said nuisance is abated by the city, any
subsequent inspection and notice of violation in the calendar year, shall be
deemed a “continuing violation and continued failure to abate.” In that
event, the inspection/notice provisions of subsections (A)(1) and (2), shall
be followed by the Planning and Zoning Administrator for the city; however,
the notice outlined in subsection (A)(2) shall additionally state that unless
the specified public nuisance is abated by the owner, occupant or lessee of
the “lot” or “parcel of real estate” within the corporate boundaries
of the city within the required time, or unless a hearing is requested
pursuant to § 93.04 (B), then the city shall take the abatement action
contemplated in § 93.04, and shall continue to abate public nuisances in
regard to “lots” or “parcels of real estate” subject to this
subsection once each month for the remainder of the calendar year without
further notice, if not otherwise abated by the owner, occupant or lessee.



      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator for the city will
prepare a list of properties subject to this subsection and present the list
at the monthly meeting of the Board of Public Works and Safety for their
approval of continuing abatement and continued failure to abate by owner,
occupant or lessee.



(Ord. 12-2005, passed 4-27-2005; Am. Ord. 20-2006, passed 6-27-2006) 
Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  FAILURE TO ABATE.



   (A)   Any owner, occupant or lessee of the lot who shall fail to
remove or abate the ordinance violation involving garbage as defined in §
94.01, weeds, uncut grass or other unsightly vegetation as defined in §
94.01; or any trash or rank elements as defined in § 94.01 to be deposited
on, grow on or remain on any lot, after receiving notice as provided in §
94.03, shall be subject to the duty of the Board of Public Works and Safety
to cause the same to be removed or otherwise abated.



   (B)   (1)   Any owner, occupant or lessee of any lot alleged to
be in violation of the city nuisance ordinance, i.e. §§ 94.01, 94.02, 94.03
and 94.04, shall have the right to contest the alleged ordinance violation by
notifying the City Planning and Zoning Administrator, who shall so inform the
Board of Public Works and Safety of the person's request to be heard.



      (2)   If a hearing is requested, the Board of Public Works and
Safety shall then have a hearing on the alleged violation to determine
whether or not an ordinance violation has incurred prior to taking action to
remove or rebate.



   (C)   When the Board of Public Works and Safety has affected the
removal or abatement of the nuisance, the Board of Public Works and Safety
shall prepare a sworn statement showing the cost of the work performed and
they shall bill the owner of record. The bill shall be due and payable at the
time of receiving the statement. The minimum amount shall be $25.



   (D)   (1)   When the full amount due the city is not paid by the
owner within 30 days after work has been performed, as provided in division
(C) above, then, and in that case, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall
certify the total cost to remove and abate, including postage and/or
publication costs to the County Auditor.



      (2)   This certification shall be in the form of a sworn
statement, showing the total cost and expense incurred, including the expense
of notice and/or publication, the expense of the work done including the date
of completion and the location of the property upon which the work was done
for removal or abatement. This sworn statement shall be signed by the duly
elected Mayor of the City of Brazil as Mayor and as a member of the Brazil,
Indiana Board of Public Works and Safety. The Auditor shall place the total
amount certified, on the tax duplicate for the property affected, and the
total amount, including any accrued interest, shall be collected as
delinquent taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to the General Fund of
the City of Brazil, Indiana in administering this chapter.



      (3)   At the city's discretion, the certification and sworn
statement may also be provided to the Recorder of Clay County, Indiana, which
sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and
shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due on principal and
interest, plus cost, if any, for collection, until payment has been made, at
which time a release of the lien shall be recorded.



      (4)   The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner
fixed by law for the collection of real estate taxes and further shall be
subject to a delinquent penalty the same as real estate taxes in the event
same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill on which charges
appears become delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the
provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities
have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and
satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the
property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due
and collectible as provided by law.



(Ord. 12-2005, passed 4-27-2005; Am. Ord. 20-2006, passed 6-27-2006) 
Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   (A)   The Common Council of the City of Brazil deems it necessary to
prevent the occurrence of excessive noise from residences, buildings,
vehicles or other places within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil to
preserve and protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
City of Brazil, and to protect and preserve the quality of life in the city.



   (B)   No person shall permit excessive noise or to assemble, or
permit persons to assemble, in any house, residential dwelling, apartment or
building, located within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil, who
annoys, disturbs, injuries or endangers the health, peace or safety of the
citizens of Brazil.



   (C)   No person shall operate any electronic sound amplification
system or equipment, radio, cassette tape player, compact disc player or any
machine, device, equipment or musical instrument which produces sound outside
of any house, residential dwelling, apartment, building or other enclosed
structure, which disturbs the peace, quiet, enjoyment or welfare of the
neighborhood within the city at any hour of the day or night, except for a
parade, musical concert or other lawful entertainment event approved by the
Mayor.



(Ord. 14-2004, passed 6-13-2004)



   (D)   No person occupying a motor vehicle, bicycle, motorcycle or
motor scooter on any street, highway, alley, parking lot, driveway or on any
other public or private property within the corporate limits of the City of
Brazil, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification
system or equipment, radio, cassette tape player, compact disc player, loud
speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound from
within or on a motor vehicle, bicycle, motorcycle or motor scooter, so that
the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet or more, or beyond the
property line if the vehicle or the like is situated on private property.



   (E)   PLAINLY AUDIBLE means any sound which clearly can be heard by
unimpaired auditory senses based on a direct line of sight of 25 feet or
more, including bass reverberation. Words or phrases from a sound need not be
discernable for a violation to occur.



(Ord. 7-2000, passed 1-25-2000)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   If a citation is issued, whoever violates any provision of
§§ 94.02 through 93.04, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.  The
procedure set forth in § 94.04 is not a condition precedent to violation and
enforcement of this chapter.



   (C)   If a citation is issued, whoever violates any provisions of §
94.05 shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.



   (D)   For violations of this chapter, a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 7-2000, passed 1-25-2000; Am. Ord. 14-2004, passed 6-13-2004; Am. Ord.
20-2006, passed 6-27-2006)



CHAPTER 95:  UNSAFE BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   95.01   Brazil Unsafe Building Law



   95.02   State law incorporated by reference



   95.03   Public nuisance declaration



   95.04   Role and authority of Building Administrator



   95.05   Unsafe building defined



   95.06   Substantial property interest defined



   95.07   Workpersonlike manner



   95.08   Unsafe Building Fund



   95.09   Performance of work ordered



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  BRAZIL UNSAFE BUILDING LAW.



   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is established the Brazil
Unsafe Building Law.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



§ 95.02  STATE LAW INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 is incorporated by reference
in the Brazil Unsafe Building Law.



   (B)   All proceedings within the City of Brazil for the inspection,
repair and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by the law and the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   In the event the provisions of this chapter conflict with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-8-9-28, then the provisions of the
state statute shall control.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



§ 95.03  PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARATION.



   All buildings or portions thereof within the City of Brazil which are
determined, after inspection by the Building Administrator to be unsafe as
defined in this chapter are declared to be public nuisances and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  ROLE AND AUTHORITY OF BUILDING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Brazil Building Administrator as chief administrative
officer, shall be authorized to administer and to proceed under the
provisions of the law in ordering the repair or removal of any buildings
found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified hereafter.



   (B)   Wherever, in the building regulations of the City of Brazil or
the Brazil Unsafe Building Law, it is provided that anything must be done to
the approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Administrator,
this shall be construed to give that officer only the discretion of
determining whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have
been complied with; and no provisions shall be construed as giving any
officer discretionary powers as to what the regulations or standards shall
be, power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or to enforce
ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discretionary manner.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



§ 95.05  UNSAFE BUILDING DEFINED.



   The description of an unsafe building contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is
supplemented to provide minimum standards for building condition or
maintenance in the City of Brazil, Indiana, by adding the following
definition.



   UNSAFE BUILDING.  Any building or structure which has any or all of
the conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that conditions or
defects exist to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the
public or its occupants are endangered:



      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;



      (2)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway,
stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise
unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic;



      (3)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1-1/2 times the working
stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location;



      (4)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before the catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;



      (5)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is
likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby
injure persons or damage property;



      (6)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of ½ of that specified for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the
working stresses permitted for buildings;



      (7)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to an extent so that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction;



      (8)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty
construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting a building; the deterioration,
decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to
partially or completely collapse;



      (9)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to an extent that a plumb line passing through
the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle 1/3 of the base;



      (10)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;



      (11)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated so as to become an attractive nuisance to children, or freely
accessible to persons for the purpose of committing unlawful acts;



      (12)   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement
or prohibition applicable to a building or structure provided by the building
regulations of the City of Brazil, or of any law or ordinance of this state
of City of Brazil relating to the condition, location or structure of
buildings;



      (13)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or
not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;



      (14)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the Health
Official or Planning and Zoning Administrator to be unsanitary, unfit for
human habitation or in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease;



      (15)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction is determined by the  Fire
Official or Planning and Zoning Administrator  to be a fire hazard; and/or



      (16)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of 6
months so as to constitute the building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



§ 95.06  SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST DEFINED.



   The definition of "substantial property interest" set forth in I.C.
36-7-9-2 is incorporated by reference herein as if copied in full.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



§ 95.07  WORKPERSONLIKE MANNER.



   (A)   All work for the reconstruction, repair or demolition of
buildings land other structures shall be performed in a good workpersonlike
manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade.



   (B)   The provisions of the building laws, as defined in I.C.
22-12-1-3, adopted as rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission, shall be considered standard and acceptable practice for all
matters covered by this chapter or orders issued pursuant to this chapter by
the Building Administrator of the City of Brazil, Indiana.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.08  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   An Unsafe Building Fund is established in the operating budget of the
City of Brazil in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



§ 95.09  PERFORMANCE OF WORK ORDERED.



   The work required by an order of the Building Administrator may be
performed in the following manner:



   (A)   (1)   If the work is being performed under an order other
than an order under § 150.22(A)(2), and if the cost of this work is
estimated to be less than $10,000, the city acting through its Building
Administrator as enforcement authority or other agents, may perform the work
by means of the city's own workers and with equipment either owned or leased
by the city. Notice that this work is to be performed must be given to all
persons with a substantial property interest, in the manner prescribed in
division (C) of this section, at least 10 days before the date of performance
of the work by the Building Administrator.



      (2)   This notice must include a statement that an amount
representing a reasonable estimate of the cost incurred by the Building
Administrator in processing the matter and performing the work may, if not
paid, be recorded after a hearing as a lien against all persons having a fee
interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises.



   (B)   If the work is being performed under an order other than an
order under § 150.22(A)(2), and if the estimated costs of this work is
$10,000 or more, this work must be let at public bid to a contractor licensed
and qualified under law. This obligation to pay costs imposed by § 150.29 is
based on the condition of the unsafe premises at the time the public bid was
accepted. Changes occurring in the condition of the unsafe premises after the
public bid was accepted do not eliminate or diminish this obligation.



(Ord. 14-1999, passed  8-24-1999)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee,
sub-lessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or
premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or any order issued by the Building
Administrator.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or I.C.
36-7-9-28 shall commit a Class C infraction for each day the violation
continues.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 3-27-1988)



   (C)   A person who remains in, uses or enters a building in
violation of an order made under §§ 95.01 through 96.08, knowingly
interferes with or delays the carrying out of an order made under §§ 95.01
through 96.08; knowingly obstructs, damages or interferes with persons
engaged or property used in performing any work or duty under §§ 95.01
through 96.08, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.



   (D)   Should any person violating any of the specified sections
above not pay the designated civil penalty at the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days after being served with a citation, the
violator shall be summoned into court.



(Ord. 15-1999, passed 8-24-1999)



CHAPTER 96:  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU



Section



   96.01   Establishment of Bureau



   96.02   Violations Clerk



   96.03   Schedule of ordinances and penalties; Violations Clerk



   96.99   Chart of penalties



§ 96.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF BUREAU.



   An Ordinance Violations Bureau is established in the City of Brazil to
accept written appearance, admissions of violations and payment of civil
penalties for violations of ordinances of the City of Brazil.



§ 96.02  VIOLATIONS CLERK.



   The Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Brazil is designated the Violations
Clerk of the City of Brazil.



§ 96.03  SCHEDULE OF ORDINANCES AND PENALTIES; VIOLATIONS CLERK.



   (A)   Violations of any ordinance of the City of Brazil calling for
a civil penalty may be settled by the Violations Clerk by receipt of an
amount equal to the lesser of:



      (1)   The maximum penalty set forth in the ordinance; or



      (2)   A maximum of $100;



      (3)   Plus court costs as set by the State of Indiana.



   (B)   No settlement shall be permitted if a person fails to pay the
amount authorized hereunder within the time specified in the summons or
notice provided the person. If a person fails to settle a violation through
the Violations Bureau established hereunder and the person is taken to court
to enforce the ordinance in question, the person may be subject to the
maximum penalties set forth in the underlying ordinance.



§ 96.99  CHART OF PENALTIES.



 


Activity

 

Code Section

 

Penalty





Alarms; false
 

§90.64

 

$1-$25



Alcohol in automobiles
 

§91.99

 

$50-$2,500



Animals
 

§93.03

 

$25-$50



Assemblies
 

§90.63

 

$5-$100



Buildings; unsafe
 

§95.09

 

Class C infraction/$500



Buildings/construction
 

§150.99

 

Not to exceed $2500



Burning
 

§90.99

 

$250-$500



Discrimination
 

§92.08

 

$1,000-$2,500



Disturbing the peace
 

§90.64

 

$10



Dogs
 

§93.03

 

$25-$50



Garbage/trash
 

§90.99

 

$100



Guns
 

§90.60

 

$1-$10



Housing discrimination
 

§92.08

 

$1,000-$2,500



Impoundment; animals
 

§93.17

 

$25-$50



Licensing
 

§110.99

 

$1-$100



Open containers
 

§91.99

 

$50-$2,500



Peace disruption
 

§90.64

 

$10



Poles and posts
 

§153.99

 

$25, $50-$2,500



Traffic
 

Title VII

 

-



Trees
 

§152.99

 

$50



Unsafe building
 

§95.09

 

Class C infraction/$500



Weapons
 

§90.64

 

$1-$10



Zoning
 

Ch. 157

 

$10-$500





 



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




Administration of Facilities




   97.01   Authority to operate



   97.02   Department of Parks and Recreation



   97.03   Four-member Parks and Recreation Board



   97.04   Powers of the Board and Park Superintendent



   97.05   Designation of 3 city parks and other recreational areas



   97.06   Creation of Skate Park Fund



   97.07   Skate Park Advisory Board




Park Rules and Regulations




   97.20   Authority to adopt rules and regulations by the Board



   97.21   Park hours



   97.22   Unlawful to damage or destroy park/city property



   97.23   Injury to plants and trees prohibited



   97.24   Prohibited conduct



   97.25   Gambling and soliciting restricted



   97.26   Discharging firearms and possession of weapons prohibited



   97.27   Alcohol and drugs prohibited



   97.28   Organized picnics; use of outdoor ovens



   97.29   Advertising and sales restricted



   97.30   Dangerous sports and activities



   97.31   Harming or endangering wildlife and animals prohibited



   97.32   Vehicular traffic



   97.33   Park and recreation fees




Municipal Golf Course Operations




   97.45   Purpose; authority to operate



   97.46   Creation of Municipal Golf Course Board; compensation and
terms of office



   97.47   Powers and duties of Board



   97.48   Meetings; transfer of powers



   97.49   Golf course regulations



   97.50   Enforcement



   97.99   Penalty




ADMINISTRATION OF FACILITIES




§ 97.01  AUTHORITY TO OPERATE.



   The city may establish, aid, maintain and operate public parks,
playgrounds and recreation facilities and programs.



§ 97.02  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   The Brazil Department of Parks and Recreation shall have
administrative and management jurisdiction over Forest Park, Babe Wheeler
Park and George N. Craig Park.



   (B)   The Department shall consist of a Parks and Recreation Board,
a Park Superintendent and other personnel that the Board deems necessary.



(Ord. 4-1992, passed 5-10-1992)



§ 97.03  FOUR-MEMBER PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of 4 members
appointed by the Mayor with no more than 2 being affiliated with the same
political party.



   (B)   The terms of office and the filling of vacancies shall be
according to applicable state statutes.



(Ord. 4-1992, passed 5-10-1992)



§ 97.04  POWERS OF THE BOARD AND PARK SUPERINTENDENT.



   The powers and duties of the members of the Parks and Recreation Board
and the Park Superintendent shall be pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-1 through
36-10-3-14 and other applicable provisions of this code.



(Ord. 4-1992, passed 5-10-1992)



§ 97.05  DESIGNATION OF 3 CITY PARKS AND OTHER RECREATIONAL AREAS.



   (A)   The City of Brazil, under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Parks and Recreation, operates the following city parks:



      (1)   Babe Wheeler Park;



      (2)   Forest Park (formerly Hendrix Park); and



      (3)   George N. Craig Park



   (B)   There are established the following designated tracts or areas
as and for public playgrounds and recreation centers under and by virtue of
Chapter 1742 of the Acts of 1925, as amended:



      (1)   The tract or parcel of land adjacent to and south of
Forest Park proper which was acquired from the school city and on which is
situated playground equipment, the swimming pool, the bathing beach, the bath
house, the athletic field stadium and the camping or picnic area;



      (2)   The tract or parcel of land adjacent to and southeast of
Forest Park proper, and to the east of and adjacent to the last above
designated tract, acquired from Fred Nichols, and on which is situated that
certain playing field used and maintained as and for a municipal golf course;



      (3)   That tract or parcel of land situated at the southwest
intersection of North Meridian Street  and West Hendrix Street, acquired
from diverse persons, and commonly known as Hendrix Park;



      (4)   The tract or parcel of land situated within the lands
owned by Harry Bradshaw, located north of Hendrix Street and east of State
Highway No. 59, under lease by the city, from year to year; and



      (5)   The area located in the southwest corner of Forest Park
proper on which is situated certain games and playing courts and similar
layouts.



   (C)   All structures, buildings and other improvements situated on
the above designated tracts, parcels or areas are permitted to be used for
playground or recreational purposes pursuant to the provisions of and for the
purposes designated in this section.



(1982 Code, § 94.01)  (Ord. 10-1949, passed 8-2-1949; Am Ord. 35-1983,
passed - -)



§ 97.06  CREATION OF SKATE PARK FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created a new fund as a part of Brazil Parks
and Recreation Department Non-Reverting Fund which shall be designated as the
"Skate Park Fund."



   (B)   The purpose of the fund is to allow the Brazil Skate Park
Advisory Board to receive monetary donations from the community and
individuals, deposit contributions into the Skate Park Fund and disburse
monies therefrom to construct and maintain for the citizens and youth of
Brazil and Clay County a skate park in Craig Park.



   (C)   The fund shall be perpetual until terminated pursuant to the
terms of this section.



   (D)   This fund may be terminated by the enactment of an ordinance
and any fund balance in that fund shall revert to the Brazil Parks &
Recreation Department Non-Reverting Fund to be used for any purposes lawfully
allowed.



(Ord. 22-2005, passed 8-10-2005)



§ 97.07  SKATE PARK ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Skate Park Advisory
Board under the direction of the Brazil City Park and Recreation Board for
the City of Brazil which shall consist of 5 members, citizens and residents
of Clay County, Indiana, 4 of whom 2 shall be appointed by the Mayor and 2
shall be appointed by the Brazil City Parks and Recreation Board. The Brazil
Human Resources/Safety Director shall be the remaining member of the Skate
Park Advisory Board.



   (B)   The term of the 4 persons shall be 2 years except that the
term of 1 of the members appointed by the Mayor and 1 of the members
appointed by the Brazil Parks and Recreation Board to the first board shall
be for only 1 year and the term of 2 members of the first board shall be for
2 years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any
member, his or her successor shall be appointed by the respective appointing
party for the unexpired portion of the term.



   (C)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Skate Park Advisory
Board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update, and
administer a written plan for the construction, care and maintenance of the
Skate Park to be built in George Craig Park. A plan will be presented to the
Brazil Parks and Recreation Board and upon their acceptance and approval
shall constitute the official comprehensive construction and maintenance plan
for the skate park. The plan may be updated periodically and an updated plan
will be affective upon approval by the Brazil City Parks and Recreation Board.



   (E)   The City Skate Park Advisory Board shall serve as an advisory
council to the Brazil Parks and Recreation Board concerning the construction,
care and maintenance of the skate park. However, authority and control over
city parks shall remain with the Brazil Parks and Recreation Board. The City
Skate Park Advisory Board shall receive monetary donations from the community
and individuals, and deposit all monetary contributions into the Skate Park
Fund. Furthermore, the City Skate Park Advisory Board shall have the
authority to disburse monies therefrom to construct and maintain for the
citizens and youth of Brazil and Clay County, a skate park in George Craig
Park.



   (F)   The City Skate Park Advisory Board shall choose its own
officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep minutes of its
proceedings which will form permanent records on file in the City
Clerk-Treasurer's office. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business.



   (G)   The Brazil City Parks and Recreation Board shall have the
right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the City Skate Park
Advisory Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the City
Skate Park Advisory Board to the City Parks and Recreation Board who may hear
the matter and make final decisions.



(Ord. 23-2005, passed 8-10-2005)




PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS




§ 97.20  AUTHORITY TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS BY THE BOARD.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Board shall adopt and establish rules
and regulations for the control, maintenance, use and regulation of
playground and recreation facilities, bathing areas, swimming and wading
pools and other park and recreation property; for providing and maintaining
all necessary equipment, supplies, building structures and all other property
under its control and jurisdiction; for establishing standards and
qualifications for the appointment of personnel.



   (B)   All promulgated rules and regulations are subject to the
approval by the Mayor before becoming effective.



   (C)   The Board may by the rules and regulations provide for,
regulate, set aside and allocate the use by persons, vehicles and animals of
the public parks, playgrounds and other public places under its control, but
without being limited to classifications, for and into the following general
classes or uses and purposes:



      (1)   Playground areas, including all sports and recreation
activities, bathing areas, swimming and wading pools, other bodies of water
and beaches, athletic fields, child recreation and playground areas; and
uses, with all buildings and structures and equipment appurtenant thereto;



      (2)   Picnic areas, including roadside and park tables,
shelter houses and outdoor ovens for eating and drinking;



      (3)   Public meeting areas, including grandstand areas, music
buildings and exhibition pavilion, use of which may be obtained after
receiving permission from the Board with restrictions on the use of
loudspeakers and other sound amplification devices; and



      (4)   Areas for concerts, amusement attractions and theatrical
performances.



   (D)   The Board is authorized and empowered to restrict or set aside
all various areas of the city's parks, including the entire parks, on
specified and reasonable limited occasions or periods of time for concerts,
carnivals and other amusement attractions and theatrical performances or for
some other special purpose, and may prohibit the use of any or all areas by
other persons at any times, except for the use thereof which is prescribed
and then allowed for any like area.



   (E)   No person of the opposite sex, except children under the age
of 4 years when accompanied by an adult, shall enter a facility provided for
the opposite sex.



(1982 Code, § 30.18)  (Ord. 35-1983, passed 11-28-1983)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.21  PARK HOURS.



   (A)   During the season, when so declared by the Board of Parks and
Recreation, the public parks shall be open to the public during hours
specified by the Board. However, on special occasions and certain sponsored
events, the hours may be changed and fixed generally different from those
specified hours.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of
the city in the course of his or her employment, or except while traveling on
an established highway through a park, to be or remain in any park during any
time it is not open, or to use any park at any time for any unlawful meetings
or purposes.



(1982 Code, § 94.26)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.22  UNLAWFUL TO DAMAGE OR DESTROY PARK/CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to write on, cut,
mutilate, deface, damage, remove or destroy in any manner any building,
swimming or wading pool, golf course, equipment, structure, fountain, fence,
bench, masonry, statue, ornament or any other property, real or personal, or
any appurtenance thereto, owned or operated by the city or its Board of Parks
and Recreation, and located on or in any park, golf course, playground or any
other place or property under the control of the Board.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to damage or destroy any property leased
or loaned to or by the Board, including any property on which a concession
has been granted by the Boards, or belonging to any person and rightfully an
park property.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to remove, relocate, damage or destroy
any benches, seats, tables, equipment or other movable property, at any time
from their places in any park, golf course or other park property, without
permission from the Park Superintendent, Golf Course Manager or other
authorized park official.



(1982 Code, § 94.27)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.23  INJURY TO PLANTS AND TREES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an employee of the Board
of Parks and Recreation or who is not authorized to do so by the Board, to
pull, pluck, break, plant, trample, climb into, injure, mutilate, remove or
destroy any tree, shrub, plant, vine, hedge, flower or fruit, whether wild or
cultivated, or to cut, break down, bend, damage the bark, or trim any
sapling, tree, shrub or plant, or any limbs, branches, twigs or leaves
thereof, that is growing and located in any public park, street, tree row or
playground, or any property controlled, leased or loaned to others by the
Board or on concession has been granted by it, or on any other property
outside a park and which is under the control or supervision of the Board.



(1982 Code, § 94.28)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.24  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use profane, obscene,
lewd, threatening or abusive language; or to fight, quarrel or throw any
stone or missile; or to behave in a loud or disorderly manner; or to commit
any offense against decency, good morals or contrary to law; or to litter,
dump or deposit any garbage or other offensive substance or article on any
park, playground or any other property under the control or supervision of
the Board of Parks and Recreation, or on any property leased or loaned or on
which a concession has been granted by it; or to use or participate with
others in using any places for any subversive, seditious or other unlawful
purposes.



   (B)   No unlawful, threatening, abusive, profane, lewd or indecent
language, gesture or conduct shall be permitted in, or in the vicinity of any
bathing beach, wading or swimming pool, recreation center or playground, nor
shall any person who is lawfully at any place be so annoyed or unlawfully
touched.



(1982 Code, § 94.29)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.25  GAMBLING AND SOLICITING RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble or violate any federal,
state or city laws pertaining thereto, or to beg, hawk, peddle, distribute or
solicit or offer for sale any article, thing, paper, privilege or service
within the parks, nor circulate petitions within the parks without permission
from the Board of Parks and Recreation.



(1982 Code, § 94.30)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.26  DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND POSSESSION OF WEAPONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the Board of
Parks and Recreation, to discharge any firearms or have possession of any
firearms or other explosive devices, or to endanger others by the use of any
weapon, article or device within any park, playground or on any property
controlled or leased by the Board of Parks and Recreation, or on which a
concession has been granted by it.



(1982 Code, § 94.31)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.27  ALCOHOL AND DRUGS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated or under the
influence or effect of narcotics, or to use alcohol or narcotics in any park,
playground, community building, golf clubhouse, swimming or wading pool or
beach, or other premises or places under the jurisdiction or control of the
Board of Parks and Recreation without the permission of the Board.



(1982 Code, § 94.32)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.28  ORGANIZED PICNICS; USE OF OUTDOOR OVENS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not
invited or included by the sponsors thereof to intrude himself or herself on
a picnic without the consent of those in charge thereof, or to disturb any
picnic within the parks.



      (2)   The Board shall adopt general rules and regulations as
necessary for compelling persons holding picnics or eating anything within
any public park to clean up the ground and remove or dispose of all food,
paper, litter and other debris before leaving the premises.



(1982 Code, § 94.33)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee of the
Board of Parks and Recreation, to build, kindle or ignite a fire for cooking,
heating or any other purpose in any park, playground or on any property
controlled or leased by the Board, or on which a concession has been granted
by it, or on any other property under the control or supervision of the Board
of Parks and Recreation, except as allowed for any purposes in accordance
with regulations as the Board shall establish regulating the use of outdoor
ovens at any designated places or other uses in certain areas.



(1982 Code, § 94.34)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.29  ADVERTISING AND SALES RESTRICTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, post or
otherwise affix any bill, notice or advertising sign on any structure, tree
or thing within any park, playground, golf course or other property under the
control of the Board of Parks and Recreation, without having obtained
permission therefor from the Board of Parks and Recreation.



(1982 Code, § 94.35)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or
barter any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind whatever within any public
park, playground or other park property, without having first obtained
consent or a concession therefor from the Board of Parks and Recreation.



(1982 Code, § 94.36)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.30  DANGEROUS SPORTS AND ACTIVITIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive golf balls, fly model
planes, throw objects, practice archery or shooting or participate in any
other games or activities which are hazardous to others on property
controlled or operated by the Board of Parks and Recreation, or located in or
on any park or playground, however, the Board of Parks and Recreation may set
aside and designate places and specify the times and regulations for engaging
in any like activities. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or
operate a skateboard on, in, or upon any portion of the "pavilion building"
or the "band shell building" located in Forest Park, which is a municipal
park located in the City of Brazil, Indiana.



(Ord. 18-2004, passed 8-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 94.99.



§ 97.31  HARMING OR ENDANGERING WILDLIFE AND ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner of or
having control thereof, and without permission of the Board of Parks and
Recreation, to suffer or permit any animals or fowl to stray into or to run
at large or unattended or to trespass on any park, playground, waters or any
property controlled, leased or loaned by the Board of Parks and Recreation or
on which a concession has been granted by it.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person harboring or controlling a
dog to permit or to suffer a dog, when not attended and under control of the
person and held by a leash, to be in any park, public playground or golf
course, or at any time to enter any wading or swimming pool or beach located
therein.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or drive a
horse, mule, pony, donkey or any other beast of burden on any park property,
except that the Board of Parks and Recreation may designate certain portions
of park property as bridle paths or other areas wherein horses and other
equine animals may be ridden. Horseback and other animal riding shall be
confined exclusively to designated bridle paths and in public parks, or to
other places set apart for that use. Reckless riding or racing at any place
shall be unlawful. Riding horses or other animals on or across grass, lawns,
flower beds, golf courses or any park property, other than on bridle paths or
places designated therefor, shall be unlawful.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee of the
Board of Parks and Recreation or not authorized by the Board, to chase,
catch, trap, injure, molest, kill, disturb, annoy or remove any animal, bird,
fish, reptile or fowl, either wild or domestic, on land, in the air or water
or in any place in the parks, zoo or playground or any property controlled,
leased or loaned by the Board, or on which a concession has been granted by
it.



(1982 Code, § 94.38)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.32  VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, excepting police
officers, firefighters and emergency vehicle drivers, to drive or propel or
cause to be driven or propelled along or over any road within the parks, any
vehicle at a greater speed than 15 mph, unless otherwise posted.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Drive any vehicle on any area except the park roadways
or parking areas or other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated
as temporary parking areas by the Board of Parks and Recreation or the Board
of Public Works and Safety;



      (2)   Drive any vehicle on foot paths, pedestrian walks,
nature trails and bridle paths designated and established for pedestrian
travel and horseback riding;



      (3)   Park a vehicle on a roadway or parking area in a manner
or under conditions so as to impede or obstruct the normal and safe flow of
traffic;



      (4)   Operate a motor vehicle in the park without the use of a
muffler adequate to deaden the sound of the engine in the vehicle;



      (5)   Operate a vehicle in the parks which emits excessive
noxious fumes or dense smoke;



      (6)   Use a siren or other type of loud sounding device which
makes unusually loud and unnecessary noise, excepting persons driving police,
fire or emergency vehicles;



      (7)   Operate a motor vehicle on a service drive except in
making deliveries and servicing the facility to which the without permission
of the Park Superintendent or Board of Parks and Recreation;



      (8)   Park a vehicle within the boundaries of Forest Park at
the northeast corner of Roy Brann Stadium beginning at the east edge of the
crosswalk at the intersection of Miller Drive and South Nabuco Drive
extending westerly a distance of 50 feet; and on the south side of Miller
Drive beginning 158 feet  from the southwest corner of the intersection of
Miller Drive and South Nabuco Drive and extending northerly a distance of 30
feet (to be designated as an "Ambulance Entrance") during the hours when the
swimming pool is open to the public;



      (9)   Park or otherwise stop a vehicle within the boundaries
of Forest Park on the south side of Miller Drive in front of the swimming
pool entrance, beginning 102 feet from the southwest corner of the
intersection of Miller Drive and South Nabuco Drive and extending northerly a
distance of 30 feet only during the hours when the swimming pool is open to
the public, unless the vehicle shall have attached thereto a disabled license
plate or other conspicuous evidence that it is being used to transport a
disabled. That  area shall be designated as “Disabled Parking Only When
Pool Open;” or



      (10)   Operate a vehicle through the following intersections
within the boundaries of and at Forest Park located within the corporate
limits of the city without first coming to a complete stop: King Avenue at
the intersection with East Pinkley Street; King Avenue at the intersection
with East Deloss Street; Miller Drive at the intersection with King Avenue;
Ivan Fuqua Drive at the intersection with King Avenue; South Nabuco Drive at
the intersection with South Forest Avenue; Miller Drive at the intersection
with the Cabin Crosswalk; Miller Drive at the intersection with South Nabuco
Drive; Stadium Drive at the intersection with South Nabuco Drive; East Nabuco
Drive at the Intersection with South Nabuco Drive; East Nabuco Drive at the
Intersection with East Pinkley Street.



   (C)   As used in this section, the term VEHICLE shall mean any motor
vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, truck tractor,
bus, school bus, recreational vehicle, construction vehicle, tractor and
bicycle.



(1982 Code, § 94.39)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978; Am. Ord. 28-1983,
passed - -)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.33  PARK AND RECREATION FEES.



   (A)   Pool hours are 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. with a review after the
first months to see if lengthening the hours is warranted.



   (B)   A flat fee of $80 will be charged with lifeguard fees being
paid by the party givers. The number of lifeguards needed would depend on the
size of the party. Party guidelines will govern.



   (C)   Admission fees and passes:



      (1)   Daily rates:



         (a)   Ages 0–4: Free when accompanied by a paying
adult;



         (b)   Ages 5–9: $2.00;



         (c)   Ages 10–16: $2.25;



         (d)   Ages 17+: $2.50; and



         (e)   Ages 60+: $1.50.



      (2)   Passes:



         (a)   Ages 5–9: $50.00;



         (b)   Ages 10–16: $55.00;



         (c)   Ages 17+: $60.00; and



         (d)   Ages 60+: $50.00.



      (3)   Family passes (up to 4 members):



         (a)   Clay County resident: $100.00;



         (b)   Non-county resident $125.00; and



         (c)   $10.00 each additional family member.



      (4)   A block of 30 daily admission tickets will be discounted
20% if paid in advance.



   (D)   The park shelter may be reserved at a fee based on the number
of people with a minimum fee amount of $20.00.



   (E)   The Park Manager and all related personnel will be paid at
rates established by the Board of Parks and Recreation.



(Board of Parks and Recreation Meeting of March 19, 1998)




MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE OPERATIONS




§ 97.45  PURPOSE; AUTHORITY TO OPERATE.



   (A)   It is deemed necessary and proper that it is in the best
interests of the city, the public and golfing enthusiasts who utilized the
municipal golf course of the city, that a board be created and given the
authority to control, supervise and operate specifically and exclusively the
golf course because of its particular and special nature; that members of the
newly created board be especially sensitive to and knowledgeable of the
particular needs of the golf course and the desires of those citizens who
utilize and enjoy the sport of golfing at the golf course and that those
persons who consistently utilize the golf course facility be allowed to
provide their input into the operation, maintenance, improvement and
expansion of the golf course.



(1982 Code, § 94.10)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



   (B)   The city has the power to acquire, develop, improve and
operate golf courses, either as a part of or in connection with its public
park, or separate and apart therefrom, pursuant to I.C. 36-10-5-3(b).



(1982 Code, § 94.11)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



§ 97.46  CREATION OF MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE BOARD; COMPENSATION AND TERMS OF
OFFICE.



   (A)   There is created the City Municipal Golf Course Board which
shall have the power to govern, control, supervise, operate and acquire
property for purposes of the golf course previously vested in the Board of
Parks and Recreation.



(1982 Code, § 94.12)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



   (B)   (1)   The Golf Course Board shall consist of 5 members
appointed by the Mayor, all of whom must be residents of Clay County, Indiana
for at least 5 years, and have, in the opinion of the Mayor, actively
participated in the sport of golf in Clay County, shown an interest in the
operation of the golf course facility, the ability to make decisions
concerning the operation and maintenance of the golf course.



      (2)   The first members of the Golf Course Board shall hold
office respectively as follows: one for a term of 1 year; 1 for a term of 2
years; 1 for a term of 3 years; and 2 for a term of 4 years. The Mayor shall
appoint a new member to fill each of the vacancies caused by the expiration
of the above respective terms, and newly-appointed members shall hold office
for a term of 4 years.



      (3)   If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Board, by
resignation or otherwise, the Mayor shall appoint a replacement for the
residue of the departing member's term.



      (4)   The Board members serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
may be removed only for cause, upon specific written filed against them.



         (a)   The charges shall be filed and heard by the Mayor
unless the Mayor brings the charges. If the Mayor brings the charges, the
Common Council shall meet and appoint a person to serve as hearing officer to
hear the particular charges against the accused Board member who is not
related to the accused member or the Mayor nor a salaried employee of the
city.



         (b)   The hearing officer shall fix a date for a public
hearing and give notice to the accused member at least 10 days in advance of
the hearing.



         (c)   At the hearing, the member shall be entitled to
present evidence and argument on his or her behalf, be represented by legal
counsel and cross-examine opposing witnesses.



         (d)   Following the submission of all evidence and
argument, the hearing officer shall consider same and make special findings
of fact and determination of the member's guilt or innocence of the alleged
charges.



(Am. Ord. 9-1982, passed 6-28-1982)



         (e)   The members shall serve without compensation
except for actual expenses to be approved by the Mayor and the Common Council.



(1982 Code, § 94.13)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



§ 97.47  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.



   (A)   The Golf Course Board shall have the power to develop, improve
and operate the golf course, acquire the already existing golf course and
lands developed for that purpose, and issue municipal bonds to pay the cost
of any acquisition, development and improvement, or for any of the purposes,
subject to statutes relating to the issuance of bonds and the making of
appropriations by the city.



   (B)   In addition to the above powers, the Board shall have the
following powers and duties:



      (1)   Exercise general supervision of and control over the
operation, maintenance, development and improvement of the golf course;



      (2)   Make rules and regulations governing the operation,
maintenance and use of the golf course facilities;



      (3)   Hire necessary professional, managerial and maintenance
staff personnel and employees for the efficient operation and maintenance of
the golf course without regard to political affiliation, plus discipline and
dismiss any personnel and employees for cause;



      (4)   Make necessary contracts and leases for facilities,
services and equipment necessary for the proper operation of the golf course;



      (5)   Contract with not-for-profit corporations or
organizations for use of the golf course facilities for teaching purposes,
youth athletic programs, tournaments and other related services;



      (6)   Acquire and dispose of real and personal property
related to the golf course or needed for the efficient operation, improvement
or expansion of the golf course;



      (7)   Exercise the power of eminent domain under the authority
of any laws generally made available to municipalities for this purpose;



      (8)   Establish standards and qualifications for the
appointment and hire of all personnel, fix their compensation and determine
causes for disciplinary action or dismissal of employees;



      (9)   Contract for special and temporary services and for
professional assistance;



      (10)   Make recommendations and an annual report to the Mayor
and the Common Council concerning the operation of the Board and the golf
course;



      (11)   Invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy for the
enforcement of the provisions of any ordinance relating to the use and
operation of the golf course or any other applicable ordinance or law;



      (12)   Prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner
as other departments of the city as prescribed by the State Board of Accounts;



      (13)   Authorize and regulate the operation of a golf pro shop
including the sale of golf-related equipment and apparel; and



      (14)   Fix the fees and rates to be charged for the playing of
golf on the golf course and for tournament authorized and held thereon.



(1982 Code, § 94.14)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



§ 97.48  MEETINGS; TRANSFER OF POWERS.



   (A)   (1)   Meetings of the Board shall be public. The Board
shall fix the time and place of its meetings, but it shall meet at least
quarterly.



      (2)   These meeting shall be called by the President of the
Board on his or her own request or the request of any member. Written notice
of the meeting shall be sent to all members by the Secretary of the Board at
least 48 hours in advance of the meeting.



      (3)   All regularly scheduled and special meetings of the
Board shall comply with the Indiana Open Door Law, I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 through
5-14-1.5-7.



      (4)   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and
any action of the Board is not official unless authorized by at least 3
members present and acting.



(1982 Code, § 94.15)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



   (B)   In addition to powers and duties specified in § 97.47, the
powers and duties previously vested in the Board of Parks and Recreation
pertaining to the golf course are transferred to the Golf Course Board.



(1982 Code, § 94.16)  (Ord. 8-1981, passed 4-13-1981)



§ 97.49  GOLF COURSE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Except during the hours specified, no person other than
employees of the golf course shall be permitted to remain in the golf
clubhouse on any part of the course. No person shall play golf on the links
except on payment of the fees stipulated by it and in compliance with its
rules and regulations thereon, as may be adopted by it at any time.



   (B)   All persons within the limits of the golf course must at all
times abide by the rules and, regulations of the golf course, which shall be
posted in the clubhouse or on the course, and by the orders of the custodian
of the course, and shall not violate any laws of the city or state. For any
violation of this, the violator may be punished as prescribed by this code
and be excluded from the use of the golf course.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale
golf balls, clubs or any articles for whatever use in playing golf on the
municipal golf course within 500 feet of the boundary line of the golf
course, without written consent of the Board.



(1982 Code, § 94.40)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)



§ 97.50  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Board of Parks and Recreation, Park Superintendent, recreation
supervisors, Golf Course Manager, park police, police of the city and of the
state, all health authorities and other employees of the Board of Parks and
Recreation holding special police powers are authorized and empowered to
enforce any and all of the provisions of this chapter and laws of the state
and city in all places under the control of the Board of Parks and Recreation
and the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(1982 Code, § 94.41)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 4-11-1978)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined $50. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 18-2004, passed 8-10-2004)



CHAPTER 98:  CEMETERIES



Section



   98.01   Common Council to oversee cemeteries



   98.02   Three city-owned cemeteries



   98.03   Officers and office overseeing city-owned cemeteries



   98.04   Rules for cemetery lot owners



   98.05   Opening and closing of graves; fees



   98.06   Purchase of burial plots



   98.07   Removals; fees



   98.08   Rules



   98.09   Undertakers



   98.10   Monumental work



   98.11   Decorations



   98.12   General management



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  COMMON COUNCIL TO OVERSEE CEMETERIES.



   The city-owned cemeteries shall be controlled and managed by the Common
Council pursuant to I.C. 3-14-24-1 et seq. and applicable city ordinances and
other state statutes.



(1982 Code, § 30.04)  (Ord. 14-1982, passed 8-30-1982)



§ 98.02  THREE CITY-OWNED CEMETERIES.



   The City of Brazil manages and controls the following cemeteries:



   (A)   Cottage Hill;



   (B)   Old Hill; and



   (C)   Restlawn.



§ 98.03  OFFICERS AND OFFICE OVERSEEING CITY-OWNED CEMETERIES.



   (A)   The Supervisor of the city-owned and maintained cemeteries and
employed assistants shall be designated "the officers" and shall have the
responsibility of giving their constant and personal attention to the care,
maintenance, operation and management of the cemeteries.



   (B)   The office of the Supervisor is located at the Cottage Hill
Cemetery at the right driveway near the entrance. All the lot and grave
owners in the cemeteries should consult with the officers at all times.
Advice and assistance will be given without charge to those contemplating the
purchases of monuments or the making of other improvements.



   (C)   Orders for work, complaints and lost and found articles should
be reported at the office of the Supervisor or the City Clerk-Treasurer. All
business involving the cemeteries will be transacted at these offices.



   (D)   Employees of the cemeteries are prohibited from accepting
orders or instructions for work from anyone except the Supervisor. Every
person is requested to report to the Supervisor any errors or lack of proper
care in the execution of duties of the cemetery employees.



   (E)   No tips, gratuities or fees are permitted to be paid to
cemetery employees by any person.



(1982 Code, § 91.01)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)



§ 98.04  RULES FOR CEMETERY LOT OWNERS.



   (A)   All deeds to cemetery lot owners when executed shall be
construed as simply granting the purchaser of the lot conveyed the right to
use the lot for the interment of himself or herself, his or her family,
relatives and decedents.



   (B)   Cemetery lot owners shall not be permitted to transfer their
right to any unused portion of a lot except by written permit signed and
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, the City Clerk-Treasurer
and the Supervisor of the cemeteries.



(1982 Code, § 91.02)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.05  OPENING AND CLOSING OF GRAVES; FEES.



   (A)   All lot owners are to bring their deed or proof of right of
burial when ordering graves opened.



   (B)   All orders for opening graves must be made at least 16 hours
before the time set for the funeral.



   (C)   When a new grave is opened in close proximity to a previous
interment, it is often impossible to avoid damaging the old grave. The
management or the city will not be responsible for that damage and remounding
or reboxing. If ordered, fees will be charged to the lot owner of the opened
grave.



   (D)   In the case of death from smallpox, or cholera, the grave will
be prepared by the cemetery employees, but neither they nor the Supervisor
will be present at the interment. The Board of Health must furnish the tools
and employees to handle the remains and close the grave.



(1982 Code, § 91.03(A)-(D))



   (E)   Price for opening and closing graves shall be as follows:



      (1)   All graves under 4 feet in length-$125;



      (2)   All other graves-$400; and



      (3)   Ash burial-$125.



(Ord. 4-2004, passed 2-23-2004)



   (F)   All improvement work on burial lots such as resurfacing,
grading, excavating, sodding, setting trees, placing foundation work for
stone work or setting corner posts must be done by cemetery employees under
the supervision of the Supervisor.



(1982 Code, § 91.03(F))  (Am. Ord. 20-1981, passed 11-23-1981)



§ 98.06  PURCHASE OF BURIAL PLOTS.



   (A)   Persons desiring to purchase burial plots will, on application
therefor at the cemetery office, be accompanied over the cemetery grounds by
the Supervisor who will assist them in selecting a plot.



   (B)   Having decided on a suitable location for the grave plot, the
purchaser shall return to the office where he or she will be given an
application form properly filled out, describing the lot, section, number and
price. Upon presenting the completed application form at the
Clerk-Treasurer's office in the city building, and payment to the
Clerk-Treasurer the consideration for the plot, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
execute a deed to the purchaser.



   (C)   No interment will be allowed until payment of the full
purchase price for the lot on which the interment is to be made.



(1982 Code, § 91.04(C))  (Am. Ord. 20-1981, passed 11-23-1981)



   (D)   Prices of burial plots shall be as follows:



      (1)   Single grave (adult)-$250; and



      (2)   Single grave (children)-$125.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 4-12-1994)



§ 98.07  REMOVALS; FEES.



   (A)   Under no condition shall a removal of a body from a grave be
made where death was caused by smallpox or cholera.



   (B)   The price of removal of a body from a grave shall be $150.



   (C)   In making removals from 1 cemetery to another, the price shall
be governed by the distance, condition of the remains and time and labor
required.



   (D)   Burial plots may be surrendered only after they have been
cleared of all encumbrances and when recommended by the Supervisor.



(1982 Code, § 91.05)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.08  RULES.



   (A)   The proper burial certificate required by the municipal
authorities must be delivered at the gate office before any interment is
made, or anyone is placed in any vault or tomb.



   (B)   All persons are prohibited from driving a horse-drawn or
motor-driven conveyance through the grounds faster than 10 mph.



   (C)   Bicycle or sled riding in all cemeteries is prohibited.



   (D)   No person shall park a car within 50 feet of an open grave.



   (E)   All motor vehicles shall be stopped and the motor shut off
within 50 feet of any burial service in progress.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or company to
advertise any business or product in or on any cemetery, except by permission
of the Supervisor.



   (G)   All persons are prohibited from plucking flowers, whether wild
or cultivated.



   (H)   Taking pictures is prohibited in the cemetery, except by
permission of the Supervisor.



   (I)   Children under 10 years of age shall be accompanied by parents
or guardian who will be responsible for their conduct while in the cemetery.



   (J)   Writing on or otherwise defacing any mausoleum, monument,
marker or memorial structure of any kind is prohibited.



   (K)   All persons are prohibited from discharging firearms in the
cemetery except in case of military funerals or by special permission of the
Supervisor.



   (L)   No visitors or curiosity seekers are permitted to be present
at the removal of a body.



(1982 Code, § 91.06)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.09  UNDERTAKERS.



   (A)   Undertakers are requested to make complete arrangements with
the Supervisor so no confusion will result in burials at the same hour.



   (B)   All undertakers are urgently requested by the management to so
arrange funerals as to give the cemetery employees ample time to prepare and
close the grave during the regular working hours of the employees. An extra
charge will be made when employees are held overtime to complete the
services. The regular working hours of the employees are from 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.



   (C)   All funeral processions while within the grounds will be
subject to the control of the Supervisor and his or her assistants. Every
possible effort will be made by the Supervisor and cemetery employees to
prevent any inconvenience to funeral processions while within the cemetery.
It is often necessary to prohibit parking on certain driveways, and every
person shall obey the signs or signals at the intersections.



   (D)   Any person observed parking on the lawn will be subject to
arrest for malicious trespass.



   (E)   Driving a car backwards, or making a complete turn on any
drive or avenue in the cemetery is prohibited.



   (F)   The sale of refreshments, merchandise and flowers on cemetery
property is prohibited.



(1982 Code, § 91.07)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)



§ 98.10  MONUMENTAL WORK.



   (A)   All workpersons engaged in erecting monuments or other
structures are prohibited from attaching ropes to any tree or shrub except by
permission of the Supervisor.



   (B)   All workpersons and builders are under the control and
direction of the Supervisor while on the grounds and must enter and leave the
cemetery during the working hours of the cemetery employees. Any workperson
failing to comply with this regulation shall not be permitted to work in the
cemetery.



   (C)   No stone work shall be begun on Saturday that cannot be
finished and the debris cleared away before the regular quitting time of the
cemetery employees.



   (D)   No stone work shall be removed from the cemetery except by
permission of the Supervisor.



   (E)   All markers must be placed at the opposite end of the grave
from the monument.



   (F)   The management does not bind itself to maintain or replace any
stone or structure erected on any lot.



(1982 Code, § 91.08)  (Ord. 1-1951, passed 4-10-1951; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)



§ 98.11  DECORATIONS.



   (A)   Toys, cans, dishes, globes, shells, bottles or bric-a-brac of
any kind shall not be allowed on the graves, as they interfere with cutting
the grass. These articles will be promptly removed whenever found.



   (B)   Dead flowers, weeds, grass, paper or other forms of rubbish
shall be put in the containers provided for that purpose, and shall by no
means be piled against trees or left on the section.



   (C)   Planting trees as boundary line marks to prohibited.



   (D)   Fences or enclosures are prohibited on any lot or part.



   (E)   Wooden trellises, vines or shrubs are prohibited on any lot or
grave unless approved by the Supervisor.



   (F)   Lot owners shall not place any chair, settee or portable seat
of any kind on their lot, as they attract strangers to the lot and the
constant use of them destroys the grass and is objectionable in other ways.



   (G)   When trees or shrubs by means of their height or branches,
become detrimental to adjacent lots, or dangerous or inconvenient to
passengers, it shall be the duty of the Supervisor to remove the tree, shrub
or offending part thereof.



   (H)   No grave mounds shall be permitted.



   (I)   All bouquet holders must be set flush with the surface of the
ground. Vases with cut flowers may be placed on graves, but will be removed
when the flowers wither.



   (J)   Unfilled vases and urns shall not be allowed to remain on lots
after July 1 of each year, but will be removed from the lot and held subject
to the order of the lot owner for 1 year after which all responsibility of
the cemetery ceases, and disposal will be made as the management deems best.



   (K)   Floral designs or other decorations will be removed from lots
or graves as soon as the flowers become wilted or unsightly, and persons
wishing to retain the same must remove them within 48 hours after the funeral.



   (L)   Winter decorations, holly, evergreen or artificial wreaths may
be placed on the graves beginning November 1 and may remain until March 1,
after which date all decorations will be removed. If these are to be kept for
future use, they must be removed and cared for by the lot owner before March
1.



   (M)   Seats or benches of stone will not hereafter be permitted in
the cemetery, and as those now existing become broken, or out of repair, they
will be removed and may not be replaced.



   (N)   Before ordering monuments or markers, lot owners must consult
the Supervisor and ascertain if there is space on the lot for the desired
stone or markers.



   (O)   If any trees or shrubs situated on any lot shall, by reason of
the growth of their roots and branches, or in any other way, become
detrimental to the adjacent lots, walks, driveways or avenues, or dangerous
or inconvenient to it shall be the duty of the passers-by, Supervisor to
enter on the lot and remove the trees or shrubs, or parts thereof as are thus
detrimental, dangerous or inconvenient.



(1982 Code, § 91.09)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.12  GENERAL MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   All lot and grave owners will be presented with a copy of this
chapter on application at the cemetery office.



   (B)   Questions which may arise, not covered in these rules, are
subject to the decision of the Supervisor, and Board of Public Works and
Safety and the Common Council.



   (C)   Visitors are requested to observe the decorum which should
characterize a place, and unnecessary noise or improper conduct of any person
will not be tolerated.



   (D)   The Supervisor is charged with the execution of these rules
and persons are requested to inform him or her of any breach of these rules
of which they become aware.



   (E)   The Supervisor and his or her deputies are invested with full
police power to arrest any offender in these grounds. They shall expel from
the grounds any violator of these rules or any person disturbing the sanctity
of the place by any act of disrespect whereby the offender is subject to
punishment.



   (F)   The cemetery gates or entrance will be opened at 7:00 a.m. and
closed at sunset.



(1982 Code, § 91.10)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 8-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class B infraction and subject to a penalty of not more than $1,000. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation
occurs or continues.



(1982 Code, § 91.99)  (Ord. 10-1945, passed 10-28-1945; Am. Ord. 20-1981,
passed 11-23-1981)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   SALES, FEES, LICENSES AND PERMITS



      111.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISED SYSTEMS REGULATIONS



      112.   PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT DEALERS



      113.   CIRCUSES, EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENTS



      114.   TAXICABS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



      115.   GASOLINE STATION REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  SALES, FEES, LICENSES AND PERMITS



Section




General Provisions




   110.01   Authority to license



   110.02   Issuance and inspections



   110.03   Complaints, revocations and suspensions



   110.04   Service charge for unhonored or returned checks



   110.05   Copying or duplication fee



   110.06   Accident report fee



   110.07   Motor vehicle inspection fee



   110.08   Building and construction fees



   110.09   Planning and zoning fees



   110.10   Utility fees



   110.11   Chart of permit fees



   110.12   Limits on sales of products containing ephedrine and the
like




Licensing




   110.25   Restricted hours of business for places of selected
entertainment



   110.26   Slaughterhouses prohibited



   110.27   License required; fees; application



   110.28   Role of Clerk-Treasurer



   110.29   Licenses non-transferable



   110.30   Orderly and lawful compliance required



   110.31   Restricted hours for hawkers and peddlers



   110.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 110.01  AUTHORITY TO LICENSE.



   The city has the authority to impose a license fee reasonably related
to the administrative cost of exercising those powers.



§ 110.02  ISSUANCE AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue licenses upon payment of the
license fees and compliance with the applicable provisions of the Brazil City
Code, unless otherwise indicated.



   (B)   The Police Department shall inspect all places of business
under license or required to have a license.



§ 110.03  COMPLAINTS, REVOCATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall hear any complaint against a person to whom
the City of Brazil has issued a license.



   (B)   The Mayor make revoke or suspend any license if he or she
finds, after proper notice, and that the person has willfully violated a term
or condition of his or her license, or has willfully done or permitted to be
done an act in violation of a statute or provisions of the Brazil City Code.



   (C)   The Mayor shall file a copy of his or her findings and
determination with the Clerk-Treasurer within 72 hours after it is made.



§ 110.04  SERVICE CHARGE FOR UNHONORED OR RETURNED CHECKS.



   (A)   Purpose. The Brazil city water utility’s tariff approved by
the Public Service Commission of Indiana on September 5, 1984 provided for
the charging of a "bad check charge" by the water utility in the amount of $5
per check to any customer who presents a check on an overdrawn account, on an
account with insufficient funds or deposit or on a closed account for payment
of metered water charges or other water utility charges provided in that
tariff. The purpose of this section is to provide for the charging of a "bad
check charge" as set forth in the tariff and established a procedure for the
enforcement and collection of a charge.



   (B)   Charge for the presentment of bad checks.



      (1)   The Brazil city waterworks shall charge any customer
thereof a "bad check charge" in the sum of $5 per check who presents to the
waterworks office any check on an overdrawn account, with insufficient funds
on deposit, or on a closed account for payment of that customer’s metered
water charge or other water utility charges as provided in that tariff.



      (2)   This section and the "bad check charge" provided for
herein shall be administered and collected by the staff of the supervisor of
the waterworks office either by placing that charge on the customer’s next
water bill, by collecting it at the time the customer resubmits payment of
the overdrawn check or by the utilization of any legal means available for
the collection of bad checks. The supervisor shall establish a procedure.



(Ord. 6-1992, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 110.05  COPYING OR DUPLICATION FEE.



   (A)   Any person requesting a copy of a public record shall pay in
advance to the Clerk-Treasurer of the city, the actual cost of copying the
record which is determined to be $0.25 per page for standard size copies
(8-1/2 x 11 or 8-1/2 x 14) and $0.50 per page for non-standard copies.



   (B)   If the city does not have mechanical means for copying a
requested record, the person requesting the record shall be entitled to
inspect and manually transcribe the record. The city shall not charge to
inspect a public record to determine whether the record may be disclosed.



§ 110.06  ACCIDENT REPORT FEE.



   (A)   The Police Department of the City of Brazil, Indiana, shall
furnish, upon demand, to any person who has sustained any loss or damage, by
reason of injury or death of any person or damage to property caused by or
resulting from the operation, maintenance or use of any vehicle upon any
public street or highway of this state, the information as set forth pursuant
to applicable state law.



   (B)   The Police Department is authorized to charge as a fee for the
information an amount to be determined by the Common Council by resolution,
the amount to be not less than the sum of $3 for each sum report.



   (C)   The fee collected under this section shall be deposited in a
separate account and entitled "Accident," which sums may be expended at the
discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer of the Police Department for
any Department purposes reasonably related to the keeping of accident reports
and records or the prevention of street and highway accidents.



§ 110.07  MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION FEE.



   (A)   A fee of $5 for each motor vehicle inspection for purposes of
motor vehicle certificate of title applications.



   (B)   A special vehicle inspection fund is established for the
purpose of depositing all money collected for the motor vehicle inspections.



   (C)   The monies collected shall only be used for law enforcement
purposes for the Brazil Police Department.



(Ord. 15-1988, passed 6-28-1988)



§ 110.08  BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION FEES.



   All building and construction permit fees are set forth in Title XV of
this Brazil City Code.



§ 110.09  PLANNING AND ZONING FEES.



   All planning and zoning fees are set forth in Chapter 157 of this
Brazil City Code.



§ 110.10  UTILITY FEES.



   All utility fees, including but not limited to water and sewage fees
are set forth in Title V of this Brazil City Code.



§ 110.11  CHART OF PERMIT FEES.



 


Activity

 

Code Section

 

Fee Amounts





Accident reports
 
§ 110.06
 

$3.00



Animal shows
 
§ 113.02
 

$20.00 - $60.00



Bad checks
 
§ 110.04
 

$5.00



Billiards
 
§ 113.10
 

$10.00



Bowling alley
 
§ 113.11
 

$1.00 - $10.00



Burial plots
 
§ 98.06
 

$125.00 - $250.00



Carnivals
 
§ 113.05
 

$25.00 - $125.00



Cemetery removal
 
§ 98.07
 

$150.00



Circuses
 
§ 113.01
 

$60.00 per day



Confectionery/drink wagons
 
§ 113.28
 

$10.00



Copying/duplicating
 
§ 110.05
 

$0.25 - $0.50



Electronic machines
 
§ 113.08
 

$1.00 - $20.00



Exhibitions
 
§ 113.03
 

$15.00 - $50.00



Fortune tellers
 
§ 113.29
 

$5.00 - $125.00



Gasoline pumps
 
§ 113.30
 

$10.00



Graves
 
§ 98.05
 

$100.00 - $275.00



Gymnasiums
 
§ 113.06
 

$3.00 - $20.00



Hawkers
 
§ 112.01
 

$10.00 - $450.00



Itinerant dealers
 
§ 113.27
 

$10.00 - $450.00



Itinerant dentists/physicians
 
§ 113.25
 

$5.00 - $50.00



Itinerant/transient dealers
 
§ 113.27
 

$3.00 - $50.00



Medicine shows
 
§ 113.04
 

$10.00



Merry-go-rounds
 
§ 113.09
 

$3.00 - $20.00



Opera houses
 
§ 113.32
 

$25.00



Park shelter
 
§ 97.33
 

$20.00 minimum



Peddlers
 
§ 112.01
 

$10.00 - $450.00



Photographer, itinerant
 
§ 113.31
 

$2.00 - $100.00



Pool (billiards)
 
§ 113.10
 

$10.00



Pool (swimming)
 
§ 97.33
 

See chart



Shooting galleries
 
§ 113.07
 

$1.00 - $20.00



Skating rinks
 
§ 113.06
 

$3.00 - $20.00



Sports events
 
§ 113.06
 

$3.00 - $20.00



Street fairs
 
§ 113.05
 

$6.00 - $125.00



Taxicabs
 
§ 114.04
 

$10.00



Theaters
 
§ 113.32
 

$25.00



Trash pick-up (residential)
 
§ 90.22
 

$5.00 per month



Vendor, itinerant
 
§ 113.26
 

$1.00 - $100.00



Zoning
 
Chapter 157
 

See chapter





 



§ 110.12  LIMITS ON SALES OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CUSTOMER.  Any person who purchases or acquires products from
any retail store.



      EPHEDRINE.  Any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or
illegal, that contains ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride,
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine sulfate or phenylpropanolamine.



      PACKAGE.  Any bottle, box, blister pack or other container in
which products containing ephedrine are sold.



      PERMITTEE.  A person who has obtained a permit to sell ephedrine
to customers.



      PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.



      RETAIL STORE.  Any single geographic location of any business,
company, corporation, person, employee or associate, that sells ephedrine to
any customer. It does not include any wholesalers engaged in a wholesale
transaction.



      SELL.  To furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver,
surrender, distribute or supply, whether or not for monetary gain or other
consideration.



      WHOLESALER.  One whose business is the selling of goods in gross
to retail stores for purposes of resale.



   (B)   Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
retail store in the City of Brazil that does not possess a valid permit
issued by the Clerk-Treasurer. The permit shall be posted in the
establishment in a place conspicuous to the public.



      (1)   No permit is required for a prescription written by a
licensed physician and/or a pharmacist providing the drugs for a prescription.



      (2)   An applicant may apply for a permit, at no cost, by
submitting a completed application form to the Clerk-Treasurer's office.



      (3)   All permits issued by the Clerk-Treasurer's office shall
contain the name of the retail store; name of the person to whom the permit
is granted; the address of the retail store for which the permit is issued;
and the inclusive dates the permit is valid, if other than for a calendar
year.



      (4)   A permit issued to a retail store shall not be sold,
assigned or transferred.



      (5)   Should any person fail to obtain a permit, the person
shall be charged a $250 penalty.



   (C)   Limitations on the sale or purchase of ephedrine products.



      (1)   Each permittee shall require from its customer
identification showing he or she is of legal age (18), a picture form of
identification and current address. All information obtained on the customer
shall be recorded in an appropriate manner and a copy of the report shall be
forwarded to the Brazil City Police Department at the end of each calendar
month by the permittee.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person or permittee during a
single transaction to sell to a customer more than 2 packages of products
containing ephedrine.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any customer to purchase or acquire
more than 2 packages of products containing ephedrine within a 7-day period.



   (D)   Exclusions. This section excludes any prescription written by
a licensed physician and a pharmacist providing the drugs for a prescription.



   (E)   Separate violations of each incident. Each offense shall be
considered a separate offense and subject to a fine. Each 24 hours that a
violation occurs will be considered a separate offense and can be cited as so.



   (F)   Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall
be fined $500. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 6-2005, passed 4-27-2005)




LICENSING




§ 110.25  RESTRICTED HOURS OF BUSINESS FOR PLACES OF SELECTED ENTERTAINMENT.



   All pool rooms, billiard rooms, pool and billiard parlors, bowling
alleys, shooting galleries, public dance halls, skating rinks and places of
business where card games are played in connection with a business, within
the city, shall close at 11:00 p.m., and remain closed until 6:00 a.m.



(1982 Code, § 110.01)  (Ord. 69-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 110.26  SLAUGHTERHOUSES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The slaughtering of cattle, sheep, hogs or other animals
within the corporate limits of the city is declared a nuisance.



   (B)   Any building or enclosure which shall or may produce any
unwholesome smell or annoyance to the inhabitants being in the vicinity
thereof or any slaughterhouse for the killing of animals, located within the
corporate limits of the city or within 1/2-mile of the corporate limits
thereof, are each and all declared nuisances.



   (C)   It is declared unlawful for any person or company to slaughter
any animals in the city or to maintain any building, or enclosure therein, or
to construct, maintain and operate any slaughterhouse within the corporate
limits of the city, or without the city within 1/2 mile of the corporate
limits of the city.



(1982 Code, § 110.02)  (Ord. 61-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 110.27  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company or
corporation, for the purpose of profit or gain, to erect, maintain, use,
operate or exhibit, or to practice, engage in, do or perform any of the
exhibitions, performances, trades, avocations, businesses, professions,
enterprises or things particularly designated in this chapter, without having
first procured from the city a license to do so, and paid to the city for the
license the sum of money provided herein.



(1982 Code, § 110.10)  (Ord. 64-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 77-1932,
passed 2-23-1932)



   (B)   (1)   The license fee to be charged for the purposes herein
designated shall be in sums and shall be issued for periods of time as set
out in the following divisions.



      (2)   All licenses so issued shall plainly set out the time
covered by licenses.



(1982 Code, § 110.11)



   (C)   (1)   Any person desiring any license herein provided for
shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer the fee hereinbefore provided for, and take
his or her receipt therefore.



      (2)   The applicant shall then present the Clerk-Treasurer
with his or her application for the license desired and for the length of
time desired.



(1982 Code, § 110.12)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.28  ROLE OF CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the applicant the license
applied and paid upon proper review and approval.



   (B)   The holder of the license and the license shall exhibit the
same on the reasonable request of any police officer.



(1982 Code, § 110.12)



§ 110.29  LICENSES NON-TRANSFERABLE.



   None of the licenses required herein shall be assignable or
transferable by the licensee.



(1982 Code, § 110.12)  (Ord. 64-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 110.30  ORDERLY AND LAWFUL COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It is declared unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation
holding a license hereunder and exhibiting or controlling by virtue thereof,
any shows, circus or other entertainment and controlling the place of
entertainment to allow any indecent, obscene or immoral language, or picture
or exhibition to be used or to appear in or as a part of entertainment or
show, or to fail to conduct and cause entertainment and place to be conducted
in a lawful and orderly manner.



(1982 Code, § 110.13(A))  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.31  RESTRICTED HOURS FOR HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS.



   (A)   Persons holding the license herein provided for as peddlers
and hawkers are required to conduct themselves while operating under the
license in a decorous and orderly manner on the streets and on the premises
of persons whose houses they may visit for any display or sale of goods.



   (B)   They shall not visit a premises for any purpose at any time
except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each day and they
shall not importune persons to examine or buy goods to the annoyance of
persons and peddlers and hawkers, shall at all times while working under the
license, refrain from unusual demonstrations, loud, boisterous, profane or
obscene language.



(1982 Code, § 110.13(B))  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, company or corporation that shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined in any sum not less than $1 nor more than $100.



   (B)   Each day's continuance in the violation shall constitute a
separate offense.



(1982 Code, § 110.99)  (Ord. 64-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



CHAPTER 111:  CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISED SYSTEMS REGULATIONS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Regulation of basic rates by Board of Public Works and
Safety



   111.03   Procedures for cable rates and charges



   111.04   Rules and regulations of the Board



   111.05   Opportunity for public input



   111.06   Final rate orders



   111.07   Common Council review of final rate orders



   111.08   Hearing before the Common Council



   111.09   Judicial review



   111.10   Certification forms



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE ACT.  The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by
the Cable Television Consumer Protection Act of 1992, an amendment to the
Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.) as the same may be
amended or supplemented from time to time.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within the city, but the term does not include a facility that
serves only to retransmit the television signals of 1 or more television
broadcast stations; a facility that services only subscribers in 1 or more
multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control only subscribers in 1
or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control or
management, unless the facility or facilities use any public right-of-way; a
facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of Title II of the Communication Act of 1934, as amended except
that the facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes
of § 621(c) of the Act 147, United States Code § 541(c)] to the extent the
facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers; or any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems.



   FRANCHISE.  An initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a
renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to § 626 of the
Act (427 U.S.C. § 546), issued by the city whether authorization is
designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract,
certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction
operation of a cable system.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.02  REGULATION OF BASIC RATES BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   To the extent permitted by § 623 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 543)
and any duly promulgated FCC rate regulations, the City of Brazil, by and
through its Board of Public Works and Safety, shall regulate the basic
service rates and charges for cable television service to subscribers.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.03  PROCEDURES FOR CABLE RATES AND CHARGES.



   The following procedures shall be used to review and approve changes in
basic service rates and charges of the company, or any other franchised cable
television system operating within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.04  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall adopt rules and regulations
for the review and regulation of basic service rates and charges for cable
television services provided by the company or other cable television
franchises consistent with the requirements of the Cable Act, FCC rate
regulations and this chapter.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.05  OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC INPUT.



   Regulations shall be promulgated to ensure all interested parties or
persons a reasonable opportunity to express their views regarding any changes
in basic service rates and charges of the company or other cable television
franchises.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.06  FINAL RATE ORDERS.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall adopt final rate orders in
accordance with its adopted regulations. Orders shall be final upon adoption,
but may be reviewed by the Common Council upon request by the company or
other cable television franchise, the Board of Public Works and Safety or any
person or interested party who participated orally or by filing written
positions with the Board in the rate proceedings held by it.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.07  COMMON COUNCIL REVIEW OF FINAL RATE ORDERS.



   Review by the Common Council shall be initiated by filing a request
with the Clerk-Treasurer within 15 days of the date of the Board’s final
rate order. The request shall state briefly the reasons for which the review
is being requested.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.08  HEARING BEFORE THE COMMON COUNCIL.



   Within 30 days of the filing of a request, the Common Council shall
hold a hearing on that request. The Council may affirm the final rate order
or remand the order to the Board for further review. If the order is so
remanded, the Board shall hold additional hearings as it deems appropriate
and may either affirm or amend its final rate order.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.09  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   The order of the Board shall be final subject only to judicial review
as provided by law.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 111.10  CERTIFICATION FORMS.



   The Mayor, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf
of the city and file with the Federal Communications Commission certification
forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC
rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates
and charges.



(Ord. 12-1993, passed 11-9-1993)



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT DEALERS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License fees



   112.03   Surety bond required



   112.04   Exceptions



   112.05   Nuisances declared



   112.06   Solicitation and distribution at or in public places



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HAWKER.  Anyone who goes about the streets, or elsewhere in the city,
selling or offering for sale, any goods by public outcry, placards, signals
or any other device designed to attract purchasers.



   ITINERANT DEALER.  Any transient person or any person who shall engage
temporarily in the making or selling of any kinds of goods, wares or
merchandise within the city, regardless of whether the goods, wares or
merchandise are peddled from house to house, sold on the streets or other
public places, or sold from any room, branch store, establishment or concern,
building, structure or lot owned, rented or leased for the purpose of
carrying on a temporary business.



   PEDDLER.  Anyone who goes about the streets or from house to house
selling or offering for sale, any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles.



   SOLICITOR.  Any transient person who goes from house to house or from
place to place in the city selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell
or take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, service or any other thing of
value whatsoever.



(1982 Code, § 110.11 (A)(1))  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   For each foot peddler, hawker, solicitor or itinerant dealer
of goods, wares or merchandise, or other articles or products, the license
fee shall be:



 



For each day, when taken by the day
 

$10



For each week, when taken by the week
 

$40



For each month, when taken by the month
 

$100



For each year, when taken by the year
 

$300





 



   (B)   For each peddler, hawker, solicitor, itinerant dealer of any
articles or service dispensed from any vehicle or conveyance:



 



For each day, when taken by the day
 

$15



For each week, when taken by the week
 

$60



For each month, when taken by the month
 

$150



For each year, when taken by the year
 

$450





 



(1982 Code, § 110.11(A)(2)(3))  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  SURETY BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   In addition to the license fee required herein, the applicant
for license shall be required to file and deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer a
bond with sureties to be approved by the Clerk-Treasurer in the penal sum of
$5,000 running to the city.



   (B)   The bond shall be for the use and benefit of any purchaser of
any goods, wares or merchandise or service who might have a cause of action
of any nature arising out of a sale against the applicant, or for the payment
of any fines that may be assessed against the applicant, agents or employees
for the violation of this section, or the satisfaction of all cause of action
commenced within 1 year of the date that the sale is made provided that the
aggregate liability of the surety on the bond shall in no event exceed the
amount of the bond and that there shall be no limit of liability against the
foot peddler, solicitor, hawker or itinerant dealer, or the applicant for the
license; provided further, the Clerk-Treasurer in lieu of the bond may accept
proof by the applicant that he or she is presently bonded in the penal sum of
$5,000 or more, which would provide coverage for sales made within the city
during the time of the applicant’s license.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(A)(4))  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The license provided for in § 112.02 shall apply to all
peddlers whether selling goods for cash or immediate delivery, or on orders.
For future delivery or on the installment plan, and to hawkers, solicitors,
itinerant dealers and to all persons assisting in conducting the business;
selling for cash on immediate delivery or taking orders for future delivery
or selling on the installment plan; but this section shall not apply to
agricultural products or fruits cultivated and grown by any peddler, hawker
or itinerant dealer.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(A)(5))



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of
newspapers, meat, wood, coal, ice or milk and sales made to dealers by
commercial travelers, and nothing in this section shall be so construed and
enforced to place a burden on interstate commerce.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(A)(5))  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  NUISANCES DECLARED.



   The practice or act of going in and on private property or residences,
by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of
merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or
occupant of the private property or residences, for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or the rendering or
furnishing of any service or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling,
hawking, rendering or furnishing the same, is declared to be a nuisance and
to be unlawful.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(A)(7))  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION AT OR IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DISTRIBUTION.  The offering, giving, distributing or making
available for distributing of any item of property, including but not limited
to food, drink, leaflets or other written materials, by any person or who is
a bona fide resident of Clay County, Indiana, and any organization which is
located or based in Clay County, Indiana.



      ORGANIZATION.  A person or group of persons who is or are bona
fide residents of Clay County, Indiana; and any corporation, whether
for-profit or not-for-profit; any charitable association, corporation or
entity; any church or other religious-based entity; any civic group or
entity; any service club or entity; any labor union or other labor-based
association or entity; and any municipal, county, state or federal
governmental group, department, agency or entity of any governmental unit, or
other organization which is has an office or locally based location within
Clay County, Indiana, including any national, state or regional charitable,
religious or educational organization.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
park, public conveyance, building or other place that is open or available to
the general public at large and owned, operated and maintained by any
municipal, county, state or federal governmental unit or entity.



      SOLICITATION.  The requesting, pleading, appealing or the
attempt or exercise of requesting, pleading, appealing for the purpose of
obtaining money or other objects as donations from members of the general
public by any organization, charitable or otherwise, on or within any public
place.



   (B)   Solicitation or distribution. Any person or organization that
desires to engage in the solicitation of money or other objects or to engage
in the distribution of any item of property from or to members of the general
public at or on any public place located within the corporate limits of the
City of Brazil must, prior to solicitation or distribution, register the name
of the person or organization who desires to engage in solicitation or
distribution with the Clerk-Treasurer during normal business hours of that
office at least 2 weeks prior to the intended date of solicitation or
distribution. Registration shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the organization intending on
engaging in solicitation or distribution;



      (2)   The date(s) of the planned solicitation or distribution;



      (3)   The intended locations(s) of the planned solicitation or
distribution;



      (4)   The purpose of the intended solicitation or
distribution; and



      (5)   The name and address of any person in charge of or
supervising the intended solicitation or distribution.



   (C)   Solicitation or distribution requirements. Any person or
organization engaging in solicitation or distribution pursuant to this
chapter shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Place or carry a flat sign or placard not attached to
any container in a place clearly visible to the general public affected by
the solicitation or distribution that clearly identifies the organization
engaging in the solicitation or distribution to the public affected thereby
and that is clearly readable to persons in vehicles and pedestrian passers-by;



      (2)   The sign or placard shall state the purpose of the
solicitation or distribution;



      (3)   The intended solicitation or distribution shall be
performed only during daylight hours;



      (4)   The person or persons engaging in the solicitation or
distribution shall wear bright colored protective vests that are clearly
visible to motorists and other passers by if the solicitation or distribution
is occurring at or on a public street, road or highway, or the intersection
thereof; and



      (5)   The Police Department may cause any solicitation or
distribution provided for by this ordinance to cease or terminate if any
congested traffic condition or emergency occurs.



   (D)   Solicitation or distribution limited. Any person or
organization engaging in solicitation or distribution within the corporate
limits of the City of Brazil, or desiring to engage in solicitation or
distribution, shall be entitled to do so only 1 time during any calendar
year. Any desired solicitation or distribution more than 1 time per year
shall be at the sole discretion of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 12-2003, passed 9-9-2003)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $100. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day that a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 12-2003, passed 9-9-2003)



CHAPTER 113:  CIRCUSES, EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENTS



Section




General Regulations




   113.01   Fees for circuses, parades and wild west shows



   113.02   Animal shows; fees



   113.03   Non-specified exhibitions and entertainments



   113.04   Medicine shows, lectures and exhibitions; fees



   113.05   Street fairs or carnivals



   113.06   Skating rinks, gymnasiums or other sports events



   113.07   Shooting gallery and picture machine; fees



   113.08   Striking, blowing or electric machine; fees



   113.09   Merry-go-round; fees



   113.10   Billiard, pool or other machines or devices



   113.11   Bowling alleys; fees



   113.12   Junk stores or pawn brokers; fees




Specific Regulations




   113.25   Itinerant physician or dentist; fees



   113.26   Itinerant vendor of medicines; fees



   113.27   Itinerant or transient dealer



   113.28   Confectionery or drink wagon vendors; fees



   113.29   Clairvoyant or fortune tellers; fees



   113.30   Gasoline pumps; fees



   113.31   Itinerant or transient photographer; fees



   113.32   Theaters or opera houses



   113.99   Penalty




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 113.01  FEES FOR CIRCUSES, PARADES AND WILD WEST SHOWS.



   (A)   For each show commonly known as a circus or as a wild west
show, or any show of similar character, the license fee shall be $60 for each
day.



   (B)   For each parade of a show in the city, the license fee shall
be $60.



   (C)   However, where a show is showing within the city limits and
has procured a license from the city to show, no license fee shall be charged
by the city for a parade of the show.



   (D)   For each show accompanying any show and known as a side show,
the license fee shall be $5.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(C))



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any circus or side show to exhibit in
the city any indecent or immoral performance. Exhibitions shall be conducted
in an orderly manner and no gambling or any immoral practices shall be
allowed on the grounds occupied or controlled by any show management. In
making any parade of a circus on the streets of the city, the parade shall be
conducted in an orderly and decorous manner and in a manner so as to cause no
injury directly or indirectly to any person or property.



(1982 Code, § 110.13(F))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.02  ANIMAL SHOWS; FEES.



   For each trained animal show or menagerie the license fee shall be:



   (A)   For each day, when taken by the day-$20; and



   (B)   For each week, when taken by the week-$60.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(D))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  NON-SPECIFIED EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENTS.



   For exhibitions and entertainments not herein, or in any other
ordinance of the city specifically provided for, the license fee shall be:



   (A)   For each day-$15; and



   (B)   For each week-$50.



(1982 Code, § 110.10(E))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  MEDICINE SHOWS, LECTURES AND EXHIBITIONS; FEES.



   For shows, exhibitions, lectures, discourses or entertainments for the
sale or advertisement of medicine, medical remedies or methods of treatment
of diseases, or for the sale or advertisement of any article, held in any
room, hall, building on the street or vacant grounds, whether admission is
charged to the same or not, the license fee shall be $10 for each day.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(F))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.05  STREET FAIRS OR CARNIVALS.



   (A)   For every aggregation of shows, exhibitions or entertainments,
commonly known as a street fair or carnival, where aggregation is carried on
under 1 or a common management, the license for the same shall be:



      (1)   For each day, when taken by the day-$25; and



      (2)   For each week of 6 days-$125.



   (B)   Where shows, exhibitions or entertainments are under separate
management, for each of the shows, exhibitions or features of entertainment
constituting aggregation, the license fee shall be:



      (1)   For each day when taken by the day-$6; and



      (2)   For each week, when taken by the week-$25



(1982 Code, § 110.11(G))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  SKATING RINKS, GYMNASIUMS OR OTHER SPORTS EVENTS.



   For each commercial skating rink, gymnasium or place where polo,
basketball and like games are played, or other miscellaneous entertainments
are held, the license fee shall be $3 for each day when the license is taken
by the day; $4 for each week when the license is taken by the week; $10 for
each month when taken by the month; and $20 for each year when a license is
taken by the year.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(H))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  SHOOTING GALLERY AND PICTURE MACHINE; FEES.



   For each shooting gallery, baby rack and picture machine all combined
or for either of the same separately, the license shall be:



   (A)   For each day-$1;



   (B)   For each week-$5;



   (C)   For each month-$7; and



   (D)   For each year-$20.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(I))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  STRIKING, BLOWING OR ELECTRIC MACHINE; FEES.



   For each striking, lifting, pulling, blowing or electric machine:



   (A)   For each day-$1;



   (B)   For each week-$5;



   (C)   For each month-$7; and



   (D)   For each year-$20;



(1982 Code, § 110.11(J))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.09  MERRY-GO-ROUND; FEES.



   (A)   For each merry-go-round:



      (1)   For each day-$3;



      (2)   For each week-$10;



      (3)   For each month-$12; and



      (4)   For each year-$20



   (B)   It is declared unlawful for any person, firm, company or
corporation to conduct or operate the same on any lot or plot of ground
within 1 block from National Avenue, extending from Alabama Street west to
the city limits.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(K))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.10  BILLIARD, POOL OR OTHER MACHINES OR DEVICES.



   No person shall have, keep, operate or maintain for hire or profit in
any public or private place, any billiard, pool or bagatelle table, any
electronic video game, pinball machine and any other mechanical or electrical
gaming machine or device or other machine or device for sports and games,
without obtaining a license specifying the number of tables, games and
devices renewable on or before January 1, 2007 and each year thereafter,
conspicuously displaying the license in the place or establishment where the
table, machine or device is placed or kept, and paying the following annual
license fee:



   (A)   For each billiard, pool or bagatelle table-$25 per table;



   (B)   For each electronic video game, pinball machine, other
mechanical or electronic gaming machine or device or other machine or device
for sports and games-$25 per machine; and



   (C)   For each additional or new table, game, machine or device,
obtained following the issuance of the annual license, a new license must be
obtained by payment of the respective fees, specified in divisions (A) or (B)
above, for each additional table, game or device placed in the establishment
where the same are to be operated.



(Ord. 28-2005, passed 8-24-2005)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.11  BOWLING ALLEYS; FEES.



   For each bowling alley kept for hire:



   (A)   For each day-$1;



   (B)   For each week-$3;



   (C)   For each month-$8; and



   (D)   For each year-$10.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(M))



§ 113.12  JUNK STORES OR PAWN BROKERS; FEES.



   (A)   For carrying on the business of junk stores or pawnbroker, the
license fee shall be $10 for each year.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      JUNK DEALER.  One who keeps a place of business for the purchase
or sale of junk, old metal, rags, old rope, old canvas, old paper or the like.



      PAWNBROKER.  Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property on condition of selling the property or other valuable
things or who deals in the purchasing of personal property on condition of
selling the same back again.



   (C)   Every person, company or corporation holding a license from
the city to conduct the business of a pawnbroker and conducting the business
in the city thereunder, shall make a report in writing to the Marshal on
Monday of each and every week in which report shall be set out every article
of jewelry, watches, rings, silverware, bric-a-brac and other small articles
of property, which have been pawned or sold to or for any purpose left with
the pawnbroker during the calendar week just preceding, and the report shall
give the name and place of residence of the persons so pawning, selling or
depositing any article, and give a full and detailed description of every
article together with the probable value thereof and the time of so leaving
the same. Every junk dealer in the city shall make a report as aforesaid on
Monday of each week in which he or she shall state, set out and describe all
brass or copper that may have been purchased by him or her during the
preceding calendar week, giving the name of the person from whom the same was
purchased. And it is further ordained that no person, firm or corporation
shall conduct the business of junk dealer within 2 city blocks of National
Avenue or within 2 city blocks of any church, hospital or public school
building.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(N))  Penalty, see § 113.99




SPECIFIC REGULATIONS




§ 113.25  ITINERANT PHYSICIAN OR DENTIST; FEES.



   (A)   For each person practicing as an itinerant physician or
dentist, the license fee shall be:



      (1)   For each day-$5;



      (2)   For each week-$25; and



      (3)   For each month-$50.



   (B)   No person holding a license hereunder as an itinerant
physician or dentist, or as a vendor of medicine, shall, in the conduct of
his or her business, make any false representations as regards to diseases,
cures or methods of treatment used by him or her, or as to medicines sold by
him or her.



(1982 Code, § 110.13(O))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.26  ITINERANT VENDOR OF MEDICINES; FEES.



   For each itinerant vendor of medicines at retail, the license fee shall
be:



   (A)   For each day-$1;



   (B)   For each week-$5;



   (C)   For each month-$25; and



   (D)   For each year-$100.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(P))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.27  ITINERANT OR TRANSIENT DEALER.



   For each itinerant or transient dealer in any goods, wares and
merchandise or other articles or products and engaged in selling, or offering
the same for sale, not herein elsewhere classified the license fee shall be:



   (A)   For each day-$3;



   (B)   For each week-$15; and



   (C)   For each month-$50.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(Q))



§ 113.28  CONFECTIONERY OR DRINK WAGON VENDORS; FEES.



   (A)   For each person selling lunch, candy, ice cream, popcorn,
Cracker Jack and other confectionery, or lemonade, or other soft drinks and
fruits on the streets with wagon or otherwise, the fee will be $10 for each 6
months for each and every vehicle used and no license shall be issued for a
period less than 6 months.



   (B)   Any person holding a license hereunder for the purpose of
selling lunch, fruits, confectionery and like articles on the streets, shall
while so working under a license, move along from place to place and not
remain stationary.



(1982 Code, § 110.13(R))



§ 113.29  CLAIRVOYANT OR FORTUNE TELLERS; FEES.



   For each clairvoyant, fortune teller or palmist practicing the same for
hire:



   (A)   For each day-$5;



   (B)   For each week-$25;



   (C)   For each month-$75; and



   (D)   For each year-$125.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(S))



§ 113.30  GASOLINE PUMPS; FEES.



   For each gasoline pump located in the city and being used and operated
in the sale of gasoline at retail or wholesale price, the license fee shall
be $10 per year.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(T))



§ 113.31  ITINERANT OR TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER; FEES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
or to exercise the vocation of an itinerant or transient photographer in the
city without having first procured from the city a license to do so and pay
to the city for the license the sums of money hereinafter designated.



   (B)   Any person desiring to procure the license as above provided
for shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer the fee hereinafter provided, for which
the Clerk-Treasurer shall execute to the applicant his or her receipt. On
presentation of a receipt to the Clerk-Treasurer, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
issue to the applicant a license to conduct the business or vocation of an
itinerant or transient photographer, as the same is hereinafter defined,
within the city for the period of time for which the applicant shall have
paid according to the scale hereinafter set out. The license shall be signed
by the Clerk-Treasurer. The license shall be issued for the period of 1 day
or for any number of days less than 1 week, or for 1 week, or for any number
of weeks less than 1 month, or for 1 month or for any number of months less
than 1 year, according as the same may be applied and paid for and the charge
for the license shall be:



      (1)   For each day-$2;



      (2)   For each week-$10;



      (3)   For each month-$25; and



      (4)   For each year-$100.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, an ITINERANT PHOTOGRAPHER or
TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER shall be any person who goes about from place to place
in the city taking photographs or pictures of scenes, objects, buildings,
structures, animals or person or groups, assemblages or processions of
persons, for hire or pay, or for the purpose of developing the negatives so
taken and selling the developed picture or negative, or for the purpose of
receiving compensation, or a consideration for a work or picture, in any way.



   (D)   It is declared unlawful for any person so licensed as
hereinbefore provided, or for any person not so licensed, engaged as an
itinerant or transient photographer or acting as so in the city, to take any
flash light picture of any public assemblage or person or persons in any
church, theater, hall, building or other enclosure in the city, and any
person engaged as a photographer in the city is prohibited from taking any
obscene, licentious, indecent or immoral pictures or from taking any snapshot
of any person against the wishes of the person or to his or her annoyance,
except the snapshot be taken to aid in the detection and prosecution of crime.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(U))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.32  THEATERS OR OPERA HOUSES.



   (A)   Authority is granted to the Clerk-Treasurer for the issuing of
a license by the city, to the owner, lessee or person in control of any
theater, opera house, room, building or other designated place in the city
for show or exhibitions in those places, which license shall be known as a
"house license" and shall be issued for the period of 1 year only. The
license must be secured before shows or exhibitions may take place.



   (B)   The license fee for a license shall be $25.00 for any show
charging an admission of not to exceed $0.05 and $50.00 for any show charging
an admission of not to exceed $0.10 and $75.00 for any show charging an
admission of more than $0.10.



(1982 Code, § 110.11(V))  (Ord. 64-1931, passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord.
94-1933, passed 11-28-1933; Am. Ord. 5-1972, passed 5-23-1972)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, company or corporation that shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, on conviction thereof, be subject to a
civil penalty of $50, and each day’s continuance in the violation shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 28-2005, passed 8-24-2005)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



Section



   114.01   Commercial vehicle defined



   114.02   Bond, liability contract and insurance requirements



   114.03   Application procedure; sign designation



   114.04   Annual license fee



   114.05   Time and days of operation



   114.06   Legal age for operation of vehicle



   114.07   Receiving and discharging passengers



   114.08   Notification of police of lost articles



   114.09   License revocation by Council and suspension by Mayor



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE DEFINED.



   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation operating any motor vehicle
along and on any public street or highway within the city, for the purpose of
affording a means of local street or highway transportation by accepting and
discharging persons as may offer themselves for transportation either at
temporary street or highway parking places or along the course or within the
terminal on which the motor vehicle is or may be running or operating or that
may be operated for the transportation of passengers, from place to place in
or about the city from any street curb, alley or highway stand or stands, or
parking or stopping places, either on calls or otherwise, from so, is
declared to be a commercial motor vehicle for hire.



   (B)   This section does not include motor vehicles owned and
operated by hotel companies or hotel proprietors, between their hotels and
depots, for their exclusive use and benefit in conveying their guests to and
from the same.



(1982 Code, § 113.01)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 114.02  BOND, LIABILITY CONTRACT AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate any commercial
vehicle, and it shall be unlawful to do so, unless there shall have been
filed with the Clerk-Treasurer, duly approved and accepted by the Mayor
thereof, a good and sufficient indemnity surety or indemnity company created
under the laws of the state, or duly authorized to transact business
thereunder, which the bond shall describe the motor vehicle by factory
number, maker’s name, rated seating capacity and number of passengers
capable of being accommodated therein at 1 time, and number of state and city
license under which the same is operated.



   (B)   When the license or either of them are changed by the issuance
of a new one, it shall be indicted on a bond by the attachment of a rider
thereto. The bond shall provide, among other things, that the company issuing
the same shall be liable for and pay all damages including injury to person
or property not exceeding $300,000 to any 1 person, or $300,000 for any 1
accident that may be recovered in any action against the person, firm or
corporation so licensed to operate the commercial vehicle by reason of the
negligent use and operation of the same. However, when any claim has been
made or an action commenced against a person, firm or corporation operating
the commercial vehicle, described in the bond, growing out of an accident by
reason of the operation thereof and while operating hereunder, the person,
firm or corporation shall not further operate the commercial vehicle
hereunder until another bond meeting the requirements of this section shall
have been filed. Or in lieu of the furnishing and filing of the bond the
person, firm or corporation shall have filed with the Clerk-Treasurer a
liability contract of insurance issued him or her by an insurance company
organized under the laws of the state, or authorized to transact business
herein, providing among other things, for the payment of any final judgment
that may be rendered against the insured for damages to property or bodily
injury or death to others resulting from accident or collision for which the
person, firm or corporation may be liable as a common carrier while operating
the commercial vehicle described therein within the provisions hereof by
reason of and growing out of the negligent operation of the commercial
vehicle.



   (C)   The bond or insurance shall be in a sum not less than $300,000
to cover liability to property or person and $300,000 to cover liability and
damages for property or persons as a result of any 1 accident.



   (D)   The policy contract of insurance or bond shall further, among
other things, provide that in the event of a final judgment being rendered or
sustained against the insured, within the provisions of the company’s
assumed liability, payment thereof to the insured shall not be made, without
the written consent of the person recovering the same, within a period of 1
year from the date the judgment was finally rendered or sustained.
Thereafter, if not paid, the person recovering judgment may be subrogated to
all of the rights and subject to the conditions of the insured and may
directly enforce the company's liability, if it existed, and the contract
shall further provide that the stipulations and the conditions therein
contained which refer to the insured’s conduct with the company and
company’s conduct with the insured, in reference to accidents and claims
thereunder and any rules governing the conduct of the insured or company or
any branch thereof shall not be a defense in any action brought to enforce a
liability under a policy or bond by any person other than the insured. It
shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation to keep the insurance
or bond in force during the full period of time for which he or she may be
operating thereunder, and in case the policy contract of insurance or bond is
canceled the city shall be notified and the contract shall so provide by
suitable provision therein, and if any bond so filed shall become inoperative
or the policy of insurance canceled, the commercial vehicle shall not be
operated until a bond or policy of insurance meeting the requirements of this
section shall have been filed.



(Am. Ord. 9-2004, passed 5-11-2004)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  APPLICATION PROCEDURE; SIGN DESIGNATION.



   (A)   A bond or policy contract of insurance shall be accompanied by
an application on blanks furnished by the city, stating the name, age, (if an
individual) business and residence of the applicant and the length of time in
which he or she has operated motor driven vehicles, the territory within
which it is proposed to operate, the commercial vehicle or the manner or
method of operation and the proposed hours, the character of operation and
the rate of fare to be charged for carriage therein. It shall state the
license number and a description of the vehicle to be used by factory number
and maker’s name, rated seating capacity and number of persons capable of
being carried therein at 1 time.



   (B)   If the application and bond or policy contract of insurance
compares with the provisions hereinbefore set forth and the applicant has
paid the hereinafter license fee, the Clerk-Treasurer shall thereupon issue
to the applicant a license permitting the operating of the commercial vehicle
therein described under the provisions of this chapter, which license shall
be numbered severally, contain the number of the motor vehicle, state license
number, date of its issuance and expiration thereof. It shall be the duty of
the person, firm or corporation receiving the license, to plainly mark, in a
permanent manner, each commercial vehicle covered thereby by painting or
securely fastening on the sides thereof in letters not less than 2 inches in
height and the letters of which shall be not less than 1/4-inch in width, the
words "Bonded Carrier" or "Insured Carrier" (as the case may be) following by
the city license number, so that all commercial vehicles claimed to be
operated under the provisions of this division may be readily identified.



(1982 Code, § 113.03)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.04  ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.



   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a license hereunder
shall pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer for the benefit of the city for each
commercial vehicle to be so driven or operated an annual license fee of $10.



(1982 Code, § 113.04)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.05  TIME AND DAYS OF OPERATION.



   All vehicles operating under this chapter shall be operated at least 5
days out of each and every week, and shall be operated at least 8 hours on
each of the days so required to be operated.



(1982 Code, § 113.05)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.06  LEGAL AGE FOR OPERATION OF VEHICLE.



   No license shall be issued to any person under the age of 18 years, and
it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to drive or
operate any commercial vehicle or for any licensee to cause or permit any
person, underage, to drive or operate a commercial vehicle so licensed for
the purpose herein provided.



(1982 Code, § 113.06)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.07  RECEIVING AND DISCHARGING PASSENGERS.



   Every person, firm or corporation operating commercial vehicles
hereunder, shall receive and discharge passengers as close to the right-hand
curb of streets as possible, and shall at all times keep vehicle so used in a
clean and sanitary condition, and no person shall be permitted to sit or
stand on the running board or fenders, or sit in the doors or door while same
is in motion. The left rear door, while a commercial vehicle is being
operated hereunder, shall be locked or otherwise fastened, so that it cannot
be opened. The rear or tonneau part of every commercial vehicle, while in
operation, shall be lighted during the night time when a winter top is used
thereon and the sides thereof closed.



(1982 Code, § 113.07)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.08  NOTIFICATION OF POLICE OF LOST ARTICLES.



   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation operating
under the provisions hereof to promptly notify the Police Department of all
articles found in any commercial vehicles operated by them, a description
thereof, where they are kept and where they may be found so as to be returned
to the owner.



(1982 Code, § 113.08)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 114.09  LICENSE REVOCATION BY COUNCIL AND SUSPENSION BY MAYOR.



   (A)   The Common Council may revoke any license issued hereunder on
notice to the licensee, and after a due hearing for the violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   When any person has been convicted for 3 successive times
within a period of 6 months of violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other ordinance of the city regulating street travel of motor
vehicles, the license of the person may be, by the Mayor, suspended for a
period not to exceed 90 days nor less that 30 days during which time the
commercial vehicles shall not be operated hereunder.



   (C)   The licensee may appeal from suspension to the Common Council
and, on hearing, the Common Council in its discretion may either affirm or
overrule the suspension of the Mayor; if overruled, the commercial vehicle
may continue operating under the license.



(1982 Code, § 113.10)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation on conviction for the violation of or
failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be fined in any
sum not less than $5 and not more than $25 for each and every offense
hereunder.



(1982 Code, § 113.99)  (Ord. 63-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



CHAPTER 115:  GASOLINE STATION REGULATIONS



Section



   115.01   Written consent for gasoline stations



   115.02   Description and location; removal or relocation



   115.03   Specification of exact location



   115.04   Restrictions on city square



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  WRITTEN CONSENT FOR GASOLINE STATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to
hereafter install any gasoline filling station in any street, alley or
sidewalk or other public place, or in any place where an installation is made
for the purpose of selling gasoline or oil or both at retail or wholesale
prices within the city without having first obtained the written consent of
the Street and Alley Committee or Common Council in writing signed by the
Chairperson of the Committee.



(1982 Code, § 114.01)  (Ord. 17-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
115.99



§ 115.02  DESCRIPTION AND LOCATION; REMOVAL OR RELOCATION.



   (A)   Before locating any gasoline station filling station, the
person, company or corporation desiring to do so shall give notice in writing
to the Committee or to the Common Council of his or her desire to locate a
gasoline filling station and shall set out in a notice a description of the
place on which it is desired to locate the same.



   (B)   The Street and Alley Committee or the city engineer, together
with the person or the representative of the company or corporation, shall go
over the street, alley or public place named in the notice and the committee,
city engineer shall designate the exact place where the filling station shall
be erected and maintained, subject however, to future removal or relocation
on reasonable notice from the city in the event of reasonable requirements of
street or other public improvements or other reasonable necessity for the
removal or relocation of the filling station; and the city shall be the sole
judge of the reasonable necessity for the removal or relocation of any
filling station at any subsequent time.



(1982 Code, § 114.02)  (Ord. 17-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
115.99



§ 115.03  SPECIFICATION OF EXACT LOCATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person, company or corporation to
install any filling station at a point other than that designated by the
committee or city engineer, and the written permit provided for in § 115.02
above shall specify the exact location of the filling station so designated
by the Committee or city engineer and it is provided, that in case of the
installation of the same at a point other than the place designated as
aforesaid or in case there should exist a reasonable necessity for the
removal or relocation of any filling station for reasons as set out in §
115.02 hereof.



   (B)   If the person, company or corporation so installing any
filling station shall fail or refuse after reasonable notice, to remove or
relocate the filling station, then in any event, the city, through its
officers and officials and employees, shall have the right to remove or
relocate any filling station and the costs of the removal or relocation may
be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction by the city from the
person, company or corporation owning the station and failing to obey the
city’s notice to relocate or remove the same.



(1982 Code, § 114.03)  (Ord. 17-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
115.99



§ 115.04  RESTRICTIONS ON CITY SQUARE.



   It is provided that there shall be only 1 gasoline filling station
located and installed in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place on
either side of any city square.



(1982 Code, § 114.04)  (Ord. 17-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than $1 or
more than $100 and each day’s continuance in the violation shall constitute
a separate offense.



(1982 Code, § 114.99)  (Ord. 17-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   CURFEW FOR MINORS



CHAPTER 130:  CURFEW FOR MINORS



Section



   130.01   Purpose of curfew



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Violation of restricted curfew hours



   130.04   Defense



   130.05   Enforcement



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  PURPOSE OF CURFEW.



   (A)   After review of relevant information provided by the Brazil
Police Department, the Common Council has deemed it necessary to enact
restricted curfew hours for minors in the City of Brazil due to increased
complaints of thefts, criminal mischief and other juvenile involvement by
children under 18 years of age.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect minors from
victimization and exposure to criminal activity during late night hours, to
promote the role of parents in the raising and control of their children, to
promote the health, safety and welfare of persons and property in the City of
Brazil and promote the peace, order and safety of cemeteries and other
facilities used to memorialize the dead.



(Ord. 5-2000, passed 9-26-2000)



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECT ROUTE.  The shortest reasonable path of travel or a commonly
used route to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the
way.



   EMERGENCY.  Any unforseen circumstances or combination of
circumstances, or state or condition resulting therefrom that requires or
calls for immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile
accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent or respond to
any serious bodily injury or death or serious property damage.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business within the
corporate limits of the City of Brazil operated for profit to which the
public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
entertainment (such as movie theater, pool or billiard establishment, concert
hall, video machine establishment and the like).



   MINOR.  Any person under 18 years of age.



   OFFICER.  A police officer or other law enforcement officer charged
with the duty of enforcing and having jurisdiction to enforce the laws of the
State of Indiana and the ordinances of the City of Brazil.



   OWNER/OPERATOR.  Any person or entity operating, managing or
conducting business in any establishment, and the employees, agents, officers
or representatives thereof (including a sole proprietorship, partnership,
association or corporation).



   PARENT.  A person who is a natural or biological mother or father,
adoptive parent, foster parent or stepparent of another person who has
custody or control of a minor, or other person to whom legal custody of a
minor has been given by court order.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  A place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways,
roads, alleys or parking lots, transportation facilities, theaters,
restaurants, shops, bowling alleys, schools and school grounds, museums,
playgrounds, places of business and amusement, swimming pools, cemetery,
community centers, YMCA, hospitals, office buildings, governmental buildings
and property and any other areas that are open to or accessible to the public.



   RESTRICTED CURFEW HOURS. 



      (1)   For a minor 15, 16 or 17 years of age: after 11:00 p.m.
on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and before 5:00 a.m.
on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, and between 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday;



      (2)   For a minor less than 15 years of age: after 11:00 p.m.
or before 5:00 a.m. on any day; and



      (3)   For a minor in a cemetery or other facility used to
memorialize the dead within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil: after
9:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. on any day.



(Ord. 5-2000, passed 9-26-2000)



§ 130.03  VIOLATION OF RESTRICTED CURFEW HOURS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a
minor to be or remain in or upon any public place or in or upon the premises
of any establishment within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil during
the restricted curfew hours, unless:



      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;



      (2)   The minor is involved in an emergency;



      (3)   The minor is engaged in a lawful employment activity, or
is going to or returning home from the activity by using a direct route
without detour or stop;



      (4)   The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place
where the minor resides with a parent or guardian;



      (5)   The minor is attending or traveling to or from by direct
route, a legal school, religious or recreational activity that is supervised
by adults sponsored by a school, governmental entity, civic organization or
other similar entity;



      (6)   The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent
or guardian and the minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by
the parent or guardian containing the following information: name, signature,
address and telephone number of the parent or guardian authorizing the
errand, the name of the minor, the minor’s destination and the date and
time that the minor is authorized to be engaged in the errand;



      (7)   The minor is exercising his or her First Amendment
rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech and right of assembly; however, the mere
presence or “hanging out” of minors in public places, or the aimless
cruising of city streets are not considered to be within the protection of
the First Amendment; or



      (8)   The minor is married and emancipated.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a
parent or guardian of a minor who knowingly permits, or by insufficient
control allows, the minor to be or remain in any public place or
establishment within the corporate limits of the City of Brazil during the
restricted curfews hours.



      (1)   For purposes of this division (division (B)) the term
KNOWINGLY includes knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected to
have concerning the whereabouts of the minor in that parent’s custody.



      (2)   It is the intent of this division to hold a neglectful
or careless parent to a reasonable community standard of parental
responsibility, and it shall be no defense that a parent was indifferent to
the activities or conduct or whereabouts of his or her minor child.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for an
owner/operator of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be or remain
upon the premises of an establishment during the restricted curfew hours. For
purposes of this division, the term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge that an
owner/operator should reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons
of the establishment, and the standard for KNOWINGLY shall be whether a
reasonable person in the owner/operator’s position should have known that
the patron was a minor in violation of the terms of this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any
person 18 years of age or older to aid and abet a minor in violating the
terms of this chapter, or for a parent or guardian to refuse to take custody
during the restricted curfew hours of a minor for whom the parent or guardian
is responsible.



(Ord. 5-2000, passed 9-26-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  DEFENSE.



   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter
when the owner/operator of an establishment, or any employee, officer, agent
or representative thereof, or the person in charge of or overseeing a public
place, promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on
the premises of the establishment during the restricted curfew hours and
refused to leave.



(Ord. 5-2000, passed 9-26-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Before taking any official enforcement action pursuant to this
chapter, the officer shall undertake an immediate investigation to determine
whether or not a violation of this chapter has occurred, including asking the
minor’s name, address, age, name of parent(s) or guardian, the reason for
being in a public place or establishment during the restricted curfew hours
and requesting any writing from the minor’s parents or guardian as provided
for in this chapter.



   (B)   If the officer determines that a violation has occurred, the
officer shall issue an ordinance violation citation to the minor, to the
parent or guardian of the minor who likewise is in violation, to the
owner/operator of an establishment who is in violation or any other person
who is in violation of this chapter, charging the violator(s) with a
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 5-2000, passed 9-26-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of § 130.01 shall be fined not
less than $1 nor more than $100.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 130.03 shall be fined not
less than $1 nor more than $10.



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of § 130.04 shall be fined not
less than $1 nor more than $25.



   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of § 130.05 shall be fined not
less than $5 nor more than $100.



   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of § 130.06 shall be fined not
more than $10.



   (F)   For violations of this chapter, a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



   (G)   Any minor 15 to 17 years of age who violates § 130.03(A)
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.



   (H)   Any minor under the age of 15 years who violates § 130.03(A)
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.



   (I)   Any minor who violates § 130.03(A) in a cemetery or other
facility used to memorialize the dead shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100.



   (J)   Any parent or guardian of a minor who violates § 130.03(B)
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.



   (K)   Any person or entity who violates §§ 130.03(C) or (D) shall
be subject to a civil penalty of $50.



   (L)   For each violation of § 130.03 by any minor, parent or
guardian of a minor, owner/operator of an establishment, or any other person
within 90 days of a previous violation, the violator shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $100.



   (M)   Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall pay the
appropriate penalty at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days
from the date of the citation. If the penalty is not paid within 30 days, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the citation to the City Attorney for filing and
prosecution of the citation in a court of competent jurisdiction over
ordinance violations located in the county.



(Ord. 5-2000, passed 9-26-2000)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING CODE



      151.   FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      152.   PLANTING ALONG PUBLIC WAYS



      153.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      154.   HOUSING CODE; HOUSE NUMBERING PLAN



      155.   EXCAVATION REGULATIONS



      156.   ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODE



Section




Generally




   150.01   Title and purpose of subchapter



   150.02   Definitions



   150.03   Authority



   150.04   Scope



   150.05   Severability



   150.06   Effect of adoption on prior ordinance



   150.07   Building permit required



   150.08   Application for building permit



   150.09   Review of application



   150.10   Issuance of building permit



   150.11   Certificate of occupancy



   150.12   Term of permit



   150.13   General authority to make inspections and investigations



   150.14   Inspections by Fire Department



   150.15   Withhold issuance of permits



   150.16   Permit revocation



   150.17   Stop-work order



   150.18   Civil action



   150.19   Right to appeal



   150.20   Adoption of regulations by reference



   150.21   Lifting devices located within a private residence



   150.22   Fees



   150.23   Inspection fees




Enforcement of Building Standards




   150.30   Purpose



   150.31   Definitions



   150.32   Orders; consents; notice; expiration of orders



   150.33   Recission and modification of orders; notice



   150.34   Hearing; procedure



   150.35   Appeals



   150.36   Emergency action; recovery of costs



   150.37   Action to enforce orders



   150.38   Performance of work required by orders; procedure



   150.39   Liability for costs



   150.40   Notice of unpaid costs; filing; hearing; judgement lien



   150.41   Unsafe Building Fund



   150.42   Inspection warrants



   150.43   Civil remedies



   150.44   Manner of serving notice



   150.45   Recording of orders, statements and records



   150.46   Transfers of property by persons not complying with orders



   150.47   State statute incorporated by reference



   150.99   Penalty




GENERALLY




§ 150.01  TITLE AND PURPOSE OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental and amendatory
hereto shall be known as the “Building Code of the City of Brazil,
Indiana,” may be cited as so and shall be referred to herein as “Building
Code.”



   (B)   The purpose of this Building Code is to protect the life,
public safety, health, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and
2-mile jurisdictional area, and shall be construed in such a manner to
effectuate this purpose.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The duly appointed independent contractor charged
with the duties to inspect and enforce all parts of this Building Code.



   PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR.  Includes individuals employed by the Planning
and Building Department that are authorized to represent the Building
Commissioner.



   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-4 has the following
definitions:



      (1)   Class 1 Structure means any part of the following:



         (a)   Building or structure that is intended to be or is
occupied or otherwise used in any part by any of the following:



            1.   The public;



            2.   Three or more tenants; or



            3.   One or more persons who act as the employees
of another.



         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons
with physical disabilities to a building or structure described in subsection
(a) above;



         (c)   Any class of buildings or structures that the
Commission determines by rules to affect a building or structure described in
subsection (a) above, except building or structures described in subsections
(3) through (6) below;



      (2)   Subsection (1)(a) Includes a structure that contains 3
or more condominium units (as defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or other units that:



         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the
owner of the unit; and



         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an
unimproved space.



      (3)   Subsection (1)(a) does not include a building or
structure that:



         (a)   Is intended to be or used only for an agricultural
purpose on the land where it is located; and



         (b)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used
for retail sales of farm produce for 8 or less consecutive months in a
calendar year.



      (4)   Subsection (1)(a) above does not include a Class 2
structure.



      (5)   Subsection (1)(a) above does not include a vehicular
bridge.



      (6)   Subsection (1)(a) above does not include a structure
that is intended to be or is occupied solely to provide periodic maintenance
or repair of:



         (a)   The structure; or



         (b)   Mechanical or electrical equipment located within
and affixed to the structure.



      (7)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming
pool.



   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5, has the following
definition:



      (1)   Any part of the following:



         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to
contain or contains only 1 dwelling unit or 2 dwelling units unless any part
of the building or structure is regularly used as a Class 1 structure;



         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in
subsection (a), such as a garage, barn or family swimming pool, unless any
part of the outbuilding is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.



      (2)   Subsection (1) does not include a vehicular bridge.



      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming
pool.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-7, any of the following:



      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building
system or mobile structure for use at another site;



      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure at the site where it will be used;



      (3)   Installation of any of the permanent heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency
detection, emergency communication or fire or explosion suppression systems
for a Class 1 or Class 2 structure at the site where it will be used;



      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate or add
to any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure; and/or



      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or
Class 2 structure, except a mobile structure.



   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, any part
of a building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial part
fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly
at the building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or
another building or structure. However, the term does not include a mobile
structure or a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16 has the meaning set
forth in 42 U.S.C. § 5402 as it existed on January 1, 2003, means a
structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which in traveling mode, is 8
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained
therein; except that the term shall include any structure which meets all the
requirements of this division except the size requirements and with respect
to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards
established under this 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. and except that the term
shall not include any self-propelled recreational vehicle.



   MOBILE STRUCTURE. 



      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17, any part of a fabricated
unit that is designed to be:



         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and



         (b)   Connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or
use as a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another structure.



      (2)   The term includes the following:



         (a)   Two or more components that can be retracted for
towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; and



         (b)   Two or more units that are separately towable but
designed to be joined into 1 integral unit.



   PERSON.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-18, means an individual,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, unincorporated
association or governmental entity.



   STRUCTURE.  Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically
stated otherwise.



   VEHICULAR BRIDGE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-26, means any bridge that
is neither:



      (1)   A pedestrian walkway;



      (2)   A passageway for lights vehicles;



      (3)   Suspended between 2 or more parts of a building or
between 2 or more buildings.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.03  AUTHORITY.



   The Planning and Building Administrator is hereby authorized and
directed to administer and enforce the following:



   (A)   All of the provisions of this Building Code;



   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11; and



   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.04  SCOPE.



   (A)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this Building Code.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this Building Code shall not apply
to industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C.
22-15-4; however, the provisions of this Building Code and the rules
promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to
any construction related to an industrialized building system or mobile
structure not certified under I.C. 22-15-4.



   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this Building Code is not
applicable to regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated
pressure vessels, or regulated lifting devices.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.05  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any provision (section, clause, phrase, word or any other
portion) of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, if
and only if the remaining provisions can, without the invalid provision or
provisions be given the effect intended in adopting this chapter. To this
end, the provisions of the ordinances are severable.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.06  EFFECT OF ADOPTION ON PRIOR ORDINANCE.



   The expressed or implied repeal of amendment of any other ordinance or
part of any other ordinance does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date
of this chapter. These rights, liabilities and other proceedings are
continued and penalties shall be imposed and enforced under the repealed or
amended ordinance as if this chapter had not been adopted.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.07  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Construction is prohibited unless in conformity with a valid building
permit obtained from the Planning Administrator prior to commencement of
construction.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.08  APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a
complete application to the Planning Administrator.



   (B)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the
Planning Administrator, and shall contain the following:



      (1)   Information that the Planning Administrator determines
to be necessary to locate and contact the applicant.



      (2)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature
and location of all work to be accomplished.



      (3)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided, however, such plot
plan shall not be required in the instance where all such construction is to
occur entirely within an existing structure. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to such
streets, curbs and sidewalks.



      (4)   If required by Indiana law or any rule of the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, a copy of a design release for the
work to be done that has been issued by the Building Law Compliance Officer
pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3.



      (5)   Any additional information that the Planning
Administrator finds to be necessary to determine that the construction will
conform to all applicable building laws and will not violate any other
applicable ordinances or laws.



      (6)   The fee established by § 150.22.



   (C)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person
entitled to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The
Planning Administrator may require that such an employee or agent provide
written authority to apply for a permit.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.09  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Planning
Administrator shall:



   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding.



   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within
the flood plain area having special flood hazards to determine that the
proposed repair:



      (1)   Uses construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage; and



      (2)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the flood plain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including manufactured
homes) is protected from flood damage, is designed, modified, and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures, and uses
construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.10  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.



   The Planning Administrator shall issue a building permit to a person
after the person has submitted a complete application, including any
applicable fee, provided that the proposed construction will conform to all
applicable building laws and will not violate any other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.11  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure shall be
issued unless the building or structure was constructed in compliance with
the provisions of this Building Code. It shall be unlawful to occupy any
building or structure unless a full, partial, or temporary certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Planning Administrator.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.12  TERM OF PERMIT.



   Any and all permits issued under § 150.07 shall be valid for 1 year
from the date of issuance by the Planning Administrator.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.13  GENERAL AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by
the Building Inspector irrespective of whether a building permit has been or
is required to be obtained.



   (B)   The Building Inspector may at any reasonable time go in, upon,
around or about the premises where any structure subject to the provisions of
this Building Code or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation of the
structure. Inspection and investigation may be made before and/or after
construction on the project is completed for the purposes of determining
whether the structure meets building standards and procedures, and
ascertaining whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished
in a manner consistent with this Building Code and the rules of the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.14  INSPECTIONS BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Planning Administrator and the Fire Department shall work
cooperatively to conduct inspections and investigations to promote compliance
with the fire safety laws. (The Fire Department has independent authority to
conduct inspections and take enforcement actions under I.C. 36-8-17).



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.15  WITHHOLD ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Whenever a person which is either an applicant for a building
permit or an obtainer of a building permit owes fees (including checks for
insufficient funds, permit fees owed pursuant to § 150.21, or inspection
fees owed pursuant to § 150.23) to the Planning Administrator, the Planning
Administrator may withhold the issuance of subsequently requested permits
until a time that the debt is satisfied.



   (B)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a
structure that is not being used or constructed in conformance with
applicable provisions of an applicable zoning ordinances or other ordinances
relating to land use, the Planning Administrator is authorized to withhold
the issuance of requested permits until a time that the property is brought
into conformance with applicable ordinances.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.16  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   The Planning Administrator may revoke a building permit when any of the
following are applicable:



   (A)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact;



   (B)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack
of compliance with building standards and procedures;



   (C)   There is failure to comply with the Building Code; and/or



   (D)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is
not being used or constructed in conformance with applicable zoning
ordinances or other ordinances relating to land use.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.17  STOP-WORK ORDER.



   (A)   The Planning Administrator or Building Inspector may issue an
order requiring suspension of the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in
accordance with this section.



   (B)   The stop-work order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   State with specificity the construction to which it is
applicable and the reason for its issuance;



      (3)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place;



      (4)   If practical, be given to:



         (a)   The person doing the construction; and



         (b)   To the owner of the property or the owner's agent.



      (5)   The stop work order shall state the conditions under
which construction may be resumed.



   (C)   The Planning Administrator or Building Inspector may issue a
stop-work order if:



      (1)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner,
including, but not limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this
Building Code or any state law pertaining to safety during construction;



      (2)   Construction is occurring in violation of this Building
Code or in a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a
reasonable probability that it will substantially be difficult to correct the
violation; and/or



      (3)   Construction for which a building permit is required is
proceeding without a building permit being in force.



   (D)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the
operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this Building Code.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.18  CIVIL ACTION.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the city may initiate a civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from violating a
provision of this Building Code.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.19  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this Building
Code shall have the right to petition for review of any of the Planning and
Building Administrator or Building Inspector. A person may file a petition
using either, or both, of the following procedures.



      (1)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission.



         (a)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this
Building Code may appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Commission, in
accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7.



         (b)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order
issued by the city that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, 22-13,
22-14, 22-15, a fire safety or a building rule.



         (c)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
must review orders that concerns a Class 2 structure if the person aggrieved
by the order petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after
the issuance of the order.



         (d)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
may review all other orders issued under this Building Code.



         (e)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period
under any statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review
of the order.



      (2)   Appeal to the Brazil City Board of Public Works and
Safety (hereinafter referred to as "Administrative Body") or court.



   (B)   If, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the city has established by
ordinance to hear appeals of orders issued under ordinances, then a person
aggrieved by an order may petition for review with this administrative body
in accordance with this subchapter. If no administrative body exists, then
the person may petition a court for judicial review of the order.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.20  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following
Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby
incorporated by reference in this code and shall include any later amendments
to those rules.



      (1)   Article 13 – Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;



         (b)   Indiana Building Code;



      (2)   Article 14 – Indiana Residential Code;



      (3)   Article 16 – Indiana Plumbing Code;



      (4)   Article 17 – Indiana Electrical Code;



      (5)   Article 18 – Indiana Mechanical Code;



      (6)   Article 19 – Indiana Energy Conservation Code;



      (7)   Article 20 – Indiana Swimming Pool Code;



      (8)   Article 22 – Indiana Fire Code;



      (9)   Article 24 – Migrant Day Care Nursery Fire Safety
Code; and



      (10)   Article 25 – Indiana Fuel Gas Code.



   (B)   Two copies of the above building rules incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the Clerk for the legislative body for
public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



   (C)   The Planning and Building Administrator and the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission may grant a variance to the fire
safety laws and building laws adopted in this Building Code. Pursuant to I.C.
22-13-2-7 (b), a variance granted by the Planning and Building Administrator
is not effective until it has been approved by Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.21  LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as
elevators and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not
regulated lifting devices.



   (B)   Therefore, the following standards applicable to lifting
devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference:



      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME
A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New
York, 10016;



      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators,
ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by
the Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York,
10016;



      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts,
ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform
and Stairway Chair lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016;



      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts,
ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform
and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016; and



      (5)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.



   (C)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated
by reference are on file in the office of the Clerk for the legislative body
for public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



§ 150.22  FEES.



   (A)   The fees for permits required by § 150.07 of this chapter
shall be paid to the Planning and Building Administrator who shall forthwith
pay the same over to the Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Brazil, Indiana.



   (B)   The following fees shall be paid for the following designated
categories:



      (1)   For each application for an improvement location permit:
a fee of $10;



      (2)   For each application for a certificate of occupancy: a
fee of $5;



      (3)   For each application for building permit for all
residences, garages and other buildings and structures and room additions:



 


Cost

 

Fee





$500 to $5,000
 

$15



$5,001 to $10,000
 

$20



$10,001 to $15,000
 

$25



$15,001 to $20,000
 

$30



$20,001 to $25,000
 

$36



$25,001 to $30,000
 

$42



$30,001 to $35,000
 

$50



$35,001 to $40,000
 

$60



$40,001 to $50,000
 

$75



>$50,000
 

$1.50 per $1,000 of cost





 



      (4)   Manufactured home permit: a fee of $75.



(Ord. 11-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 10-2006, passed 3-28-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.23  INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   Permits required by § 150.07 of this chapter shall be issued
only upon prior payment of fees provided in § 150.22 and inspection fees of
$25 per inspection according to the following schedule:



 


Type of Construction

 

Minimum Number of Required Inspections





One and 2-family dwellings (duplexes are 8 per unit)
 

8



Apartments, hotels and motels
 

10 (minimum)



Business, commercial, public
 

10 (minimum)



Educational, institutional, church
 

10 (minimum)



Industrial, warehouse, bulk storage
 

8



Accessory building (residential)
 

3



Garages
 

4



Additions (including plumbing and heating)
 

7



Remodel
 

1 (minimum)



Windows
 

1



Siding
 

1



Electrical
 

1



Post frame building
 

3



Deck
 

1



Porch
 

2



Manufactured homes (less than 23 feet in width)
 

2



Modular homes
 

4





 



   (B)   If additional inspections are required for any of the above
types of construction, the fee thereof shall be $25 per inspection. The
authorized City Building Inspector shall determine if any additional
inspections are necessary and required in order that approved building codes
have been fully satisfied. The above inspection fees shall be paid and
collected by the Planning and Building Administrator at the time the
application for a permit is made, and they are applicable to all new
construction within the corporate limits of the city and the area of land
extending 2 miles from the corporate limits. Fees for additional inspections
shall be paid to the Administrator prior to a final issuance of the
certificate of occupancy. Fees shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
City of Brazil, Indiana.



(Ord. 11-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 10-2006, passed 3-28-2006) 
Penalty, see § 150.99




ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING STANDARDS




§ 150.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is for the protection of the health,
welfare and safety of the public and citizens of Brazil, Indiana by adopting
applicable provisions of the state enforcement of Buildings Standards law as
provided in I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, which provides for the enactment
of an ordinance specifying procedures to remedy the existence of unsafe
buildings and structures within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Brazil, and provide penalties for noncompliance and violations hereof.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.  The Building Administrator of the City of
Brazil.



   HEARING AUTHORITY.  The Board of Public Works and Safety of the City
of Brazil.



   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST.  Any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this subchapter,
including a fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a
present possessory interest or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.



   UNSAFE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.  Any building or structure, or any part
thereof, that is in an impaired structural condition that makes it unsafe to
a person or property; a fire hazard; a hazard to the public health; a public
nuisance; or dangerous to a person or property because of a violation of a
statute or ordinance concerning building condition or maintenance; or vacant
and not maintained in a manner that would allow human habitation, occupancy
or use under the requirements of a statute or an ordinance.



   UNSAFE PREMISES.  An unsafe building and the tract of real property on
which the unsafe building is located.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.32  ORDERS; CONSENTS; NOTICE; EXPIRATION OF ORDERS.



   (A)   The Building Administrator as the enforcement authority may
issue an order requiring action relative to any unsafe premises located in
the City of Brazil, including:



      (1)   Vacating of an unsafe building;



      (2)   Sealing an unsafe building against intrusion by
unauthorized persons by either locking or securing or securing all possible
means of entrance, "Boarding up" of all means of entrance, installing a chain
and conspicuous sign prohibiting entrance onto this unsafe premises at all
possible means of entrance or by appropriate law enforcement or fire
suppression officials prohibiting access thereto;



      (3)   Extermination of vermin in and about the unsafe premises;



      (4)   Removal of trash, debris or fire hazardous material in
and about the unsafe premises;



      (5)   Repair of an unsafe building to bring it into compliance
with standards for building condition or maintenance as prescribed by law;



      (6)   Removal of part of an unsafe building;



      (7)   Removal of an unsafe building; and/or



      (8)   Requiring, for an unsafe building that will be sealed
for a period of more than 90 days:



         (a)   Sealing against intrusion by unauthorized persons
and the effects of weather;



         (b)   Exterior improvements to make the building
compatible in appearance with other buildings in the area; and



         (c)   Continuing maintenance and upkeep of the building
and premises; in accordance with standards established by ordinance.



   (B)   This order must contain the name of the person to whom the
order is issued; the legal description or address of the unsafe premises that
are the subject of the order; the action that the order requires; the period
of time in which the action is required to be accomplished, measured from the
time when the notice of the order is given; if a hearing is required, a
statement indicating the exact time and place of the hearing, and stating
that person to whom the order was issued is entitled to appear at the hearing
with or without legal counsel, present evidence, cross-examine opposing
witnesses and present arguments; if a hearing is not required, a statement
that an order to seal an unsafe building against intrusion by unauthorized
persons pursuant to division (A)(2) above becomes final 10 days after notice
is given, unless a hearing is requested in writing by a person holding a fee
interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises, and the request is
delivered to the Building Administrator before the end of the 10-day period;
a statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the Building
Administrator if the order is not complied with; a statement indicating the
obligation created by § 150.44 relating to notification of subsequent
substantial property interest holders and the Building Administrator; the
name, address and telephone number of the Building Administrator as the
enforcement authority.



   (C)   The order must allow sufficient time, of at least 10 days from
the time when notice of the order is given, to accomplish the required
action. If the order allows more than 30 days to accomplish the action, the
order may require that a substantial beginning be made in accomplishing the
action within 30 days.



   (D)   Notice of the order must be given pursuant to the provisions
of § 150.30 of this subchapter.



   (E)   The order expires 2 years from the day the notice of the order
is given, unless 1 or more of the following events occurs within that 2-year
period:



      (1)   A complaint requesting judicial review is filed seeking
emergency action pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-9;



      (2)   A contract for action required by the order is let at
public bid under I.C. 36-7-9-11; or



      (3)   A civil action is filed under I.C. 36-7-9-17.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.33  RECISSION AND MODIFICATION OF ORDERS; NOTICE.



   (A)   The Building Administrator may issue an order that modifies or
rescinds the order previously issued pertaining to an unsafe building or
unsafe premises.



   (B)   All persons who have been issued an order pertaining to an
unsafe building or an unsafe premises must be notified of its recission under
§ 150.44 of this order by means of a written statement including:



      (1)   The name of the person to whom the statement of
recission is issued;



      (2)   The legal description or address of the unsafe premises
that are the subject of the order being rescinded;



      (3)   The substance of the order being rescinded;



      (4)   A statement that the order is being rescinded; and



      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the Building
Administrator as the enforcement authority.



   (C)   If service of the order being modified or rescinded was by
publication, it is sufficient to serve the statement of modification or
recission by publication, unless the Building Administrator has received
information in writing that enables him or her to make service under §
150.38 by a method other than publication. If service of a statement of
recission is by publication, the publication must include the items listed in
divisions (B)(1) through (B)(5) above.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.34  HEARING; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A hearing must be held relative to each order issued by the
Building Administrator except for an order issued for sealing an unsafe
building against intrusion by unauthorized persons under § 150.32(A)(2). An
order issued under § 150.32(A)(2) becomes final 10 days after notice is
given, unless a hearing is requested before the 10-day period ends by a
person holding a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises.
The hearing shall be conducted by the Board of Public Works and Safety as the
hearing authority.



   (B)   The hearing shall be held on a business day no earlier than 10
days after notice of the order is given. The Board of Public Works and Safety
may, however, take action at the hearing, or before the hearing if a written
request is received by the Board not later than 5 days after notice is given,
to continue the hearing to a business day not later than 14 days after the
hearing date shown on the order. Unless the hearing authority takes action to
have the continued hearing held on a definite, specified date, notice of the
continued hearing must be given to the person to whom the order was issued at
least 5 days before the continued hearing date, in the manner prescribed by
§ 150.44. If the order being considered at the continued hearing was served
by publication, it is sufficient to give notice of the continued hearing by
publication unless the Building Administrator has received information in
writing that enables him or her to make service under § 150.44 by a method
other than publication.



   (C)   The person to whom the order was issued, any person having a
substantial property interest in the unsafe premises that are the subject of
the order or any other person with an interest in the proceedings may appear
in person or by counsel at the hearing. Each person appearing at the hearing
is entitled to present evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses and present
arguments.



   (D)   At the conclusion of any hearing at which a continuance is not
granted, the Board of Public Works and Safety as hearing authority may make
findings and take action to:



      (1)   Affirm the order;



      (2)   Rescind the order; and/or



      (3)   Modify the order, but unless the person to whom the
order was issued, or counsel for that person, is present at the hearing, the
Board as hearing authority may modify the order in only a manner that makes
its terms less stringent.



   (E)   If, at the hearing, a person to whom an order has been issued
requests an additional period to accomplish action requested by the order,
and shows good cause for this request to be granted, the hearing authority
may grant the request. However, as a condition for allowing the additional
period, the hearing authority may require that the person post a performance
bond to be forfeited if the action required by the order is not completed
within the additional period.



   (F)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall, at a public
hearing, after having given notice of the time and place of the hearing by
publication in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1, adopt a schedule setting forth the
maximum amount of performance bonds applicable to various types of ordered
action. The Board shall use this schedule to fix the amount of performance
bond required under division (E) above.



   (G)   The record of the findings made and action taken by the
presiding officer at the hearing shall be available to the public upon
request. However, neither the Building Administrator nor the Board of Public
Works and Safety is required to give any person notice of the findings and
action.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.35  APPEALS.



   Any action taken under § 150.34(D) is subject to review by the Circuit
or Superior Court of Clay County pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-8. A person
requesting judicial review under this section must file a verified complaint
including the findings of fact and the action taken by the Board of Public
Works and Safety as hearing authority. The complaint must be filed within 10
days after the date when the action was taken. An appeal under this section
is action de novo. The Court may affirm, modify or reverse the action taken
by the Board.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.36  EMERGENCY ACTION; RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (A)   If the Building Administrator finds it necessary to take
emergency action concerning an unsafe premises in order to protect life,
safety or property, it may take that action without issuing an order or
giving notice. However, this emergency action must be limited to removing any
immediate danger.



   (B)   The Building Administrator may recover the costs incurred by
him or her in taking emergency action, by filing a civil action in the
Circuit Court or Superior Court of Clay County against the persons who held a
fee interest or a life estate interest in the unsafe premises at the time the
Building Administrator found it necessary to take emergency action. The
Building Administrator is not liable for the costs of this civil action.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.37  ACTION TO ENFORCE ORDERS.



   (A)   The Building Administrator may cause the action required by an
order to seal an unsafe building under § 150.32(A)(2) to be performed by a
contractor if:



      (1)   The order has been served, in the manner prescribed by
§ 150.44, on each person having a fee interest or life estate interest in
the unsafe premises that are the subject of the order;



      (2)   The order has not been complied with;



      (3)   A hearing was not requested under § 150.32(B)(6), or,
if a hearing was requested, the order was affirmed at the hearing; or



      (4)   The order is not being reviewed under the appeal
provisions of this subchapter as provided for in § 150.35.



   (B)   If action is being taken under this section on the basis of an
order that was served by publication, it is sufficient to serve the statement
that the Building Administrator intends to perform the work by publication,
unless the Building Administrator has received information in writing that
enables him or her to make service under § 150.38 by a method other than
publication.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.38  PERFORMANCE OF WORK REQUIRED BY ORDERS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The work required by an order of the Building Administration
may be performed in the following manner.



      (1)   If the work is being performed under an order other than
an order under § 150.32(A)(2), and if the cost of this work is estimated to
be less than $10,000, the city, acting through its Building Administrator as
enforcement authority or other agents, may perform the work by means of the
city's own workers and with equipment either owned or leased by the city.
Notice that this work is to be performed must be given to all persons with a
substantial property interest, in the manner prescribed in division (C)
below, at least 10 days before the date of performance of the work by the
Building Administrator. This notice must include a statement that an amount
representing a reasonable estimate of the cost incurred by the Building
Administrator in processing the matter and performing the work may, if not
paid, be recorded after a hearing as a lien against all persons having a fee
interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises.



      (2)   If the work is being performed under an order other than
an order under § 150.32(A)(2), and if the estimated costs of this work is
$10,000 or more, this work must be let at public bid to a contractor licensed
and qualified under law. This obligation to pay costs imposed by § 150.39 is
based on the condition of the unsafe premises at the time the public bid was
accepted. Changes occurring in the condition of the unsafe premises after the
public bid was accepted do not eliminate or diminish this obligation.



      (3)   If the work is being performed under an order to seal an
unsafe building under § 150.32(A)(2), the work may be performed by a
contractor who has been awarded a base bid contract to seal unsafe buildings
for the Building Administrator, or by the city using its own workers and
equipment owned or leased by it. The unsafe building may be sealed without
further notice to the persons holding a fee interest or life estate interest,
and these persons are liable for the cost incurred by the Building
Administrator in processing the matter and performing the work, as provided
by § 150.39.



   (B)   Bids may be solicited and accepted for work on more than 1
property if the bid reflects an allocation of the bid amount among the
various unsafe premises in proportion to the work to be accomplished. The
part of the bid amount attributable to each of the unsafe premises
constitutes the basis for calculating the part of the costs described by §
150.39(A)(1).



   (C)   All persons who have a substantial property interest in the
unsafe premises and are subject to an order other than an order under §
150.32(A)(2) must be notified about the public bid in the manner prescribed
by § 150.44, by means of a written statement including:



      (1)   The name of the person to whom the order was issued;



      (2)   A legal description or address of the unsafe premises
that are the subject of the order;



      (3)   A statement that the contract is to be let at public bid
to a licensed contractor to accomplish work to comply with the order;



      (4)   A description of work to be accomplished;



      (5)   A statement that both the bid price of the licensed
contractor who accomplishes the work and amount representing a reasonable
estimate of the costs incurred by the Building Administrator in processing
the matter of the unsafe premises may, if not paid, be recorded after a
hearing as a lien against all persons having a fee interest or life estate
interest in the unsafe premises;



      (6)   The time of the bid opening;



      (7)   The place of the bid opening; and



      (8)   The name, address and telephone number of the Building
Administrator.



   (D)   If the notice of the statement that public bids are to be let
is served by publication, the publication must include the information
required by division (C) above, except that it need only include a general
description of the work to be accomplished. The publication must also state
that a copy of the statement of public bid may be obtained from the Building
Administrator.



   (E)   Notice of the statement that public bids are to be let must be
given, at least 10 days before the date of the public bid, to all persons who
have a substantial property interest in the property and are subject to an
order other than an order under § 150.32(A)(2).



   (F)   If action is being taken under this section on the basis of an
order that was served by publication, it is sufficient to serve the statement
that public bids are to be let by publication, unless the enforcement
authority has received information in writing that enables it to make service
under § 150.44 by a method other than publication.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.39  LIABILITY FOR COSTS.



   (A)   When action required by an order is performed by the Building
Administrator or by a contractor acting under § 150.38 above, each person
who held a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises from
the time when the order requiring the work performed was recorded to the time
that the work was completed is jointly and severally responsible for
following costs:



      (1)   The actual cost of the work performed by the Building
Administrator for the bid price of the work accomplished by the contractor;
and



      (2)   An amount that represents a reasonable forecast of the
average processing expense that will be incurred by the enforcement authority
in taking the technical, administrative and legal actions concerning typical
unsafe premises that are necessary under this subchapter so that the action
required by an order may be performed by a contractor under § 150.38 above.
In calculating the amount of the average processing expense, the following
costs may be considered:



         (a)   The cost of obtaining reliable information about
the identity and location of persons who own a substantial property interest
in the unsafe premises;



         (b)   The cost of notice of orders, notice of statements
of recission, notice of continued hearing, notice of statements that public
bids are to be let or that the enforcement authority intends to accomplish
the work and notice that a hearing may be held on the amounts indicated in
the record, in accordance with § 150.44;



         (c)   Salaries for employees; and



         (d)   The cost of supplies, equipment and office space.



   (B)   The Building Administrator shall determine the amount of the
average processing expense at the public hearing, after notice has been given
in the same manner as is required for other official action of the Building
Administrator or the Board of Public Works and Safety. In determining the
average processing expense, the Building Administrator may fix the amount at
a full dollar amount that is an even multiple of 10.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.40  NOTICE OF UNPAID COSTS; FILING; HEARING; JUDGMENT LIEN.



   (A)   If all or any part of the costs listed in § 150.39 remain
unpaid for any unsafe premises other than unsafe premises owned by a
governmental entity for more than 15 days after the completion of the work,
and if the Building Administrator determines that there is a reasonable
probability of obtaining recovery, the Building Administrator shall prepare a
record stating:



      (1)   The name and last known address of each person who held
a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises from the time
the order requiring the work to be performed was recorded to the time that
the work was completed;



      (2)   The legal description or address of the unsafe premises
that were the subject of the work;



      (3)   The nature of the work that was accomplished;



      (4)   The amount of the unpaid bid price of the work that was
accomplished; and



      (5)   The amount of the unpaid average processing expense. The
record must be in a form approved by the State Board of Accounts.



   (B)   The Building Administrator shall swear to the accuracy of the
record before the Clerk of the Circuit Court and deposit the record in the
Clerk's office. Notice that the record has been filed and that a hearing on
the amounts indicated in the record may be held must be sent to the persons
named in the record, in the manner prescribed by § 150.44.



   (C)   If, within 30 days after the notice required by division (B)
above, a person named in the record files with the Clerk of the Circuit Court
a written petition objecting to the claim for payment and requesting a
hearing, the Clerk shall enter the cause on the docket of the Circuit or
Superior Court as a civil action, and a hearing shall be held on the question
in the matter prescribed by I.C. 4-22-2 et seq. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Court shall either sustain the petition or enter a judgment
against the persons named in the record for the amounts recorded or for the
modified amounts pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-13(c).



   (D)   If no petition is filed under division (C) above, the Clerk of
the Circuit Court shall enter the cause on the docket of the Court and the
Court shall enter a judgment for the amounts stated in the record pursuant to
I.C. 36-7-9-13(d).



   (E)   A judgment under this section is a debt and a lien on all real
and personal property of the person named, or a joint and several debt and
lien on the real and personal property of the persons named. The lien may be
perfected pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-13(e).



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.41  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   (A)   The Building Administrator shall establish in its operating
budget a fund designated as the Unsafe Building Fund. Any balance remaining
at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried over in the fund for the
following year and does not revert to the general fund.



   (B)   Money for the Unsafe Building Fund may be received from any
source, including appropriations by local, state or federal governments and
donations. The following money shall be deposited in the fund:



      (1)   Money received as payment for or settlement of
obligations or judgments established under §§ 150.36 through 150.40 and any
civil actions, injunctions, civil forfeitures, appointments of receiver,
court orders authorizing performances of work and emergency court orders
authorizing action to make premises safe, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-17 through
36-7-9-22;



      (2)   Money received from bonds posted under § 150.34; and



      (3)   Money received in satisfaction of receivers notes or
certificates that were issued under I.C. 36-7-9-20 (appointment of receiver)
and were purchased with money from the Unsafe Building Fund.



   (C)   Money in the Unsafe Building Fund may be used for the expenses
incurred in carrying the purposes of this subchapter, including:



      (1)   The cost of obtaining reliable information about the
identity and location of each person who owns a substantial property interest
in unsafe premises;



      (2)   The cost of an examination of an unsafe building by a
registered architect or registered engineer not employed by the city;



      (3)   The cost of surveys necessary to determine the location
and dimensions of real property on which an unsafe building is located;



      (4)   The cost of giving notice of orders, notice of
statements of recission, notice of continued hearing and notice of statements
that public bids are to be let in the manner prescribed by § 150.44;



      (5)   The bid price of work by a contractor under this
subchapter;



      (6)   The cost of emergency action under this subchapter;



      (7)   The cost of notes or receivers’ certificates issued
pursuant to this subchapter; and



      (8)   Payment of money from the Unsafe Building Fund must be
made in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.42  INSPECTION WARRANTS.



   (A)   If the owners or those in possession of a building refuse
inspection, the Building Administrator may obtain an inspection warrant from
any court of record in the county to determine if the building is an unsafe
building pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-16. The court shall issue the warrant
subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   The person seeking a warrant must establish that the
building to be searched or inspected is to be searched or inspected as part
of a legally authorized program of inspection that naturally includes the
building, or that there is probable cause for believing that a condition,
object, activity or circumstance legally justifies a search or inspection of
that building.



      (2)   An affidavit establishing 1 of the grounds described in
division (A)(1) above must be signed under oath or affirmation by the affiant.



      (3)   The court must examine the affiant under oath or
affirmation to verify the accuracy of the affidavit.



   (B)   The warrant is valid only if it:



      (1)   Is signed by the judge of the court and bears the date
and hour of its issuance above that signature, with the notation that the
warrant is valid for only 48 hours after its issuance; and



      (2)   Describes either directly or by reference to the
affidavit, the building where the search or inspection is to occur so that
the executor of the warrant or owner or the possessor of the building can
reasonably determine what property the warrant authorizes an inspection of.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.43  CIVIL REMEDIES.



   The City of Brazil, acting through its Building Administrator, may
bring a civil action regarding unsafe premises in the Circuit or Superior
Court of Clay County pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-17, or seek an injunction
against any person that will cause an order issued under this subchapter to
be complied with pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-17, or seek an injunction against
any person that will cause an order issued under this subchapter to be
complied with pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-18, a civil forfeiture for
noncompliance with an ordered injunction pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-20, seek a
court order authorizing the Building Administrator to cause action required
by the order to be performed by a contractor pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-21, or
seek an emergency court order authorizing action to be taken to make unsafe
premises safe because of an immediate danger to health and safety of the
surrounding community pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-22.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.44  MANNER OF SERVING NOTICE.



   (A)   Notice of orders, notice of statements of recision, notice of
continued hearings, notice of a statement that public bids are to be let and
notice of claims for payment must be given by:



      (1)   Sending a copy of the order or statement by registered
or certified mail to the residence or place of business or employment of the
person to be notified with return receipt requested;



      (2)   Delivering a copy of the order or statement personally
to the person to be notified; and/or



      (3)   Leaving a copy of the order or statement at the dwelling
or usual place of abode of the person to be notified.



   (B)   If, after a reasonable effort, service is not obtained by a
means described in division (A) above, service may be made by publishing a
notice of the order of statement in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 in the county
where the unsafe premises are located. However, publication may be made upon
consecutive days. If service of an order is made by publication, the
publication must include the information required by § 150.32(B)(1), (2),
(4) through (7),  and (9), and must also include a statement indicating
generally what action is required by the order and that the exact terms of
the order may be obtained from Building Administrator.



   (C)   When service is made by any of the means described in this
section, except by mailing or by publication, the person making service must
make an affidavit stating that he or she has made the service, the manner in
which service was made, to whom the order or statement was issued, the nature
of the order or statement and the date of service. The affidavit must be
placed on file with the Building Administrator.



   (D)   The date when notice of the order or statement is considered
given is as follows.



      (1)   If the order or statement is delivered personally or
left at the dwelling or usual place of abode, notice is considered given on
the day when the order or statement is delivered to the person or left at his
or her dwelling or usual place of abode.



      (2)   If the order or statement is mailed, notice is
considered given on the date shown on the return receipt, or, if no date is
shown, on the date when the return receipt is received by the enforcement
authority.



      (3)   Notice by publication is considered given on the date of
the second day that publication was made.



   (E)   Notice of orders, notice of statement of recision, notice of
continued hearings and notice of a statement that public bids are to be let
need not be given to a person holding a property interest in an unsafe
premises if:



      (1)   No instrument reflecting the property interest held by
the person is recorded in the recorder's office of Clay County;



      (2)   The order or statement was recorded in accordance with
§ 150.31; and



      (3)   The Building Administrator has received neither written
information nor actual notice of the identity of the person who holds a
property interest in the unsafe premises.



   (F)   A person who fails to record an instrument reflecting an
interest in his or her unsafe premises is considered to consent to action
taken under this subchapter relative to which notice would otherwise be given.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.45  RECORDING OF ORDERS, STATEMENTS AND RECORDS.



   The Building Administrator shall record in the Office of the Clay
County Recorder, orders issued under § 150.32 or § 150.33, statements of
recision issued under § 150.33(B), statements that public bids are to be let
under § 150.38. The recorder may not charge a fee for recording these items.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.46  TRANSFERS OF PROPERTY BY PERSONS NOT COMPLYING WITH ORDERS.



   (A)   A person who has been issued and has received notice of an
order relative to unsafe premises and has not complied with that order:



      (1)   Must supply full information regarding the order to a
person who takes or agrees to take a substantial property interest in the
unsafe premises before transferring or agreeing to transfer that interest; and



      (2)   Must, within 5 days after transferring or agreeing to
transfer a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises, supply the
Building Administrator with written copies of:



         (a)   The full name, address, telephone number of the
person taking a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises; and



         (b)   The legal instrument under which the transfer or
agreement to transfer the substantial property interest is accomplished.



   (B)   If a judgment is obtained against the City of Brazil, the
Building Administrator, the Board of Public Works and Safety, for the failure
to provide notice to persons holding an interest in unsafe premises in an
action taken by the city, Building Administrator or the Board of Public Works
and Safety under this subchapter, a person who failed to comply with this
section is liable to the city for the amount of the judgment if it can be
shown that the city's failure to give notice was the result of that person's
failure.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.47  STATE STATUTE INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   Applicable to provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 (the State
Enforcement of Building Standards) that have not already been provided for in
this subchapter are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part
of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 6-29-2005)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this Building Code may be subject
to a fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The assessment of a monetary
penalty shall in no way limit the operation of the penalties provided
elsewhere in this Building Code.



(Ord. 10-2005, passed 5-11-2005; Am. Ord. 5-2006, passed 2-15-2006)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section




Flood Hazard Areas




   151.01   Statutory authorization and purpose



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Duties of the Zoning Administrator



   151.04   Regulatory flood elevation



   151.05   Improvement location permit



   151.06   Preventing increased damages



   151.07   Protecting buildings



   151.08   Other development requirements



   151.09   Variances



   151.10   Disclaimer of liability



   151.11   Violations and fines



   151.12   Abrogation and greater restrictions




National Flood Insurance Program




   151.25   Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose and
objectives



   151.26   Definitions



   151.27   Lands to which subchapter applies; basis for establishing
flood data



   151.28   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   151.29   Compliance; abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.30   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevation



   151.31   Interpretation; warning and disclaimer of liability



   151.32   Designation of Administrator; duties and responsibilities



   151.33   Permit procedures



   151.34   Flood hazard reduction; general and specific standards



   151.35   Standards for subdivision proposals



   151.36   Critical facility



   151.37   Standards for identified floodways; identified fringe



   151.38   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways/fringes



   151.39   Designation and duties of Variance and Appeals Board



   151.40   Variance procedures; conditions for variances; notification



   151.41   Historic structure; special conditions



   151.99   Penalty




FLOOD HAZARD AREAS




§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Indiana Legislature granted the power to local units of
government (I.C. 36-7-4) to control land use within their jurisdictions in
order to accomplish the following.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to guide development in the
flood hazard areas in order to reduce the potential for loss of life and
property, reduce the potential for health and safety hazards and to reduce
the potential for extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief.



   (C)   Under the authority granted to local units of government to
control land use within their jurisdiction, which includes taking into
account the effects of flooding, the Common Council of the City of Brazil
hereby adopts the following floodplain management regulations in order to
accomplish the following:



      (1)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or
drainage hazards to others;



      (2)   To protect new buildings and major improvement to
buildings from flood damage;



      (3)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of
flooding;



      (4)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood
rescue and relief operations;



      (5)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating flood blighted areas; and



      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available
for structures and their contents in the City of Brazil by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or al estate including
but not limited to:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building
or any addition to a building valued at more than $1,000;



      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days;



      (3)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences,
construction of roads or similar projects;



      (4)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams, channel improvements and the like;



      (5)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations;



      (6)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



      (7)   Storage of materials; and



      (8)   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation or the construction of permanent
buildings.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of this chapter.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FBFM.  Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.



   FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FHBM.  Flood Hazard Boundary Map.



   FIRM.  Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the flood
fringe districts.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE or FPG.  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus 2 feet at any given location in the SFHA.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak hood flow of the regulatory flood of
any river or stream.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE.  Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  An amendment to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations and elevations.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the basement floor;



      (2)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the building;



      (3)   The top of the first floor or of buildings elevated on
pilings or constructed on a crawl space with permanent openings; or



      (4)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure below an
elevated building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to
the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters, by providing a minimum of 2 openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) having a total area of 1 square foot for every 2 square
feet of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than 1 foot above grade; and



         (b)   The enclosed space shall be usable for the parking
of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of this chapter.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure which
is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in Sec. 5 of this chapter. The REGULATORY FLOOD is
also known by the term BASE FLOOD.



   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation by the regulatory
flood. Until mapping becomes available, the SFHAs of the city are generally
identified by the Zoning Administrator for those areas with a past history of
flooding. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Clay County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed
into the city are generally identified as so on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
prepared for Clay County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
November 25, 1977.



   STRUCTURE.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank,
a manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not
include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or any alteration of an
"historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structures continued designation as a "historic structure."



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.03  DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Planning Commission Administrator shall implement this and
hereafter be referred to as the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator for the City of Brazil is appointed
to review all development and subdivision proposals to ensure compliance with
this chapter, including but not limited to the following duties:



      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs
of the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon
request about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission for all development projects
subject to Section 7 of this chapter, and maintain a record of authorization
(either copy of actual permit or letter of recommendation);



      (4)   Maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the top
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and/or substantially
improved buildings constructed in the SFHA. Inspect before, during and after
construction;



      (5)   Maintain a record of the engineer's certificate and the
"as-built" flood-proofed elevation of all buildings subject to Section 8 of
this chapter;



      (6)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to improve base flood and floodway data and to improve the
administration of this chapter. Submit reports as required for the National
Flood Insurance Program; and



      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letters of
Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and letters of recommendation,
federal permit documents and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for
all building constructed subject to this chapter.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.04  REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION.



   (A)   This subchapter’s protection standard is the regulatory
flood. The best available regulatory flood data is listed below.



   (B)   Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the
party submitting the detailed engineering study needs to replace existing
data with better data and submit it to the Department of Natural Resources
for review and approval.



      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits for
the SFHAs of the City of Brazil as identified by the Zoning Administrator
until mapping is published shall be according to the best data available as
provided by the Department of Natural Resources.



      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits for
the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Clay County identified as Zone A
on the Flood Hazard Boundary Maps of the County published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be according to the
best data available as provided by the Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   No action shall be taken by the Zoning Administrator
until a permit has been issued by the Natural Resources Commission granting
approval for construction in the floodway. Once a permit has been issued by
the Natural Resources Commission, the Building Official may issue the local
improvement location permit, provided the provisions contained in §§ 151.06
and 151.07 have been met. The improvement location permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit issued by the Natural Resources Commission.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.05  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted
by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first
obtaining an improvement location permit from the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall not issue an improvement
location permit if the proposed "development" does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.



      (1)   The application for an improvement location permit shall
be accompanied by the following:



         (a)   A description of the proposed development;



         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



         (c)   A legal description of the property site;



         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades; and



         (e)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed development. Elevation should be in
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD) or North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD). In either case the conversion formula should be included.



      (2)   Upon receipt of an application for improvement location
permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine if the site is located
within an identified floodway, floodway fringe or within the floodplain where
the limits of the floodway have not yet been determined.



      (3)   If the site is an identified floodway the Zoning
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Department of Natural
Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway.



      (4)   Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1-22 a permit from
the Natural Resource Commission is required prior to the issuance of a local
building permit for any excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction
activity located in the floodway. This includes land preparation activities
such as filling, grading, clearing and paving and the like undertaken before
the actual start of construction of the building.



      (5)   If the site is located in an identified floodway fringe,
then the Zoning Administrator may issue the local improvement location permit
provided the provisions contained in §§ 151.06 and 151.07 have been met.
The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the Flood Protection
Grade (FPG).



      (6)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and floodway fringe have not yet been determined
(identified as SFHA by the Zoning Administrator or shown as Zone A on the
County Flood Hazard Boundary Map) and the drainage area upstream of the site
is greater than 1 square mile, the Zoning Administrator shall require the
applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and
specifications, to the Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      (7)   No action shall be taken by the Zoning Administrator
until either a permit for construction in the floodway or a letter of
recommendation citing the 100-year flood elevation and the recommended Flood
Protection Grade has been received from the Department of Natural Resources.



      (8)   Once the Zoning Administrator has received the proper
permit or letter of recommendation approving the proposed development, an
improvement location permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
improvement location permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from Natural Resources and the provisions contained in §§ 151.06
and 151.07 have been met.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.06  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   (A)   No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to
public health and safety.



   (B)   Within the floodway identified on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the following standards shall
apply:



      (1)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will cause any increase in
the elevation of the regulatory flood; and



      (2)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



   (C)   Within all SFHAs identified as A Zones (no 100-year flood
elevation and/or floodway/floodway fringe delineation has been provided) the
following standard shall apply. The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the regulatory flood elevation more than 1/10
of 1 foot and will not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



   (D)   Public health standards in all SFHAs:



      (1)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or
storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the Flood Protection
Grade, unless the materials are stored in a floodproofed storage tank or
building constructed according to the requirements of § 151.07.



      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on-site
waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above
ground openings are located above the FPG, or those which are located below
the FPG are watertight.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.07  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
151.06, all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG.



   (B)   This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any new building valued at
more than $1,000; or greater than 400 square feet, whichever is less;



      (2)   Structural alterations made to an existing building that
increase the market value of the building by more than 50% (excluding the
value of the land);



      (3)   Any subsequent alterations;



      (4)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building
that are valued at or more than 50% of the market value of the building
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred;



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This subchapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (6)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days.



   (C)   This building protection requirement may be met by 1 of the
following methods. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of
compliance with these building protection standards as required in § 151.03.



   (D)   A residential or nonresidential building may be constructed on
a permanent land fill in accordance with the following.



      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than 1
foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the
Standard Proctor Test method.



      (2)   The fill should extend at least 10 feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the FPG.



      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements, (see
definition of lowest floor in § 151.02) shall be at or above the FPG.



   (E)   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on posts,
piers, columns, extended walls or other types of similar foundation provided:



         (a)   Walls of any enclosure below the elevated floor
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on the
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, through providing a
minimum of 2 openings (in addition to doorways and windows) having a total
area of 1 square foot for every 2 square feet of enclosed area subject to the
flooding. The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than 1 foot above
grade; and



         (b)   Any enclosure below the elevated floor is used for
storage of vehicles and building access.



      (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as buoyancy, current,
waves, ice and floating debris.



      (3)   All areas below FPG shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage. The top of the lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the FPG. Water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other
waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPG.



   (F)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed
or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet 1 of the
following anchoring requirements:



      (1)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation so that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all manufactured
homes to be placed on a site:



         (a)   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as
a result of a flood.



      (2)   This requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that
has not been substantially damaged by a flood. The manufactured home shall be
elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is
supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement.



   (G)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



      (1)   Be on the site for less than 180 consecutive days;



      (2)   Be fully-licensed and ready for highway use (defined as
being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions); or



      (3)   Meet the requirements for "manufactured homes" in
division (F) above.



   (H)   A non-residential building may be floodproofed to the FPG (in
lieu of elevating) if done in accordance with the following:



      (1)   A registered professional engineer shall certify that
the building has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The building design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures and impacts
from debris or ice; and



      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.08  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall review all proposed
subdivisions to determine whether the subdivision lies in a flood hazard area
as defined elsewhere by ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator finds the
subdivision to be so located, the Zoning Administrator shall forward plans
and materials to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and
comment. The Zoning Administrator shall require appropriate changes and
modifications in order to assure that:



      (1)   It is consistent with the need to minimize flood damages;



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards; and



      (4)   Onsite waste disposal systems, if provided, will be so
located and designed to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them
during the occurrence of the regulatory flood.



   (B)   Developers shall record the 100-year flood elevation on all
subdivision plats containing lands (identified elsewhere by this chapter)
within a flood hazard area prior to submitting the plats for approval by the
Plan Commission.



   (C)   All owners of manufactured home parks or subdivisions located
within the SFHA identified as Zone A on the community's FHEM or FIRM shall
develop an evacuation plan for those lots located in the SFHA and file it
with the local Plan Commission and have it filed with and approved by the
appropriate community emergency management authorities.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.09  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may consider issuing a variance to
the terms and provisions of this chapter provided the applicant demonstrates
that:



      (1)   There exists a good and sufficient cause for the
requested variance;



      (2)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter will
constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



      (3)   The granting of the requested variance will not increase
flood heights, create additional threats to public safety, cause additional
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may issue a variance to the terms
and provisions of this chapter subject to the following standards and
conditions:



      (1)   No variance or exception for a residential use within a
floodway subject to § 151.06(A) and (B) may be granted;



      (2)   Any variance or exception granted in a floodway subject
to § 151.06(A) and (B) will require a permit from natural resources;



      (3)   Variances or exceptions to the Building Protection
Standards of Sec. 8 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located
on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade;



      (4)   Variance or exception may be granted for the
reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Survey of Historic
Architectural, Archaeological and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts and
Objects;



      (5)   All variances shall give the minimum relief necessary
and be so that the maximum practical flood protection will be given to the
proposed construction; and



      (6)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a written notice
to the recipient of a variance or exception that the proposed construction
will be subject to increased risks to life and property and could require
payment of increased flood insurance premiums.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.10  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the community, natural resources or the State of
Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.11  VIOLATIONS AND FINES.



   (A)   Failure to obtain an improvement location permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be
treated as so in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the
City of Brazil. All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$300.



      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day
the violation continues to exist.



      (2)   The City Planning Commission shall inform the owner that
any violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations.



      (4)   All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person
or persons responsible.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.12  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted
by the city to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program.



   (B)   However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution
or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the Program. Nor does this
subchapter repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions.



   (C)   Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants or
deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall take precedence.



   (D)   In addition, the Common Council shall assure that all National
Flood Insurance Program regulations and laws (310 Indiana Administrative
Code, 6-1-1, I.C. 14-28-1-22 and I.C. 14-28-1 through 14-28-6) are met.



(Ord. 10-1993, passed 9-14-1993)




NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM




§ 151.25  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power
to local government units to control land use within their jurisdictions.
Therefore, the Common Council of the City of Brazil does hereby adopt the
following floodplain management regulations.



   (B)   (1)   The flood hazard areas of Brazil are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect
of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



   (C)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;



      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage;



      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands; and



      (6)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
structures and their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (D)   The objectives of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To protect human life and health;



      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;



      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in floodplains;



      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas in a manner so as to minimize
flood blight areas; and



      (7)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that
property is in a flood area.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE.  Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A
ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The
definitions are presented below:



      ZONE A.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no
base flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.



      ZONE AE AND A1-A30.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1%
annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones
A1-30).



      ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between 1 and 3 feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.



      ZONE AH.  Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are 1 to 3
feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown
within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.



      ZONE AR.  Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      ZONE A99.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an
under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).  A structure that is
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used
for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage
sheds, pole barns and hay sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE).  Any walled and roofed expansion
to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a
common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
ADDITION, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this subchapter or a request for a
variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from 1 to
3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be
evident. This flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation of the 1% annual chance
flood.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY.  A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).  A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.  A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a structure
or any addition to a structure;



      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days;



      (3)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences,
construction of roads or similar projects;



      (4)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams, channel improvements and the like;



      (5)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations;



      (6)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



      (7)   Storage of materials; or



      (8)   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation or the construction of permanent
structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE.  A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A certified statement that verifies a
structure's elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM.  The first phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the community's first
floodplain ordinance.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD.  The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any year.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIn includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This subchapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power which
control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance and floodplain management
requirements.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG).  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus 2 feet at any given location in the SFHA. See FREEBOARD.



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING).  A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the
BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE.  Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   HARDSHIP (AS RELATED TO VARIANCES OF THIS SUBCHAPTER).  The
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is
exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval
of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure individually listed on the Register
of Historic Places or the Indiana State Survey of Historic Architectural,
Archaeological and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts and Objects.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).  The cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with
the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures
are elevation, relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal
and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after
June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  An amendment to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA.
A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations and elevations.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F).  An official revision
by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the first floor of a structure constructed
with a crawl space, provided that the lowest point of the interior grade is
at or above the BFE and construction meets requirements of division (6)(a)
below; or



      (6)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters, by providing a minimum of 2 openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) having a total net area of 1 square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade; and



         (b)   The enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a "recreational vehicle."



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MAP AMENDMENT.  A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER.  The 4-digit number followed by a letter suffix
assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first 4 digits represent the map panel,
and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been
revised. (The letter "A" is not used by FEMA; the letter "B" is the first
revision).



   MARKET VALUE.  The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION.  Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
mitigation is 2-fold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).  The federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal
government and the private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD).  As corrected in 1929 is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD.  The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the
letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.  The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY.  Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR).  An official republication of a
community's FEMA map to affect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas
or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION.  Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later. Pre-FIRM construction means
construction or substantial improvement, which started on or before December
31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community,
whichever is later.



   PROBATION.  A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal
use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM.  The phase of the community's participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in Article 3 (B) of this subchapter. The
REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the term BASE FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
and 100-YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on 2
separate occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of the event
for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
structure at the time of each flood event.



   SECTION 1316.  That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood prone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  Those lands within the
jurisdictions of the city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.
Until FEMA floodplain mapping becomes available, the SFHAs of the city are
identified for construction purposes only on the Pogue's Run Watershed
Floodplain Mapping, produced by Samuel L. Moore and Associates and dated
December 1998. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Clay County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be
annexed into the city are generally identified as so on the Flood Hazard
Boundary Map prepared for Clay County by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated November 25, 1977, as well as any future updates, amendments
or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the
most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, Al-
A30, AH, AR, A99 or AO).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual START means the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank,
a manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial
damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not
include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or any alteration of a
historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structures continued designation as a historic structure.



   SUSPENSION.  The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this subchapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
subchapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this subchapter. A structure or other development
without the elevation, other certification or other evidence of compliance
required in this subchapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until a time as
that documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum where specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.



   X ZONE.  The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the
SFHA. Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate
areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A.  See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C AND X.  Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.27  LANDS TO WHICH SUBCHAPTER APPLIES; BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING FLOOD
DATA.



   (A)   Lands to which this subchapter applies. This subchapter shall
apply to all SFHAs within the jurisdiction of Brazil.



   (B)   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data. This
subchapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below. Whenever a party disagrees
with the best available data, the party submitting the detailed engineering
study needs to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and approval.



      (1) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits
for the SFHAs of the city as identified for construction purposes only on the
Pogue's Run Watershed Floodplain Mapping, produced by Samuel L. Moore and
Associates and dated December 1998.



      (2)   For the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Clay
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that
may be annexed into the city: if the SFHA is delineated as "Zone A" on the
County Flood Hazard Boundary Map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway
and fringe limits shall be according to the best data available as provided
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.28  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this subchapter prior to the commencement of any
development activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.29  COMPLIANCE; ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted
or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the
terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream
within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the
terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations.



   (B)   This subchapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair
any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this
subchapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.30  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATION.



   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the
SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.



   (D)   The property owner should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.31  INTERPRETATION; WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   In the interpretation and application of this subchapter all
provisions shall be:



      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;



      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



   (B)   The degree of flood protection required by this subchapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.



   (C)   Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore,
this subchapter does not create any liability on the part of the City of
Brazil, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources or the State of Indiana,
for any flood damage that results from reliance on this subchapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.32  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Common Council of the City of Brazil hereby appoints the
Planning and Zoning Administrator to administer and implement the provisions
of this subchapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
subchapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to §§ 151.37 and 151.38, and maintain a record of the authorization
(either copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of the notifications to FEMA;



      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment
(LOMA), Letters of Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this subchapter.



      (7)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Revision (LOMR)
or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective
SFHA maps of the community.



      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished;



      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 151.33 below;



      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance
with § 151.33 below;



      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



      (12)   Stop work orders:



         (a)   Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this subchapter shall immediately cease; and



         (b)   Notice shall be in writing and shall be given to
the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the
work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      (13)   Revocation of permits:



         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of the ordinance, in cases where there has been
any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the
application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.33  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit  shall be
made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior
to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the
following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage
facilities and the location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Specifically the following information is required:



      (1)   Application stage:



         (a)   A description of the proposed development;



         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



         (c)   A legal description of the property site;



         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



         (e)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD);



         (f)   Elevation (in NGVD) to which any non-residential
structure will be floodproofed; and



         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or related as a result of proposed development.



      (2)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor;
or floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NGVD elevation of the lowest
floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. Certification shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a
particular structure certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder’s risk. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest
floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted.) The permit holder
shall correct deficiencies detected by review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make
corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for
the project.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.34  FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION; GENERAL AND SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   (A)   General standards.  In all SFHAs the following provisions are
required:



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;



      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG;



      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;



      (6)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this
subchapter;



      (10)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement
to a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not further,
extended or replaced; and



      (11)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an
equivalent volume of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume
shall be at least equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1
to 1) due to the fill or structure.



         (a)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain
and in the same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure
is located.



         (b)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be
allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that
the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in
the same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure is
located, will be accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be
subject to ponding when not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not
be refilled.



         (c)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a
drainage way leading to the floodplain.



         (d)   The fill or structure shall be of a material
deemed stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding
and shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.



         (e)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and
filled shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any
site work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this subchapter.



   (B)   Specific standards. In all SFHAs, the following provisions are
required:



      (1)   In addition to the requirements of § 151.34, all
structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage
below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



         (a)   Construction or placement of any new structure
having a floor area greater than 400 square feet;



         (b)   Structural alterations made to:



            1.   An existing (previously unaltered structure),
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the pre-altered
structure (excluding the value of the land); and/or



            2.   Any previously altered structure.



         (c)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged
structure that are valued at more than 50% of the market value of the
structure (excluding the value of the land) before damaged occurred;



         (d)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 180 days;



         (e)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a
new manufactured home on an existing site. This subchapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



         (f)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive
loss structure.



      (2)   New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor;
including basement, at or above the FPG (2 feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division
(B)(4) below.



      (3)   New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or non-residential structure (or manufactured home)
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the FPG
(2 feet above the base flood elevation). Structures located in all "A zones"
may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the
following:



         (a)   A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures and impacts from debris or ice. Certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 151.32(C)(10); and



         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



      (4)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the base flood elevations shall be designed to preclude
finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet the follow minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of 2 openings having a total net
area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
1 foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation
or higher than the exterior foundation grade);



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions;



         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);



         (e)   The interior portion of the enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and



         (f)   Where elevation requirements exceed 6 feet above
the highest adjacent grade, a copy of the legally recorded deed restriction
prohibiting the conversion of the area below the lowest floor to a use or
dimension contrary to the structure's originally approved design, shall be
presented as a condition of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.



      (5)   A residential or nonresidential structure may be
constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
1 foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
the standard proctor test method;



         (b)   The fill should extend at least 10 feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG;



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to
1 vertical;



         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties; and



         (e)   The top of the lowest floor including basements
shall be at or above the FPG.



      (6)   A residential or nonresidential structure may be
constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection grade
provided that the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately
anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;



         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection grade
shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of 1 opening on each wall
having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every 1 square
foot of enclosed area. The bottom of the openings shall be no more than 1
foot above grade;



         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace must be at or
above the base flood elevation;



         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured
from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall
must not exceed 4 feet at any point;



         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to
remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event;



         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood
protection grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; and



         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be
elevated above the flood protection grade.



      (7)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be
installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must
meet 1 of the following requirements:



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation so that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



            1.   Outside a manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            2.   In a new manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision; or



            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as
a result of a flood.



         (b)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This
requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.



         (c)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall
either:



            1.   Be on site for less than 180 days; and



            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            3.   Meet the requirements for "manufactured
homes" as stated earlier in this section.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.35  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or 5 acres.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.36  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   (A)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the
extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available.



   (B)   Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.



   (C)   Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure
that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Access routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.37  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS; IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   (A)   Standards for identified floodways.



      (1)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 151.27, are
areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles
and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway.



      (2)   Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of
construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial
additions/improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources.



      (3)   Please note that if fill is needed to elevate an
addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction in a floodway
permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



      (4)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources granting approval for construction in a floodway. Once a
permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§ 151.34 through 151.38 have been met.



      (5)   The floodplain development permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.



      (6)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory
flood more than 0.14 of 1 foot.



      (7)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



   (B)   Standards for identified fringe. If the site is located in an
identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit  provided the provisions contained in §§
151.34 through 151.38 have been met. The key provision is that the top of the
lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or
above the FPG.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.38  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than 1 square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than 1 square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in the floodway or a floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 100-year flood elevation and the
recommended Flood Protection Grade has been received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper construction in a floodway permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment approving the proposed development, a floodplain development
permit may be issued provided the conditions of the floodplain development
permit  are not less restrictive than the conditions received from the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions contained in §§
151.34 through 151.38 have been met.



   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than 1 square mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than 1 square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis
showing the limits of the floodway, fringe and 100 year flood elevation for
the site.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§ 151.34 through 151.38 have been met.



   (C)   Cumulative effect. The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of 1 foot
and will not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.39  DESIGNATION AND DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   (A)   Designation. The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the
Common Council of the City of Brazil shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Duties. The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
subchapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal the
decision to the Circuit or Superior Court of Clay County, as provided by the
Indiana Statutory Law.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.40  VARIANCE PROCEDURES; CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES; NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Variance procedures. In passing upon applications, the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, all standards specified in other sections of this subchapter and the
following:



      (1)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of damage on the individual owner;



      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (4)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets
and bridges.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



   (B)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway
subject to §§ 151.37 or 151.38 may be granted.



      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to § 151.37
or § 151.38 will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



      (4)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction
of § 151.34 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a
lot of 1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration of any structure individually listed on the Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana State Survey of Historic Architectural, Archaeological
and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts and Objects.



      (7)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and
stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (See
division (C) below).



      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request
(See division (C) below).



   (C)   Notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Construction below the base flood level increases risks
to life and property. A copy of the notice shall by recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land; and



      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.41  HISTORIC STRUCTURE; SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
"historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
"historic structure" and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.



   (B)   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§ 151.39et
seq., and the purposes of this subchapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach the conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit
or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this
subchapter.



   (B)   All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be
treated as so in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the
City of Brazil. All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$300.



      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day
the violation continues to exist.



      (2)   The City Planning Commission shall inform the owner that
any violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 29-2005, passed 9-27-2005)



CHAPTER 152:  PLANTING ALONG PUBLIC WAYS



Section



   152.01   Street trees defined



   152.02   Tree species to be planted



   152.03   Spacing of street trees



   152.04   Distance from the curb and sidewalk



   152.05   Distance from street corners and fire hydrants



   152.06   Utilities and cable television



   152.07   Public tree care regulations



   152.08   New development and subdivisions



   152.09   Emergency tree care



   152.10   Pruning and corner clearance



   152.11   Dead, diseased or unsafe tree removal on private property



   152.12   Interference with City Tree Board



   152.13   Arborist’s permit



   152.14   Advisory Commission



   152.15   Brazil Tree Fund



   152.16   Protection of trees



   152.17   Review by Council



   152.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Tree exhibit



   Appendix B:   Diameter measurement



   Appendix C:   Types of trees



   Appendix D:   Items required on tree survey



   Appendix E:   Construction plan requirements



   Appendix F:   Tree pruning recommendations



§ 152.01  STREET TREES DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between the right-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the city.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 152.02  TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   The City Tree Board shall develop and maintain a list of desirable
trees for planting along streets and public ways. The desirable trees for
streets will be listed in 3 size classes based on height: small (under 20
feet), medium (20 to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet). Another list will be
maintained for acceptable trees to be planted in areas where size is not
necessarily a restriction. Lists of trees not suitable for planting will also
be created by the City Tree Board.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 152.03  SPACING OF STREET TREES.



   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the 3 size
classes listed in § 152.02, and no trees may be planted closer together than
the following: small trees-30 feet; medium trees-40 feet; and large trees-50
feet; except in special plantings approved by the City Tree Board.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997) Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.04  DISTANCE FROM THE CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the 3 size classes listed in § 152.02 and no
trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small
tree-2 feet; medium trees-2.5 feet; and large trees-3 feet, unless approved
by the City Tree Board.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.05  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.



   No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No tree
shall be planted within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.06  UTILITIES AND CABLE TELEVISION.



   (A)   No street trees other than those species qualifying as small
trees on the list maintained by the City Tree Board may be planted under or
within 12 feet of any overhead utility wire.



   (B)   Maintenance trimming of street trees is permitted to maintain
a safe operating clearance from high voltage electric lines. It is also
permissible to trim to provide access to poles, cable and other facilities as
long as these plans are approved by the City Tree Board. Tree limbs that grow
near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of
conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable
franchise agreements.



   (C)   A utility/cable television tree trimming policy will be
established and periodically reviewed by the City Tree Board. Any emergency
trimming should be in compliance with §§ 152.08, 152.09 and 152.10.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.07  PUBLIC TREE CARE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, parkways, highways, squares and public grounds, as
may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of public grounds. This section does not prohibit the
planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the
selection and location of trees is in accordance with §§ 152.02 through
152.06 and with approval from the City Tree Board as to species and location
of the tree. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, it will be lawful for the Brazil Street
Commissioner to remove or cause removal of the same. The cost of removal of a
tree may be charged to the property owner responsible for the planting
thereof.



   (B)   The City Tree Board may recommend to the Street Commissioner
the removal of any street tree or part thereof which is in unsafe condition
or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power
lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is infected
with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. Property owners wishing to
do maintenance or removal work at their own expense on city trees adjacent to
their property must obtain a homeowner's permit from the City Tree Board
which would verify that all the work is being done by insured tree experts
and that trimming or removal is being done for legitimate reasons. The
applications for homeowner's permits will be available at City Hall. They are
submitted to the City Clerk- Treasurer for referral and approval by the City
Tree Board.



   (C)   The topping of city street trees is strongly discouraged.
TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than 3
inches in diameter within the tree's crown to a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees near utility lines or in areas
that cannot be pruned using acceptable techniques should be removed and a new
tree appropriate to the site planted. Any person or entity wishing to top a
street tree shall notify the Brazil Street Commissioner in advance of doing
so.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.08  NEW DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   It is the responsibility of the City Tree Board to work with
the Plan Commission and developers for the purpose of establishing a planting
zone. The planting zone should be a minimum of 4 feet running parallel to the
city street and free of utility facilities.



   (B)   The City Tree Board will consult with the Plan Commission on
issues of other planting zones on any new developments prior to the Plan
Commission's approval of development plans.



§ 152.09  EMERGENCY TREE CARE.



   (A)   The City Street Department, public utilities or the Indiana
Department of Transportation may act to trim or remove trees in emergency
situations when a tree or trees have been damaged by storms or other causes.



   (B)   In these situations, they may resort to severe cutting back of
the limbs of the street trees but must report all incidents to the City Tree
Board through the Street Commissioner, as soon as practical after the
emergency has passed.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 152.10  PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE.



   (A)   Owners of trees overhanging a public street or public
right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that branches shall
not obstruct the view of any street intersection so that there shall be a
clear space of 14 feet above the street surface and of 8 feet above the
sidewalk surface.



   (B)   The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees,
or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the
public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub overhanging
the public right-of-way when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any
traffic control device or sign or sight of triangle at intersections.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.11  DEAD, DISEASED OR UNSAFE TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The City Tree Board shall notify, in writing, the owner of any
dead diseased tree when the tree constitutes a hazard to life and property,
or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other
trees within the city.



   (B)   It is the tree owner's responsibility to take the necessary
measures to remove or treat these trees to ensure the safety of the Brazil
community.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.12  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the City Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees as authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.13  ARBORIST'S PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person or firm engaging in the business or occupation of
pruning, treating or removing street trees within the city must first apply
for and procure an arborist's permit. The permit fee of $25 will be paid in
advance to the Clerk-Treasurer. The permit may be issued once the applicant
has filed an application and he or she is in possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury and $50,000
property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged
resulting from the pursuit from the endeavors as herein described.



   (B)   The permit is valid for 1 year unless the City Tree Board
revokes the permit upon evidence of the arborist's failure to apply
principles of good arboriculture or there has been cancellation or other
termination of any insurance policy upon which the original permit was
awarded. Appeals of this procedure may be submitted to the City Tree Board.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.14  ADVISORY COMMISSION.



   The City Tree Board may appoint an advisory commission which shall
consist of interested citizens of Clay County, to assist and advise the City
Tree Board.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 152.15  BRAZIL TREE FUND.



   The Brazil City Council shall establish a Brazil Tree Fund which shall
be administered by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The fund shall be to accept
donations and the funds therein shall be used for the planting and
maintenance of trees on Brazil city property and for equipment related to
planting and maintenance.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 152.16  PROTECTION OF TREES.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to recklessly,
knowingly or intentionally abuse, mutilate or deface any tree on city
property.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.17  REVIEW BY COUNCIL.



   The Brazil City Council shall have the right to review the conduct acts
and decisions of the City Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling
or order of the City Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the matter
and make final decisions.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to
comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
upon being found in violation, shall be responsible to pay for damages equal
to the appraised value or replacement value of the tree(s) and be subject to
a civil penalty of $50 for each separate offense. Each day during which any
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be
considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 19-1997, passed 10-28-1997)



APPENDIX A:  TREE EXHIBIT.







 



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ).  The area of undisturbed natural soil around
a tree defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance
from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line.



   DRIP LINE.  A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the
canopy of a tree and extending to the ground.



APPENDIX B:  DIAMETER MEASUREMENT.







 



   Diameter measurement: The diameter of a tree shall be measured as shown
above.  The diameter of a tree shall be the total diameter of the largest
trunk plus half the diameter of each additional trunk.



APPENDIX C:  TYPES OF TREES.



 


Quality Trees




Common Name

 

Botanical Name

 

Identification Notes





Pecan
 
Carya illinoensis
 
Pecan fruit, compound leaves


Cedar Elm
 
Ulmus crassifilia
 
Decidious, 1 to 2-inch dark green leaves


Shumard Red Oak
 
Quercus shumardii
 
Deep pointed lobes in leaves


Texas Red Oak
 
Quercus texana
 
Vertical multi-mink shape


Live Oak
 
Quercus virginiana
 
1-1/2-inch dark green pointed leaves


Bur Oak
 
Quercus macrocarpa
 
Large acorn, leaf border at end


Post Oak
 
Quercus stellata
 
Deep lobes, rounded tip on leaf


Black Jack Oak
 
Quercus marilandica
 
Leathery; 3 to 7-inch leaf, no lobes


Lacebark Elm
 
Ulmus parvifolia
 
Small dark serrated green leaves


Chinese Pistache
 
Pistacia chinensis
 
3-inch sickle leaflets, fall color


Sweetgum
 
Liquidambar styraciflua
 
Star shaped leaf


Austrian Pine
 
Pinus nigra
 
2 needles


Chinquapin Oak
 
Quercus muhlenbergii
 
Oblong 4 to 6-inch serrated leaf


Southern Magnolia
 
Magnolia grandiflora
 
Large evergreen leaf, white flower


Bald Cypress
 
Taxodium distichum
 
Feather-like foliage, fall color


Caddo Maple
 
Acer barbatum 'Caddo'
 
5-lobed leaf


Texas Hickory
 
Carya texana
 
5 leaflets, 1 to 2-inch nut


Western Soapberry
 
Sapindus drummondii
 
18-inch compound leaf, 1/2-inch clear fruit


Red Cedar
 
Juniperus: virginiana
 
Native, pyramidal shape



Marginal Trees



Cottonwood
 
Populus deltoides
 
Deep fissures in bark, heart shape leaf


Mesquite
 
Prosopis glandulosa
 
Lacy open foliage, 10-inch bean fruit


American Elm
 
Ulmus americana
 
"V" shaped main branching


Slash Pine
 
Pinus elliotti
 
Tall cylindrical shape


Honeylocust
 
Gleditsia triacanthos
 
Lacy foliage, thornless variety only


Japanese Black Pine
 
Pinus thunbergii
 
Twisted growth, dark green needles


Deodar Cedar
 
Cedrus deodara
 
Large pyramidal evergreen



Understory Trees




Common Name

 

Botanical Name

 

Identification Notes



Redbud
 
Cercis canadensis
 
Purple/white flower


Mexican Plum
 
Prunis mexicana
 
White flower, exfoliating bark, thorns


Possumhaw Holly
 
Ilex decidua
 
Showy orange/red fruit, deciduous


Golden Raintree
 
Koelrutaria paniculata
 
Yellow flower, panicled fruit


Yaupon Holly
 
Ilex vomitoria
 
Evergreen, light bark, red fruit


Cherry Laurel
 
Prunus carolimana
 
Glossy evergreen foliage, shrubby


River Birch
 
Betula nigra
 
White flaky bark


Eves Necklace
 
Sophora affmis
 
Dull green tear-dropped shape leaf


Persimmon
 
Diospyros virgininana
 
Thin, smooth, pale grey bark


Rusty Blackhaw
 
Viburnum nufidulum
 
Glossy, dark green leaved white flowers


Wax Myrtle
 
Myrica cerifera
 
Light olive-green leaves, pale blue berries




 



APPENDIX D:  ITEMS REQUIRED ON TREE SURVEY.



1.    Appropriate title (for example, Tree Removal Exhibit or Tree Survey).



2.    Title block, including street address, lot and block, subdivision
name, city and date of preparation.



3.    North arrow, graphic and written scale in close proximity.



4.    Scale at a size no larger than 1 inch =100 for residential
development; scale to be determined by the Landscape Administrator for
nonresidential and home building activities.



5.    Name, address and phone of owner and person preparing the document.



6.    Location of all right-of-way lines and public easements.



7.    Location of all buildings, structures, pools, parking and other
improvements which are existing or intended on the lot.



8.    Areas of cut/fill with amount of each shown and flow lines shown.



9.    Existing and proposed spot elevations, grades and major contours,
along with existing landscaping, streams, ponds and major natural features.



10.    Areas of no disturbance labeled as "No Disturbance Area." This area
must be clearly marked on the plan and surrounded with protective fencing on
the ground. A single incidence removal of underbrush and vines is allowed.



11.    All protected trees shown individually on the plan. Canopy trees 6
inches or greater in size and understory trees 2 inches or greater in size.
Trees in close proximity that all have a caliper of less than 4 inches may be
designated as a group of trees with quantity of quality, marginal and
understory trees shown. (See Appendix C)



12.    The location of protected trees must be tied by horizontal control
(including dimensions from lot lines or placed through coordinates determined
via survey).



13.    All protected trees shown with diameter (4-1/2 feet from the
ground), common name and condition.



14.    Any proposed replacement trees shown with caliper size, common name
of tree and mature size.



15.    Graphic representations distinguishing protected trees that will be
saved versus those that will be removed.



16.    Phasing of tree survey along with phasing of the development is
permitted.



Notes:



1.    The Landscape Administrator shall have the authority to designate
areas as "no disturbance" areas where a survey would not be required due to
no intended construction.



2.    An area may be designated as a "No Disturbance Zone" on the plan
when approved by the Landscape Administrator and trees within that zone are
not required to be individually identified on the plan.



3.    The Landscape Administrator shall have the authority to exempt any
of the above items that he/she deems to be not applicable.



APPENDIX E:  CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   The following shall be required as a part of all construction plans
submitted to the city when tree removal or tree protection is required during
any phase of site work or construction.



1.    A Tree Preservation Detail Sheet shall include the following at a
minimum.



   a.    The requirements of § 16-85 (b) through (d) shall be noted.



   b.    A graphics legend to be used throughout the plans for the
purposes of showing the following: trees to be flagged, protective fencing,
trees requiring bark protection, boring, areas of cut and fill impacting
protected trees.



   c.    Graphic tree exhibit showing the features of a tree to include
the critical root zone, trunk, canopy, drip line and method of diameter
measurement (per Appendices A & B).



   d.    Graphic exhibits showing methods of protection to include snow
fences, boarded skirts and the like.



   e.    Graphic exhibits showing construction methods to include grade
changes, boring, trenching and the like.



   f.    Graphic exhibit showing appropriate pruning practices (per
Appendix F).



2.    All practices which will be employed in meeting the requirements of
this article shall be shown graphically on all applicable sheets within the
construction plans.



3.    Documents as required in Appendix D herein.



APPENDIX F:  TREE PRUNING RECOMMENDATIONS.







 



CHAPTER 153:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Regulations




   153.01   Transporting waste through streets and alleys



   153.02   Street and alley obstruction; exceptions



   153.03   Maintaining sidewalks and tree rows in safe condition
required



   153.04   Sidewalk safety; violations



   153.05   Duties of the Street Commissioner



   153.06   Street, alley and sidewalk improvement regulations



   153.07   Removing or lowering grade stake; removal of earth, stone
or gravel



   153.08   Sidewalk repair regulations



   153.09   Placing obstructions on streets and sidewalks; limitations



   153.10   Permit required to display/obstruct



   153.11   Issuance; bond; liability



   153.12   Roof, awning, sign or structures extending over street or
sidewalk



   153.13   Cellar or stairway in street or sidewalk



   153.14   Excavations or obstructions



   153.15   Dirt and rubbish on sidewalks; removal of snow and ice



   153.16   Removal of obstructions from places for public entertainment



   153.17   Moving buildings over street; permit required; application



   153.18   Bond requirements



   153.19   Unnecessary stoppage or delay; repair of damaged street or
alley




Pole and Post Regulations




   153.30   Written consent for erection



   153.31   Written notice for location and type



   153.32   Removal or relocation



   153.33   Abandoned poles to be removed



   153.34   Charges for street repairs and reclamation



   153.35   Application for street cut permit



   153.99   Penalty




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 153.01  TRANSPORTING WASTE THROUGH STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Any person engaged in hauling or transporting any kind of
material over the streets of the city, in any kind of vehicle, is required to
use for this purpose a tight bed, or receptacle sufficient to retain the
material being so hauled or transported so as to prevent the same from
spilling, draining or leaking out on streets or alleys.



   (B)   In any case of hauling or transporting over any streets of any
filthy, offensive or foul smelling matter the same shall be retained in
tightly closed boxes or vessels, so as to effectively prevent the escape of
any offensive odors therefrom and any vehicle, or box or vessel so used shall
be kept clean on the outside.



   (C)   Any vehicle being used by a person in hauling or transporting
any kind of material which may be blown by the wind so as to deposit the
material on any streets or alleys shall be covered so as to prevent
depositing.



(1982 Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. 10-1966, passed 4-26-1966)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.02  STREET AND ALLEY OBSTRUCTION; EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to put, throw,
dump or leave any tin cans, old iron, old barrels, brush, boxes, tools,
implements, brick, stone, wood, logs, old vehicle, glass, glassware, dead
animals, fowl or debris of any kind whatsoever in, on or within the limits of
any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city or on any vacant
lot within the city without the consent of the owner. Nothing herein
contained shall be taken to repeal § 153.14, which allows streets, alleys
and sidewalks to be temporarily obstructed during certain construction on
obtaining a permit from the city.



(1982 Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. 10-1966, passed 4-26-1966)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.03  MAINTAINING SIDEWALKS AND TREE ROWS IN SAFE CONDITION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever any sidewalk in the city shall become obstructed in
any way, or become out of repair by reason of the brick, stone or other
paving material becoming displaced, giving way or removed from their original
position, or when any walk becomes depressed or uneven at any point, or
whenever, for any reason, any walk becomes defective and not reasonably safe
and convenient for public travel, it is made the duty of the owner of the fee
on which the sidewalk is located, and of the owner of the lot or lands
abutting on that part of the sidewalk so defective and out of repair, as
aforesaid, to repair the same and to put the sidewalk in front of the lot or
the land in repair, and make the same safe and convenient for public travel.



   (B)   Whenever any tree row in the city shall become unlawfully
obstructed in any manner, or out of repair by reason of any unlawful
excavation, or the earth removed from its original position, or when any tree
row becomes depressed and uneven in any part and requires leveling up so as
to make the same safe for persons traveling thereon, or whenever, for any
reason, any tree row becomes defective so that persons walking on the same
are liable to suffer injury and the same requires repairing to make it
reasonably safe and convenient for persons traveling thereon, it is hereby
made the duty of the owner of the fee thereof and the owner of the lot or
lands abutting on that part of the tree row so defective and out of repair as
aforesaid, to repair the tree row on or in front of the lot or ground owned
by him or her and to make the same safe and convenient for persons walking
thereon. Provided, that this section shall not apply to telephone, telegraph
and light poles, or other appliances, appurtenances, objects and things
placed and located in the tree row by authority of some license or franchise
granted by the city or other lawful authority.



(1982 Code, § 95.03)  (Ord. 34-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.04  SIDEWALK SAFETY; VIOLATIONS.



   It is made unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate on any
sidewalk or in any public stairway in the city, or to throw or deposit any
banana or orange peeling, or any substance of a like kind and having a
tendency to cause persons to slip and fall, on any sidewalk or stairway.



(1982 Code, § 95.05)  (Ord. 33-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.05  DUTIES OF THE STREET COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   In addition to the other duties devolving by reason of any law
or ordinance on the Street Commissioner, it is made the special duty of the
Street Commissioner to oversee the streets, alleys and public grounds of the
city; to discover defects and obstructions therein and to report the same to
the Street and Alley Committee of the Council, or if any defect or
obstruction be slight and easily remedied or removed, or if the same be
dangerous to travel and require immediate repair or removal, then the
Commissioner shall remedy or remove the same at once without reporting the
same to the Committee.



   (B)   The Commissioner shall see that all streets and alleys are
kept free from all defects and obstructions and in a condition convenient and
reasonably safe for public travel.



   (C)   When any dirt, earth or mud becomes deposited on any street or
sidewalk, or when there are dangerous accumulations of snow and ice thereon,
he or she shall cause the same to be removed in compliance with the
ordinances providing therefore or in an other manner as the Council may
direct.



   (D)   The Commissioner shall see that regulations relating to the
trimming of shade trees is enforced and that any tree on the streets or that
may be overhanging any street, which tree may have become dangerous and
liable to fall by reason of decay, is taken down and removed. He or she shall
report to the Council all railroad crossings in the city that may require
planking or that have been planked or otherwise improved and have become out
of repair, and for all those purposes he or she shall give all notices that
may be required by law and ordinance, and the Commissioner shall execute all
orders of the Council in relation to these matters and perform all necessary
acts and duties to maintain the streets in a condition convenient and
reasonably safe for public travel.



(1982 Code, § 95.06)  (Ord. 23-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.06  STREET, ALLEY AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   When any owner of property in the city desires to construct
any street, alley or sidewalk improvement in front of his or her property, he
or she shall make application in writing to the Common Council for permission
to make the improvement, stating in the application the kind and dimensions
of the improvement proposed and the location of the same.



   (B)   If the Council shall deem it advisable to permit the
improvement to be made they shall so declare in a motion or resolution and
shall order the city civil engineer to establish a grade for the same, and
the Council shall enact an ordinance establishing the grade so made and
reported by the engineer and work shall be done under the general supervision
of the engineer. The same shall be constructed on the grade so given by the
engineer, and shall be done in substantial compliance with the description of
the improvement as set out in the application, or as the same may be changed
and modified by motion or resolution of the Council. The City Clerk-Treasurer
shall record and index the application and the changes and modifications made
in the same by the Council as aforesaid, and he or she shall also record and
index all subsequent proceedings relating to the matter in the proper minutes
of the Council proceedings.



   (C)   The expense of any improvement shall all be paid by the person
applying for permission to make the same.



   (D)   It is declared unlawful for any person to construct or
commence the construction of any improvement in any street, alley or sidewalk
without first having obtained permission in the manner aforesaid from the
Council, or to fail to place any improvement upon the grade so given as
aforesaid, or to fail to construct any improvement in the manner described in
the application, or as the same may have been changed and modified by the
Council.



(1982 Code, § 95.15)  (Ord. 39-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.07  REMOVING OR LOWERING GRADE STAKE; REMOVAL OF EARTH, STONE OR
GRAVEL.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person to remove, change or
deface, or to raise or lower any grade stake set by the civil engineer in the
city.



(1982 Code, § 95.16)  (Ord. 39-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   It is declared unlawful for any person to take and remove, or
cause to be removed any earth, stone, gravel or other material from any
sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds of the city without authority from
the Common Council so to do.



(1982 Code, § 95.17)  (Ord. 39-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.08  SIDEWALK REPAIR REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever any sidewalk in the city shall become out of repair
by reason of the brick or stone or other paving material becoming displaced,
or breaking, or giving way or being removed from its original position, or
when any walk becomes depressed and uneven in any part thereof and requires
leveling up; and for any reason any walk is defective and requires mending
and repair to make the same safe and convenient for public travel, it is made
the duty of the owner of the lot or lands abutting on that part of the
sidewalk in front of his or her lot or land to repair the same in compliance
with the requirements of the order of the Common Council so to do, as
hereinafter provided.



   (B)   When any sidewalk shall be out of repair as aforesaid, the
Council shall pass a resolution setting out the particulars and stating what
work will be required to put the same in repair and that property owner will
be required to put the same in repair and that property owner will be
required to repair in the walk in the manner set out resolution within 20
days after receiving notice to repair the same as hereinafter provided.



   (C)   The Street Commissioner shall immediately make out and serve
on the abutting property owner or his or her authorized agent, a written or
printed notice setting out the substance of the resolution, giving a
description of abutting property and notifying the owner of the property to
repair the walk as in the resolution required within 20 days from the service
of the notice and that on failure of the property owner so to repair the walk
within the time, the city will make the repairs at his or her expense.



   (D)   If the owner be a resident of the city, service of the notice
shall be had by leaving a copy thereof with the owner or by leaving the copy
at his or her last and usual place of residence.



   (E)   If the owner be a nonresident of the city and his or her
office address be known, then by mailing to him or her a copy of the notice
to his or her post office address.



   (F)   If the owner be a nonresident of the city and his or her post
office address be not known, then by posting up a copy of the notice in a
conspicuous place on the abutting lot or lands.



   (G)   And in case of a nonresident owner, the delivery of a copy of
the notice to his or her authorized agent shall be sufficient service.



   (H)   If the property owner shall fail to make the repairs in
compliance with the resolution and notice within the 20 days, then the Street
Commissioner shall make repairs, requited or cause the same to be made,
incurring no unnecessary expense therein. The Street Commissioner shall keep
an accurate account of the necessary cost of the work and he or she shall
file with the City Clerk-Treasurer an itemized verified account of the cost
of the work in which shall be given a description of the property and the
name of the owner thereof and the date when the work was done.



   (I)   Repairs so made, or caused to be made, shall be at the expense
of the abutting property owner and the city may recover the cost of any
repairs from the abutting property owner in an action against him or her, in
the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction. In that action
the city shall also recover its court costs and a reasonable fee for its
attorney for his or her services in its behalf.



(1982 Code, § 95.18)  (Ord. 35-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.09  PLACING OBSTRUCTIONS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person, firm, company or
corporation to place or deposit on any street, alley or sidewalk in the city
any rubbish, timber, brick, stone, sand or other building material, or any
box, barrel, coop, rack or any object or material of any kind or description
whatever, and suffer the same, or any part thereof to remain thereon, except
for a length of time as may be reasonably necessary in the act of loading,
unloading and handling the same in the course of transportation, or to leave
any vehicle not then being used, standing on any street, alley or sidewalk,
or to stop any vehicle and allow the same to remain standing on or over any
street or alley crossing, or to hitch any animal so that the same may get on
any crossing or on to any sidewalk or tree row while so hitched.



   (B)   Provided, that this section shall not apply to any telegraph,
telephone or other pole which composes a part of any system located and
maintained under any grant of right from the city, nor to merchandise exposed
for sale or display on any sidewalk within a space not extending more than 3
feet from the line of the property occupied for carrying on business by the
person putting out the display.



   (C)   Provided, also, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to any contractor or person when engaged in the performance of any
improvement contract with the city, nor to any person, company or corporation
engaged in the performance of any work in and on streets, alleys and
sidewalks authorized by any right or franchise granted by the city, nor to
any person when engaged in moving any house or other structure over any of
the streets under a permit from the city for the purpose, nor to any person
when engaged in the construction or repair of any building or grounds
abutting on any street, whenever the encumbering of any street is necessary
for the purpose of carrying on any of the works the same is authorized
subject to other ordinances of the city regulating the same.



   (D)   All show cases, boxes, barrels, coops, racks and other
contrivances used for the display of goods, wares or merchandise, as in this
section provided, must be removed from any street, alley or sidewalk during
the hours from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



(1982 Code, § 95.35)  (Ord. 37-1931, passed 9-28-1981)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.10  PERMIT REQUIRED TO DISPLAY/OBSTRUCT.



   (A)   Before any person, company or corporation shall be authorized
to obstruct any street, alley or sidewalk with building or other material, as
in the provision in § 153.09 above set out, a person, company or corporation
desiring to place an obstruction thereon shall apply to and obtain from the
Council a permit authorizing the obstruction but the permit shall only
authorize an obstruction for a reasonable time and to an extent as may be
reasonably necessary under the circumstances that may exist and in no case
shall the permit authorize the obstruction of any street to an extent
exceeding 1/2 of the width thereof and a sufficient width of street shall be
left open and unobstructed to admit the free passage of horses and vehicles
and the obstruction must be so arranged as not to prevent the free flow of
water through the street gutters at that point.



   (B)   All obstructions shall have red signal lights placed thereon
to warn travelers passing over the streets of the existence thereof and
obstructions shall be guarded otherwise by all reasonable and practicable
means.



(1982 Code, § 95.36)  (Ord. 37-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.11  ISSUANCE; BOND; LIABILITY.



   (A)   The permit authorized in § 153.10 above shall be issued by
the City Clerk-Treasurer on the order of the Council.



   (B)   Before the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue any permit so to
obstruct any street or alley with building material, the person applying for
the same shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer an indemnifying surety company
bond payable to the city with surety to be approved by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   The bond shall have a condition that the person applying for
the permit will pay any judgment that may be obtained against the city for
damages of any kind to any person or property resulting from the obstruction
or occasioned thereby, and will save the city harmless on account of any
damages or judgment and will defend at his or her own expense any suit that
may be instituted against the city for any damages, or for any cause growing
out of any obstruction.



(1982 Code, § 95.37)  (Ord. 37-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.12  ROOF, AWNING, SIGN OR STRUCTURES EXTENDING OVER STREET OR
SIDEWALK.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful to construct any shed, roof, awning or
sign over or across any street, alley or sidewalk in the city in a manner
that the outer edge of the same shall rest on posts or pillars placed in any
street, sidewalk or alley for the outer support of the same.



   (B)   It is unlawful to construct or adjust any other kind of awning
over and across any sidewalk in a manner as that any part of the awning, or
the irons or rigging for the support of the same shall be at a less distance
than 8 feet above the surface of the sidewalk which the same extends when the
awning is lowered.



(1982 Code, § 95.38)  (Ord. 37-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (C)   It is declared unlawful to construct or maintain any house,
barn, shed, fence or other structure in a manner so that any part of the
same, shall extend out over the property line and into and on any street,
alley or sidewalk of the city, and when any structure is found so located the
owner of the same shall remove the part so extending over the property line
from the street, alley or sidewalk, and, if the part is not removed from any
street, alley or sidewalk within 20 days of the date of receiving written
notice to remove the same, notice to be given by the Street Commissioner to
the owner of any house or other structure or to his or her agent, then the
Street Commissioner shall remove the part of any building or other structure
so extended out, over and into any street, alley or sidewalk doing as little
damage to the property as possible and at the least practicable expense and
the costs of removal shall be recovered by the city from the owner of the
property together with a reasonable attorney's fee for the collection of the
same.



   (D)   Provided, that the remedy herein provided shall not exempt the
person constructing or maintaining any building or structure from the penalty.



(1982 Code, § 95.35)  (Ord. 37-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.13  CELLAR OR STAIRWAY IN STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person, firm, company or
corporation to build, construct or maintain any cellar way or cellar door or
stairway in any part or portion of any sidewalk, street, alley or public
place in the city, provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed
as prohibiting the building of a coal chute, provided the same be firmly and
substantially arched and enclosed and covered with a substantial sidewalk,
but no opening in to any coal chute shall be allowed except in circular form
and not to exceed 20 inches in diameter, and the opening shall be at all
times, except when in actual use, kept securely closed and fastened with an
iron lid or grating, which must be kept and maintained in good repair and
shall be built flush with the surrounding sidewalk. The chute shall be
guarded when in use.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to build, construct or maintain any
opening in any street, sidewalk, alley or public place in the city, for the
purpose of furnishing light or ventilation to any cellar or basement window,
or for the purpose of furnishing access to a cellar or basement unless the
same shall be covered with a strong and substantial iron or steel door or
grating maintained and kept in good repair and built and maintained flush
with the surrounding sidewalk and no opening shall be more than 4 feet in
length or extended more than 3 feet from the property line.



(1982 Code, § 95.40)  (Ord. 37-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.14  EXCAVATIONS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   When any person, firm, company or corporation shall apply for
a permit or license from the Council or from any officer of the city,
authorizing the obstruction, for any purpose, of any street, alley or
sidewalk, or for the purpose of digging or cutting into, or making any
excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk, that person, firm, company or
corporation shall, before any permit is issued, file with the Clerk-Treasurer
a surety company bond, except as in other ordinances of the city containing
special provisions for bonds in those cases.



   (B)   The bond shall be payable to the city and shall be conditioned
that the person or company receiving the permit will use all reasonable care,
caution and diligence in the execution of the work or obstruction proposed to
prevent injury to person or property by reason of or resulting from the work
or obstruction, that they will protect any work or obstruction during the
continuance thereof with proper guards and signal lights, that the person or
company so receiving any permit will defend at his or her own expense any
suit that may be brought against the city, or to which the city may be a
party, to recover any damages to person or property alleged to have resulted
from the proposed obstruction, work, cut or excavation, and pay all damages,
or any and costs therefor and will save the city harmless on account of any
damages or judgment thereof. The bond shall be executed by some surety
company authorized to do business in the state, shall be subject to the
approval of the Clerk-Treasurer and shall inure to the benefit of any person
that may sustain injury to person or property resulting from any proposed
obstruction, work, cut or excavation. The amount of the bond shall be fixed
by the Common Council's Committee on streets and sewers as they may from time
to time determine and its order or orders made in pursuance thereof shall be
considered part of this section as though originally written herein.



   (C)   It is declared unlawful for any officer of the city to issue
any permit or license as in divisions (A) and (B) above designated until the
bond therein provided for shall have been filed; and it is also declared
unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to place any
obstruction in any street, alley or sidewalk or to make any cut or excavation
in any street, alley or sidewalk for any purpose until the bond shall have
been filed with and approved by the Clerk-Treasurer.



(1982 Code, § 95.41)  (Ord. 30-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.15  DIRT AND RUBBISH ON SIDEWALKS; REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner’s agent, occupant or
other person having the control of any lot or parcel of ground in the city in
front of which a sidewalk has been constructed, to throw or place any dirt,
rubbish, cut grass or weeds, or any other matter on a sidewalk in front of
his or her property. And in case dirt or mud shall fall or wash down from any
lot or lands abutting any sidewalk, it is made the duty of the owner, agent,
occupant or person having control of any property to remove any dirt or mud
from the sidewalk within 5 days after having been notified by the Street
Commissioners so to do.



   (B)   It is declared unlawful for the owner, agent or occupant of
any lot or ground in the city, in front of which any sidewalk has been
constructed, to allow or permit the sidewalk in front of that property to
become and remain obstructed by any accumulation of snow or ice, and it is
made the duty of any owner, agent or occupant, during the winter season and
during the time snow shall continue on the ground, by 10:00 a.m. on each and
every morning, to clean the sidewalk in front of the lot of ground free from
snow and ice and keep the sidewalk conveniently free thereof during the day.



(1982 Code, § 95.42)  (Ord. 31-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.16  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS FROM PLACES FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT.



   In billiard rooms, pool rooms, soft drink saloons and in all places in
the city kept for public entertainment, all screens and other artificial
obstructions shall be removed therefrom and the furniture and fixtures and
other objects shall be so arranged as to give a person standing at any point
on the sidewalk in front of the place a clear and entire view of the interior
thereof, except that columns and supports as are necessary to uphold the
building.



(1982 Code, § 95.43)  (Ord. 70-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.17  MOVING BUILDINGS OVER STREET; PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any building
over, across or along any street or alley, without first obtaining a written
permit so to do from the city civil engineer, as hereinafter provided.



(1982 Code, § 95.44)  (Ord. 24-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   The permit mentioned in § 153.14 above shall be issued on
application in writing, by the city civil engineer. The application shall
distinctly set forth the points from and to which removal is to be made,
shall accurately describe the building and shall set forth the route to be
taken and streets and alleys to be passed over. No building shall be removed
over any other street, alley or route than that specified in the permit.



(1982 Code, § 95.45)  (Ord. 24-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.18  BOND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   When the city civil engineer shall have granted any permit,
the City Clerk shall issue to the person to whom the permit shall have been
granted, a certified copy thereof under his or her hand and seal which shall
authorize the removal of the building for which the permit is granted.



   (B)   However, no copy shall be issued until the person asking the
same shall have filed with, and to the approval of the Clerk-Treasurer, a
bond with sufficient surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
work of removing the building according to the specifications in the permit,
and for the payment of any damages that the city may sustain to its streets
or otherwise by the removal of the building and that the obligors in the bond
will defend, at their own expense, any suit that may be brought against the
city for damages to person or property growing out of the removal of the
building and that they will pay any judgment that may be finally obtained in
any case and save the city harmless.



(1982 Code, § 95.40)  (Ord. 24-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.19  UNNECESSARY STOPPAGE OR DELAY; REPAIR OF DAMAGED STREET OR ALLEY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unnecessary
stoppage or delay on any street or alley in the removal of any building.



(1982 Code, § 95.47)  (Ord. 24-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



   (B)   If any person shall damage any street or alley over and along
which he or she shall remove any building he or she shall repair the same
within 24 hours after the occurrence of injury to the satisfaction of the
city civil engineer.



(1982 Code, § 95.48)  (Ord. 24-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99




POLE AND POST REGULATIONS




§ 153.30  WRITTEN CONSENT FOR ERECTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to
hereafter erect, or maintain any pole or post in any street, alley, sidewalk
or public place within the city, without first having obtained the consent of
the Street and Alley Committee of the Common Council in writing, signed by
the Chairperson of the Committee.



(1982 Code, § 95.55)  (Ord. 29-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.31  WRITTEN NOTICE FOR LOCATION AND TYPE.



   (A)   Before locating any poles or posts, the person, company or
corporation desiring so to do shall give notice in writing to the Committee
or to the Council of his or her desire to locate certain poles or posts and
shall set out in a notice the kind, probable number of the same, the purpose
for which the same are to be used, the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
place on which it is desired to locate the same.



   (B)   Whereupon the Street and Alley Committee, together with the
person or the representative of the company or corporation shall go over the
streets, alleys and public places named in the notice and the Committee shall
designate the place where each of the poles, or posts may be erected and
maintained, subject, however, to future removal or relocation on reasonable
notice from the city in the event of reasonable requirements of street or
other public improvements, or if other reasonable necessity should require
removal or relocation of any poles or posts so located. The city shall be the
sole judge of the reasonable necessity for the removal or relocation of any
pole or poles at any subsequent time.



   (C)   The written permit provided for in § 153.30 shall specify the
location of each of the poles or posts so designated by the Committee, and it
shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to erect or maintain
any pole or post at a point other than that designated by the Committee.



   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to any person,
company or corporation authorized under any grant, license or franchise from
the city, to erect or maintain any poles or posts in the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public places, as well as to all other persons, companies or
corporations not so authorized.



(1982 Code, § 95.56)  (Ord. 29-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.32  REMOVAL OR RELOCATION.



   In case of the location of any pole or post in any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place without the written consent of the Street and Alley
Committee of the Council having first been obtained as hereinbefore provided,
or in case of the erection of the same at a point other than the place
designated as aforesaid, or in case there should exist a reasonable necessity
for the removal or relocation of any pole or post for reasons as in § 153.31
hereof designated, and the person, company or corporation so maintaining any
pole or post shall fall or refuse, after reasonable notice, to remove or
relocate the same, then and in either of the cases the city, through its
officers, agents and employees, shall have the right to remove any poles or
posts and the cost of removal or relocation may be recovered by the city from
the person, company or corporation so locating and maintaining the same in an
action therefore in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(1982 Code, § 95.57)  (Ord. 29-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.33  ABANDONED POLES TO BE REMOVED.



   (A)   Hereafter, whenever any electric light, telegraph, telephone
or other poles or similar objects used by any person or corporation, shall be
abandoned and not used any longer, the pole or object must be removed from
the street or other public place in which it is located.



   (B)   The hole occasioned by the removal filled and tamped with some
proper material in reasonable thin layers that the same will be solid and not
sink and leave any depression on the surface.



   (C)   After it is removed, the pole shall be cut off at least 6
inches below the surface of the ground and the excavation caused thereby
filled up and tamped, as in case when the poles are removed.



   (D)   When any pole is removed or cut off in any sidewalk, street or
other public place which has been improved in any manner with concrete,
stone, brick, gravel or other improving material, the top of the excavation
shall be filled in with the same material as that surrounding the pole, and
as near like the surrounding improvements as possible, and shall be made
flush with the surface of the street, sidewalk or other improvement.



(1982 Code, § 95.58)  (Ord. 29-1931, passed 9-22-1931)



§ 153.34  CHARGES FOR STREET REPAIRS AND RECLAMATION.



   (A)   Upon the request of any person, private contractor, public
utility, firm, partnership, association or corporation, including the Brazil
Waterworks and the City of Brazil Sewage Department (city utility), to the
Street Department to repair and make reclamation of any public street, alley,
sidewalk or other public right-of-way located within the corporate limits,
which has been dug, damaged, excavated or removed by the person or city
utility requesting same, the city shall charge the person or city utility the
following schedule of charges for making necessary repairs and reclamation:



      (1)   Actual cost of materials used;



      (2)   $10 per hour per person for labor;



      (3)   $15 per hour per truck used; and



      (4)   $25 per hour per backhoe used.



   (B)   (1)   To request the city to repair or make reclamation as
provided in division (A) above, the person or city utility shall file a
request for same with the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall then issue a written work
order to the Street Department Supervisor specifying the location of the
needed work signed by the Mayor as authorizing the work do be performed.



   (C)   (1)   Upon completion of the necessary repairs or
reclamation, the Street Department Supervisor shall submit a "Street Repair
Completion Report" to the Clerk-Treasurer which specifies the date of the
work order, date and location of the work done, description and cost of
materials used, number of person hours used, number of truck hours used and
number of backhoe hours used.



      (2)   The Street Department Supervisor shall sign the report
approving it before submitting it to the Clerk-Treasurer for payment.



      (3)   This section applies to any repairs, improvement,
reclamation or work done, called for or required by §§ 153.06, 153.07(B),
153.08, 153.12 and 153.13.



      (4)   Upon failure of any person, excluding city utilities, to
pay the designated charges for any work performed and materials purchased by
the Street Department personnel pursuant to this section within 60 days of
the date the bill was sent by the Clerk-Treasurer to the person, the city may
utilize any and all legal and equitable remedies available to it to collect
the charges.



(1982 Code, § 95.68)  (Ord. 13-1982, passed 7-26-1982)



§ 153.35  APPLICATION FOR STREET CUT PERMIT.



   The following application shall be used:




1. Name and Address of
Applicant:   ________________________________________________





2. Telephone Number of
Applicant:   ________________________________________________





3. Reason for Street
Cut:   _______________________________________________________




_______________________________________________________________________________
_



4. Is excavation (removal of surface and sub-surface materials) required: ___
If so, please explain:



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



5. Size of street cut and excavation (length, width, depth):
________________________________



6. Name/address/telephone number of person or firm performing the cut and
excavation:



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



   a. Name and title of representative in charge of cut and work:
__________________________



7. Date of commencement of work: _____     8. Date or anticipated date of
completion of work: __



9. Name/address/telephone number of person or firm performing street
reclamation:



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



   a. Name and title of representative in charge:
________________________________________



   b. Describe Method of Reclamation:
_______________________________________________



10. $25 permit fee submitted: _________     11. Plat map or scaled drawing
submitted: _________



12. Cash Bond: _____ (check)           13. Performance Bond:
___________ (check)



14. Applicant is: ___ Individual ___ Firm ___ Corporation ___ Association ___
Partnership



___Public Utility



APPLICATION FOR STREET CUT PERMIT: Applicant, by signing below, in
consideration for the issuance of a street cut permit, agrees to hold
harmless and indemnify the City of Brazil, its officers, employees, agents
and representatives against any and all damages and claim for damages which
may be asserted against the city and the like by reason of or arising out of
the street cut or excavation and any work done as a result thereof for which
a permit has been issued.



Date: ________________  Applicant:
_______________________________________________



Approved: _______________________    
__________________________________________



         Clerk-Treasurer         Street Department
Supervisor



Permit No. _______     Issued _______ (date)     Permit Denied
___________________



Reasons:
_______________________________________________________________________



(1982 Code, Title IX, Appendix)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 153.02 or 153.03 shall
be fined not more than $25.



(1982 Code, § 95.99(13))  (Ord. 10-1966, passed 4-26-1966)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 153.06 and 153.07, and
§§ 153.09 through 153.13(A) shall be fined not more than $50.



(1982 Code, § 95.99(C))  (Ord. 47-1931; passed 9-22-1931; Am. Ord. 70-1931,
passed 9-22-1931)



   (D)   Any person violating the provisions by making a cut or
excavation in a public street without first obtaining a permit shall be
guilty of an order violation and subject to a penalty consisting of a fine in
the amount of $2,500 for each violation.



(1982 Code, § 95.99(E))  (Ord. 14-1981, passed 9-28-1981)



   (E)   For violations of this subchapter, a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



(1982 Code, § 95.99(E)(F))



CHAPTER 154:  HOUSING CODE; HOUSE NUMBERING PLAN



Section




Philadelphia Plan of Numbering Houses




   154.01   Plan adopted



   154.02   General provisions



   154.03   Mandatory compliance required



   154.04   Costs to home owners when failing to comply



   154.99   Penalty




PHILADELPHIA PLAN OF NUMBERING HOUSES




§ 154.01  PLAN ADOPTED.



   The plan known as the Philadelphia System of Numbering Houses be and
the same is adopted in the city.



(1982 Code, § 95.07(A))



§ 154.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The Philadelphia Plan of Numbering Houses, as adopted, is as follows:



   (A)   All streets running north and south from National Avenue,
formerly Main Street, as a base, with odd numbers on the right-hand side and
even numbers on the left-hand side, thus commencing at National Avenue,
formerly Main Street, with 1 and 2 and add successively 100 to the serial at
the crossing of each street, until the north or south limit of the city is
reached.



   (B)   All streets running east and west from Walnut Street as the
base, with odd numbers on the right-hand side and even numbers on the
left-hand side, thus commencing at Walnut Street with 1 and 2 and add
successively 100 to the serial at the crossing of each street until the east
and west limit of the city is reached.



(1982 Code, § 95.07(B))



§ 154.03  MANDATORY COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owners of all houses in the city are required, within 30
days, to number their houses in accordance with the plan set forth in §
154.02, the numbers to be placed on a conspicuous part of the building and in
figures not less than 2 inches in size.



   (B)   The plan or chart showing the numbers of the different houses
on various streets, prepared by the city engineer and deposited with the City
Clerk-Treasurer, as directed by Ord. No. 667 passed by the Common Council on
July 21, 1891, is adopted for the numbering of the houses, as herein provided
for and the chart shall be kept at the office and open to the inspection of
any person desiring to examine the same.



(1982 Code, § 95.07(C),(D))  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.04  COSTS TO HOME OWNERS WHEN FAILING TO COMPLY.



   On the failure of the owner of any house in the city to number the same
as required in § 154.03 above, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to
cause the same to be done and the engineer so doing the work shall be paid
for the same from the City Treasury and the same recovered from the owner of
the house so numbered in a suit in the name of the city, together with all
costs.



(1982 Code, § 95.07(E1))  (Ord. 72-1931, passed 9-22-1931)  Penalty, see
§ 154.99



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (D)   Should any person violating any of the specified divisions (A)
or (B) above not pay the designated civil penalty at the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days after being served with a citation, the
violator shall be summoned into court.



   (E)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that
a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 16-1999, passed 8-24-1999)



CHAPTER 155:  EXCAVATION REGULATIONS



Section



   155.01   Definitions



   155.02   Permit required



   155.03   Application; fees



   155.04   Bond required



   155.05   Reclamation of street



   155.06   Emergency



§ 155.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Any individual, firm, partnership, association or
corporation registered with and under the jurisdiction of the Public Service
Commission of Indiana which provides for the production, transmission,
delivery or furnishing of heat, light, water or power; or for the collection,
treatment, purification and disposal in a sanitary manner of liquid or solid
wastes, sewage, night soil and industrial waste; or provide for the
conveyance of telegraph or telephone messages, but specifically excludes
municipally-owned and operated utilities of the city.



   RECLAMATION.  The repair or replacement of a public street in as good
or better condition as it was prior to any cut or excavation, and in a manner
so as to prevent, as much as possible, future subsidence of the street
surface in the area of the cut.



   STREET CUT or EXCAVATION.  Any cut of the surface material of any
public street under the control and jurisdiction of the city, plus any
digging and removal of surface and sub-surface material of and below the
street.



(1982 Code, § 95.25)  (Ord. 14-1981, passed 9-28-1981)



§ 155.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any cut or excavation of
any kind in any public street located within the corporate boundaries of the
city, and under the control of the city or that which the city is required to
maintain, unless that person first applies for and obtains a street cut
permit according to the provisions of this subchapter.



(1982 Code, § 95.26)  (Ord. 14-1981, passed 9-28-1981)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 155.03  APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Any person desiring to make a cut or excavation into a public
street shall, before making the cut or excavation, apply for a street cut
permit with the City Clerk-Treasurer on the prescribed form available at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer by completing the form and providing the
information with the Clerk-Treasurer along with the permit application
requested therein; filing the application fee of $25, a plat map or other
scaled drawing indicating the exact location of the proposed cut or
excavation, and the proper bond.



   (B)   The street cut application form shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the person
applying for the permit;



      (2)   The specific reason or reasons for which a street cut
permit is being requested;



      (3)   The size of the cut or excavation, including length,
width and depth;



      (4)   Name, address and telephone number of the person or
company contracted by the applicant who will perform the actual cut or
excavation if it is to be done by someone other than the applicant;



      (5)   The specific date that the cut or excavation is to be
made or recommenced and the late (or anticipated date) of completion of the
work necessitating the cut;



      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the person or
company contracted by the applicant who will be performing the street
reclamation following completion of the work; and



      (7)   A statement that the applicant agrees to hold harmless
and indemnify the city against any and all damages and claim for damages
which may be asserted against the city or its officers, employees or agents
by reason of or arising out of the street cut or excavation and any work done
as a result thereof.



   (C)   On the proper submission of the street cut application, the
application fee, plat map or scaled drawing and bond to the City
Clerk-Treasurer at least 10 days prior to the scheduled cut or excavation,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a street cut permit to the applicant within
at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the cut or excavation after
obtaining approval of the Street Department Supervisor.



   (D)   A copy of the permit shall be supplied to the Street
Department Supervisor, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief and the Mayor by the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(1982 Code, § 95.27)  (Ord. 14-1984, passed 9-28-1981)



§ 155.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   At the time of filing and submission of a street cut permit, the
applicant shall file a performance bond as follows:



   (A)   For an individual, partnership, association or corporation,
other than a public utility, a cash bond in the amount of $500 shall be
deposited with the Clerk-Treasurer;



   (B)   For a public utility, a performance bond from a reputable
bonding company in the amount of $10,000 shall be supplied to the
Clerk-Treasurer with the application, which shall be in full force and effect
for 1 year and renewable annually;



   (C)   Any cash bond filed shall be returned to the applicant
following reclamation of the street in compliance with this subchapter and to
the satisfaction of the Street Department Supervisor. If reclamation is not
so completed, the Clerk-Treasurer shall retain the cash bond; and



   (D)   If a public utility which obtained a street cut permit does
not perform proper reclamation of the street, the city may seek relief from
that utility's bonding company and perform the necessary repairs and
reclamation itself.



(1981 Code, § 95.28)  (Ord. 14-1981, passed 9-28-1981)



§ 155.05  RECLAMATION OF STREET.



   On completion of the work or repairs by the applicant which
necessitated the street cut or excavation, the applicant shall make
reclamation of the street in the area of the cut or excavation within 45 days
therefrom according to the following specifications:



   (A)   Backfill with a minimum of 12 inches of sand above any
underground water, sewer or public utility lines;



   (B)   Apply or fill the cut or excavation with #53 stone;



   (C)   When the above material has settled or subsided sufficiently
to avoid further subsidence, apply a minimum of 4 inches of finish blacktop
to the affected area;



   (D)   Before the applicant may be released from further obligation
of reclamation, the Street Department Supervisor must approve the reclamation
performed; and



   (E)   Failure of an applicant to properly make proper reclamation
may result in the denial of issuance of any future street cut permits to the
applicant.



(1982 Code, § 95.29)  (Ord. 14-1981, passed 9-28-1981)



§ 155.06  EMERGENCY.



   If an emergency occurs necessitating a cut or excavation of any public
street and it is not feasible for the person or utility to apply for and be
issued a street cut permit for the reason that the public health and safety
is in jeopardy or the Clerk-Treasurer's office is not open for business, the
person or utility may proceed with the act or excavation and obtain a permit
during the next day the Clerk-Treasurer's office is open for business.



(1982 Code, § 95.30)  (Ord. 14-1981, passed 9-28-1981)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General; Comprehensive Master Development Plan




   156.001   Authority to establish zoning and planning regulations



   156.002   Designation, title and purpose of subchapter



   156.003   Content and subjects



   156.004   Authority of plan



   156.005   Effect of plan



   156.006   Continuing authority of the City Plan Commission



   156.007   Plan on file



   156.008   Responsibility of the City Clerk-Treasurer



   156.009   Amendments




Administration and Enforcement of Chapter




   156.020   Role of Planning Administrator



   156.021   Requirements for an improvement location permit



   156.022   Issuance of improvement location permit for special
exceptions



   156.023   Certificate of occupancy required



   156.024   Requirements to make changes to use of land or buildings



   156.025   Simultaneous filing for certificate of occupancy and
improvement location permit



   156.026   Records of all certificates of occupancy



   156.027   Issuance requirements



   156.028   Review of minimum lot size, width requirements and sewage
disposal standards required prior to issuance



   156.029   Six-month requirement to commence authorized work or use
and 2-year completion deadline



   156.030   Board of Zoning Appeals; membership and meetings



   156.031   Powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals



   156.032   Enforcement by injunctions through circuit court



   156.033   Mandatory injunctions to remove violating structures



   156.034   Abatement of common nuisances




Subdivisions; General Provisions




   156.045   Establishment of control by the Commission



   156.046   Definitions



   156.047   Application



   156.048   Preliminary plat for subdivision



   156.049   Preliminary plat approval



   156.050   Final plat specifications



   156.051   Final plat approval




Standards of Design and Improvement




   156.065   Compliance of final plat



   156.066   Compliance to comprehensive plan



   156.067   General principles



   156.068   Blocks



   156.069   Lots



   156.070   Easements



   156.071   Building setback lines



   156.072   Public open spaces



   156.073   Conformance and installation



   156.074   Monuments and markers



   156.075   Streets



   156.076   Sewers



   156.077   Water



   156.078   Public utility improvements



   156.079   Curb and gutter



   156.080   Sidewalks



   156.081   Signs



   156.082   Street lights and fire hydrants




Plat Certificates and Deed of Dedication




   156.095   Commission certificates



   156.096   County Commissioner's certificate



   156.097   Registered land surveyor's certificate



   156.098   Deed of dedication




Official Thoroughfare Plan




   156.110   Short title



   156.111   Maps of thoroughfares



   156.112   Drawing



   156.113   Designation of thoroughfares



   156.114   Street opening or widening regulations



   156.115   Location of streets



   156.116   Consideration of public agencies



   156.117   Issuance of permits



   156.118   Street improvement program



   156.119   Thoroughfare Fund



   156.120   Authority for procedure



   156.121   Method of procedure; role of the Board of Public Works



   156.122   Method of procedure; role of the Common Council



   156.123   Priority of thoroughfare improvements



   156.124   Continuing authority of the Plan Commission



   156.125   Amendments



   156.126   Copies on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer




Zoning Code




   156.140   Short title



   156.141   Definitions



   156.142   Interpretation



   156.143   Conflicting provisions



   156.144   District boundaries



   156.145   Annexed or vacated areas



   156.146   Use



   156.147   Encroachments



   156.148   Lots



   156.149   Loading and unloading berths



   156.150   Surfacing parking area



   156.151   Filing fees



   156.152   Amendments



   156.153   Farms exempt



   156.154   Public utility installations exempt



   156.155   Mineral extraction exempt



   156.156   Establishment of 10 districts and Zone Map



   156.157   Residential uses and requirements



   156.158   Business uses and requirements



   156.159   Shopping center plan



   156.160   Industrial uses, standards and requirements



   156.161   Contingent uses and requirements



   156.162   Special exceptions



   156.163   Nonconforming use



   156.164   Residential uses and requirements



   156.165   Business uses and requirements



   156.166   Business uses; loading and unloading berths



   156.167   Business uses: parking spaces required



   156.168   Industrial uses and requirements



   156.169   Industrial uses; loading and unloading berths



   156.170   Contingent uses and requirements



   156.171   Contingent uses; maximum height



   156.172   Special exceptions and requirements




Improvement Location Permit




   156.185   Permit required



   156.186   Issuance



   156.187   Application and fees



   156.188   Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals



   156.189   Amendments



   156.190   Enforcement through abatement and injunctions




Manufactured Homes




   156.215   Purpose of regulations



   156.216   Definitions



   156.217   Placement of manufactured home; procedure



   156.218   Placement requirements




Signs




   156.230   Definitions



   156.231   Intent



   156.232   Scope



   156.233   Administration and enforcement



   156.234   Prohibited signs



   156.235   Nonconforming signs



   156.236   Appeals



   156.237   General sign requirements



   156.238   Residential and agricultural signage



   156.239   Business and industrial signage



   156.240   Special displays and other temporary signs



   156.241   Standard outdoor advertising structure (billboards)



   156.999   Penalty




GENERAL; COMPREHENSIVE MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN




§ 156.001  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH ZONING AND PLANNING REGULATIONS.



   A city may regulate in this area pursuant to the following state
statutes:



   (A)   I.C. 36-7-4-100 Series: Applicability and Rules;



   (B)   I.C. 36-7-4-200 Series: Establishment of Commission;



   (C)   I.C. 36-7-4-300 Series: Organization of Commission;



   (D)   I.C. 36-7-4-400 Series: Duties and Powers of the Commission;



   (E)   I.C. 36-7-4-500 Series: Comprehensive Plan;



   (F)   I.C. 36-7-4-600 Series: Zoning;



   (G)   I.C. 36-7-4700 Series: Subdivision Control;



   (H)   I.C. 36-7-4-800 Series: Improvement Location Permits;



   (I)   I.C. 36-7-4900 Series: Board of Zoning Appeals; and



   (J)   I.C. 36-7-4-1000 Series: Remedies and Enforcement.



§ 156.002  DESIGNATION, TITLE AND PURPOSE OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Comprehensive Master Development Plan Ordinance."



(1982 Code, § 153.01)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a single
unified code consisting of all plans, reports and ordinances plus
supplemental details as contained in the report of the City Plan Commission
entitled "Comprehensive Master Development Plan, 1964, Brazil, Indiana," that
deal with the subject of planning as a comprehensive guide to the future
growth and development of the city and its environs.



(1982 Code, § 153.02)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.003  CONTENT AND SUBJECTS.



   The Comprehensive Master Development Plan consists of a descriptive
report dated 1964, entitled "Comprehensive Master Development Plan, Brazil,
Indiana," together with the provisions of the maps, charts, plans and
ordinances which have heretofore or may hereafter be enacted concerning the
following subjects:



   (A)   Zoning;



   (B)   Subdivision control;



   (C)   Thoroughfares;



   (D)   School;



   (E)   Park;



   (F)   Recreation;



   (G)   Public areas and public works program and budget; and



   (H)   The Comprehensive Master Development Plan.



(1982 Code, § 153.03)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.004  AUTHORITY OF PLAN.



   The layout, the location, relocation, extension or widening of
thoroughfares; the general design of neighborhoods and their street patterns;
the use of land; their street patterns; the use of land; and the location of
sites for schools, parks, recreation and other public uses and community
facilities shall conform to the principles, policies and provisions of the
Comprehensive Master Development Plan.



(1982 Code, § 153.04)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.005  EFFECT OF PLAN.



   The City Council and all municipal boards, commissions and all other
agencies of the city shall be guided by and give consideration to the general
policy and pattern of development set out in the Comprehensive Master
Development Plan prior to the authorization, construction, alteration or
abandonment of any public installation, required or necessitated in the
interest of the physical development of the city and its environs.



(1982 Code, § 153.05)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.006  CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF THE CITY PLAN COMMISSION.



   The City Plan Commission shall from time to time consider and review
proposals with respect to changes and amendments in the Comprehensive Master
Development Plan and, on conclusion of consideration including a public
hearing thereon, shall certify to the Common Council their report on those
matters.



( 1982 Code, § 153.06)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.007  PLAN ON FILE.



   The maps, charts, plans and reports which comprise the Comprehensive
Master Development Plan are on file in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer, and are available for public inspection during all regular
office hours of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(1982 Code, § 153.07)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.008  RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CITY CLERK-TREASURER.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer is ordered and directed to keep on file, for
public inspection during all regular office hours, 2 copies of the
Comprehensive Master Development Plan including maps, charts, plans and
ordinances referred to herein.



(1982 Code, § 153.08)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.009  AMENDMENTS.



   The Comprehensive Master Development Plan may be amended from time to
time following a report thereon by the City Plan Commission prepared either
on the direction of the Common Council or on its own initiative.



(1982 Code, § 153.04)  (Ord. 18-1964, passed - -)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER




§ 156.020  ROLE OF PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Planning Administrator is designated and authorized to enforce this
chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.021  REQUIREMENTS FOR AN IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person who shall make application for an improvement
location permit shall, at the time of making that application, furnish a site
plan or development plan of the real estate on which the application is made
at least 5 days prior to the issuance of the improvement location permit.
Five days may be waived by the Planning Administrator.



   (B)   The site plan shall be drawn to scale showing the following
items, both existing and proposed:



      (1)   Legal or site description of the real estate involved;



      (2)   Location and size of all buildings and structures;



      (3)   Width and length of all entrances and exists to and from
the real estate; and



      (4)   All adjacent and adjoining roads and highways.



   (C)   An application for an improvement location permit for any
enclosed industrial use or open industrial use, subject to the provisions of
this chapter and § 156.168, shall be accompanied by a certificate of
compliance subscribed by a registered professional engineer or architect,
certifying that the use intended will satisfy the standards of the enclosed
industrial use or open industrial use, as the case may be, and in the
district in which it is to be located.



   (D)   The Planning Administrator may take 10 days in which to study
the application, during which time he or she may consult with appropriate
technical consultants. If after the 10-day period, the Planning Administrator
has not required any additional information or stated any objections in
writing, the Planning Administrator shall issue the improvement location
permit.



   (E)   Site plans or development plans so furnished shall be filed
and shall become a permanent public record.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.022  ISSUANCE OF IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   The Planning Administrator shall issue an improvement location permit
for a special exception only following receipt of notice from the Board that
the application therefor has been approved by the Board.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.023  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.



   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued stating that the building and use comply
with all of the provisions of this chapter applicable to the building or
premises or the use in the district in which it is to be located.



   (B)   When the improvement covered by the improvement location
permit has been completed in substantial conformity with the site plan or
development plan submitted in the application pursuant to § 156.021, a
certificate of occupancy shall then be issued.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.024  REQUIREMENTS TO MAKE CHANGES TO USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.



   No change shall be made in the use of land, except as provided in this
chapter, the use of any building or part thereof, now or hereafter erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered, without a certificate of occupancy
having been issued by the Planning Administrator and no certificates shall be
issued to make a change unless it is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.025  SIMULTANEOUS FILING FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND IMPROVEMENT
LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally
with the application for an improvement location permit.



   (B)   It shall be issued within 10 days after the lawful erection,
reconstruction or structural alteration of the building or other improvement
of the land shall been completed.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.026  RECORDS OF ALL CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the Planning Administrator. Copies shall be furnished on request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land
affected.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.027  ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   No improvement location permit shall be issued for excavation for or
the erection, reconstruction or structural alteration of any building, before
application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.028  REVIEW OF MINIMUM LOT SIZE, WIDTH REQUIREMENTS AND SEWAGE
DISPOSAL STANDARDS REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE.



   An application for an improvement location permit for any use shall not
be approved until it has been ascertained by the Planning Administrator that
the proposed use and minimum lot size and width meets the minimum standards
for a sewage disposal system as required by the City or County Health Officer.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.029  SIX-MONTH REQUIREMENT TO COMMENCE AUTHORIZED WORK OR USE AND
2-YEAR COMPLETION DEADLINE.



   (A)   The work or use authorized by any improvement location permit,
certificate of occupancy or permit for a variance, contingent use or other
permit, except for a special exception, must be commenced within 6 months of
the date of the issuance of a certificate or permit, otherwise the same shall
lapse and be and become null and void.



   (B)   All work so authorized shall be completed within 2 years from
the issuance of the certificate or permit therefor, except for a special
exception, and provided that for good cause shown the Planning Administrator
may extend the work completion time.



(1982 Code, § 156.28)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.030  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; MEMBERSHIP AND MEETINGS.



   (A)   A Board of Zoning Appeals is established with membership and
appointment provided in accordance with §§ 66 through 69 of Ch. 174 of the
Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of 1947 and all acts now or hereafter
amendatory thereto.



   (B)   At the first meeting of each year, the Board shall elect a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members. It may appoint and
fix the compensation of a secretary and employees as are necessary for the
discharge of its duties. All action shall be in conformity to and compliance
with salaries and compensation theretofore fixed by the legislative authority.



   (C)   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep records of its examinations
and other official actions, prepare findings and record the vote of each
member voting on each question. All minutes and records shall be filed in the
office of the Board and shall be a public record.



(1982 Code, § 156.29)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.031  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Any decision of the Planning Administrator in the enforcement
of this chapter may be appealed to the Board by any person claiming to be
adversely affected by the decision.



(1982 Code, § 156.29)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



   (B)   The Board shall have the following powers and it shall be its
duty to:



      (1)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning Administrator in
the enforcement of this chapter;



      (2)   Permit and authorize exceptions to the district
regulations only in the classes of cases or in particular situations as
specified in the section;



      (3)   Hear and decide on permits for special exceptions,
development plans or other uses on which the Board is required to act under
this chapter; and



      (4)   Authorize on appeal in specific cases variances from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to special conditions, fully demonstrated on the basis of the facts
presented, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this chapter shall
be observed and substantial justice done.



   (C)   In exercising its powers, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed form as in its opinion ought to be done in the
premises. To that end, the Board shall have all the powers of the Planning
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
certiorari.



   (E)   No variance in the application of the provisions of this
chapter shall be made by the Board relating to buildings, lands or premises
now existing or to be constructed, unless after a public hearing, the Board
shall find:



      (1)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applicable to the property or to the intended use
that do not apply generally to the other property or class of use in the same
vicinity and district;



      (2)   That a variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the
same vicinity and district but which is denied to the property in question;



      (3)   That the granting of a variance will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvement
in the vicinity and district in which the property is located; and/or



      (4)   That the granting of a variance will not alter the land
use characteristics of the vicinity and district, diminish the marketable
value of adjacent land and improvements or increase the congestion in the
public streets.



(1982 Code, § 156.29)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.032  ENFORCEMENT BY INJUNCTIONS THROUGH CIRCUIT COURT.



   The Commission, the Board, the Planning Administrator or any designated
enforcement official or any person, firm or corporation, jointly or severally
aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court of Clay
County to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating the
provisions of this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.98)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.033  MANDATORY INJUNCTIONS TO REMOVE VIOLATING STRUCTURES.



   The Commission or the Board may also institute a suit for mandatory
injunction directing any individual, corporation or a governmental unit to
remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.98)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.034  ABATEMENT OF COMMON NUISANCES.



   Any building erected, raised or converted, or land or premises used in
violation of any provisions of this chapter is declared to be a common
nuisance and as so may be abated in a manner so as nuisances are now or may
hereafter be abated under existing law.



(1982 Code, § 156.98)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)




SUBDIVISIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 156.045  ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROL BY THE COMMISSION.



   No plat or replat of a subdivision of land located within the
jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission shall be recorded until it shall
have been approved by the Commission. Approval shall been entered in writing
on the plat by the President and Secretary of the Commission.



(1982 Code, § 154.01)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.046  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A permanent public service way provided in a secondary means
of access to abutting lands.



   BLOCK.  Property abutting on 1 side of a street, and lying between the
2 nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or
other definite barrier.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line nearest the front of and across a lot
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of
buildings and structures and the front lot line.



   CITY ENGINEER.  The engineer of the city.



   COMMISSION.  The City Plan Commission.



   COMPREHENSIVE MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  The complete plan, or any of
its parts, for the development of the city prepared by the Commission and
adopted in accordance with Ch. 174, Acts of 1947, General Assembly of
Indiana, as is now or may hereafter be in effect.



   CUL-DE-SAC or DEAD-END STREET.  A short street having 1 end open to
traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turn-around.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land
by the public, a corporation or persons, for specified purposes.



   JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION.  The city and the contiguous
unincorporated territory shown on a map filed by the City Plan Commission
with the Recorder of Clay County.



   LOT.  A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as
a unit for transfer of ownership or development.



   MAJOR STREET OR HIGHWAY PLAN or THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The part of the
Comprehensive Master Development Plan for the city, now or hereafter adopted
which includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth the location,
alignment, dimensions, identification and classification of existing and
proposed streets, highways and other thoroughfares.



   PLACE.  An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley,
permanently reserved for use as the principal means of access to abutting
property.



   STREET.  A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated or otherwise
legally established to the public use, usually affording the principal means
of access to abutting property. A STREET may be designated as a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, land, drive or other
appropriate name.



      ARTERIAL STREET.  A street designated for large volumes of
traffic movement. Certain ARTERIAL STREETS may be classes as limited access
highways to which entrances and exists are provided only at controlled
intersections and access is denied to abutting properties.



      FEEDER STREET.  A street planned to facilitate the collection of
traffic from residential streets, and to provide circulation within
neighborhood areas and convenient ways for traffic to reach arterial streets.



      RESIDENTIAL STREET.  A street designate primarily to provide
access to abutting properties, usually residential. Certain RESIDENTIAL
STREETS may be marginal access streets parallel to arterial streets, which
provide access to abutting property and ways for traffic to reach access
points on arterial streets.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person or persons, firm or corporation engaged in
developing or improving a tract of land which complies with the definition of
a subdivision as defined below.



   SUBDIVISION. 



      (1)   The division of any parcel of land into 2 or more
parcels, sites or lots, any 1 of which is less than 5 acres in area for the
purpose of transfer of ownership, or building development, providing that the
division or partition of land into parcels not involving any new streets or
easements of access shall not be considered a subdivision; or



      (2)   The improvement of 1 or more parcels of land for
residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures
involving the subdivision and allocation of land as streets or other open
spaces for common use by owners, occupants or lease use by owners, occupants
or lease holders or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public
sewer, water, storm drainage or other public utilities and facilities.



   ZONING CODE.  The part of the Master Plan, now or hereafter adopted,
which includes an ordinance and Zone Map which divides the jurisdiction of
the Commission into districts, with regulations and requirements and
procedures for the establishment of land use controls.



(1982 Code, § 154.02)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.047  APPLICATION.



   A subdivider desiring approval of a plat of a subdivision of any land
lying within the jurisdiction of the Commission, shall submit a written
application therefor to the Commission. The application shall be accompanied
by the information, requirements and plans set forth in this subchapter, all
in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 154.05)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.048  PRELIMINARY PLAT FOR SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   The owner or subdivider shall provide a preliminary plan of
the subdivision which shall show the manner in which the proposed subdivision
is coordinated with the Comprehensive Master Development Plan and its
provisions; specifically, with relation to the requirements of the major
street or highway plan, school and recreational sites, shopping centers,
community facilities, sanitation, water supply and drainage and other
developments existing and proposed, in the vicinity.



   (B)   However, no land shall be subdivided for residential use
unless adequate access to the land over improved streets or thoroughfares
exists or will be provided by the subdivider, or if the land is considered by
the Commission to be unsuitable for the use by reason of flooding or improper
drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation, topography or any other
feature harmful to the health and safety of possible residents and the
community as a whole.



   (C)   The subdivider shall provide the following:



      (1)   Location map (which may be prepared by indicating the
data by notations on available maps showing:



         (a)   Subdivision name and location;



         (b)   Any thoroughfares related to the subdivision;



         (c)   Existing elementary and high schools, parks and
playgrounds, serving the area proposed to be subdivided and other community
facilities; and



         (d)   Title, scale, north point and date.



      (2)   A preliminary plat showing:



         (a)   Proposed name of the subdivision;



         (b)   Names and addresses of the owner, owners or land
surveyor;



         (c)   Streets and rights-of-way, on and adjoining the
site of the proposed subdivision showing the names (which shall not duplicate
other names of streets in the community, unless in the case of an extension
of an existing street) and including roadway widths, approximate gradients,
types and widths of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, tree planting and
other pertinent data;



         (d)   Easements; locations, widths and purposes;



         (e)   Statement concerning the location and approximate
size or capacity of utilities to be installed;



         (f)   Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers;



         (g)   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or
community purposes;



         (h)   Contours at vertical intervals of 2 feet if the
general slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical intervals of 5
feet if the general slope is greater than 10%;



         (i)   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings,
angles and references to section, township and range lines or corners;



         (j)   Building setback or front yard lines;



         (k)   Legend and notes;



         (l)   Other features or conditions which would affect
the subdivision favorably or adversely; and



         (m)   Scale, north point and date. (See division (E)
below)



      (3)   A description of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the plat of the subdivision.



   (D)   The application shall be accompanied by a certified check or
money order in the amount of $10 plus $1 for each lot in the proposed
subdivision with a minimum total charge of $25 to cover the cost of checking
and verifying the proposed plat, and the amount shall be deposited in the
general fund.



   (E)   The preliminary plat of the subdivision shall be drawn to a
scale of 50 feet to 1 inch or 100 feet to 1 inch, provided, that if the
resulting drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale as
recommended by the Commission may be used.



(1982 Code, § 154.06)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.049  PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   After an application for approval of a plat of a subdivision,
together with 2 copies of all maps and data has been filed, the Commission
shall review the preliminary plat and accept the application and plat, or
return them to the subdivider with suggestions for changes.



   (B)   No application will be considered at a meeting unless it has
been filed with the Commission at least 10 days before the date of the
meeting.



   (C)   After the Commission has accepted an application and
preliminary plat, it shall set a date for a hearing, notify the applicant in
writing and notify by general publication or otherwise, any person or
governmental unit having a probable interest in the proposed plat.



   (D)   The cost of publication of the notice of hearing shall be met
by the applicant.



   (E)   Following the hearing on the preliminary plat, the Commission
will notify the applicant in writing that it has approved the preliminary
plat and is ready to receive the final plat, or will advise the applicant of
any further changes in the preliminary plat which are required or should have
consideration before approval will be given.



(1982 Code, § 154.07)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.050  FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS.



   The final plat shall meet the following specifications:



   (A)   The final plat may include all or only a part of the
preliminary plat which has received approval.



   (B)   The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision
shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to 1 inch, provided that if the
resulting drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale of
100 feet to 1 inch may be used.



   (C)   Three black or blue line prints shall be submitted with the
original final plat, or, in order to conform to modern drafting and
reproduction methods, 3 black line prints and a reproducible print shall be
submitted.



   (D)   The following basic information shall be shown:



      (1)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles,
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more than 1
foot in 5,000 feet;



      (2)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest
established street corners or official monuments. Reference corners shall be
accurately described on the plan;



      (3)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided;



      (4)   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary of
the tract;



      (5)   Source of title to the land to be subdivided as shown by
the books of the Clay County Recorder;



      (6)   Street names;



      (7)   Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plan;



      (8)   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths of feet, with angles to street, alley and lot lines;



      (9)   Lot numbers and dimensions;



      (10)   Accurate locations of easements for utilities and any
limitations of easements;



      (11)   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or
reserved for public, semipublic or community use;



      (12)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions;



      (13)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and
lot markers;



      (14)   Plans and specifications for the improvements required
in this subchapter;



      (15)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land
and become covenants in the deed for lots;



      (16)   Name of the subdivision;



      (17)   Name and address of the owner and the subdivider;



      (18)   North point, scale and date;



      (19)   Certification by a registered land surveyor;



      (20)   Certification of dedication of streets and other public
property;



      (21)   Certificate for approved by the Commission; and



      (22)   Certificate for approval by the Clay County Board of
County Commissioners, if all or any part of the subdivision is located beyond
the city.



(1982 Code, § 154.08)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.051  FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   When the final plat is submitted to the Commission, it shall
be accompanied by a notice from the city engineer, stating that there has
been filed with and approved by the city engineer and the Board of Public
Works, 1 of the following:



      (1)   A certificate by the subdivider that all improvements
and installations for the subdivision required for its approval have been
made or installed in accordance with specifications, and that a 3-year
maintenance bond has been provided for any improvements to be made within the
streets, as is executed to the Board of Public Works for any portion of the
final plat which lies within the corporate limits of the city, and that a
3-year maintenance bond has been provided for any improvements to be made
within the streets, as is executed to the Clay County Board of County
Commissioners for any portion of the final plat which lies within the
jurisdiction of the Commission, but beyond the corporate limits of the city;
or



      (2)   A bond which shall:



         (a)   Run to the Board of Works;



         (b)   Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be
sufficient in amount to complete the improvements and installations in
compliance with this chapter;



         (c)   Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission;



         (d)   Specify the time for the completion of the
improvements and installations; and



         (e)   Specify that on completion, but prior to
acceptance by the Board of Public Works of any improvements to be made within
the streets, for any portion of the final plat which lies within the
corporate limits of the city, a 3-year maintenance bond covering street
improvements in an amount determined by the Board of Public Works to be
sufficient in amount, which shall run to the Board of Public Works, will be
provided by the subdivider of street improvements to be effective as of the
date of acceptance by the Board of Public Works of street improvements, or
for any portion of the final plat which lies within the jurisdiction of the
Commission, but beyond the corporate limits of the city, a 3-year maintenance
bond covering the street improvements, in an amount determined by the Board
of County Commissioners to be in an amount sufficient in amount, which shall
run to the Clay County Board of County Commissioners, will be provided by the
subdivider of street improvements to be effective as of the date of
acceptance by the Board of County Commissioners of the street improvements.
The subdivider shall not be held responsible for maintenance of any street
resulting beyond the control of the subdivider.



   (B)   Within a reasonable time after application for approval of the
final plat, the Commission shall approve or disapprove it. If the Commission
approves, it shall affix the Commission's seal of the plat, together with the
certifying signature of its president and secretary. If it disapproves, it
shall set forth the reasons for the disapproval in its own records and
provide the applicant with a copy.



(1982 Code, § 154.09)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)




STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT




§ 156.065  COMPLIANCE OF FINAL PLAT.



   The final plat of the subdivision shall conform to the principles and
standards of design in this subchapter.



(1982 Code, § 154.15)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.066  COMPLIANCE TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The subchapter plan shall conform to the principles and standards which
are generally exhibited in the Comprehensive Master Development Plan.



(1982 Code, § 154.16)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.067  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.



   (A)   The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots
and parcels of land within the subdivision, and where streets cross other
streets, jogs shall not be created.



   (B)   Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land
so as to produce useable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.



   (C)   Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended
to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for
normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.



   (D)   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a
street or alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the
street or alley to the prescribed width shall be platted within the proposed
subdivision.



   (E)   Widths of arterial streets and feed streets shall conform to
the widths specified in the thoroughfare plan.



   (F)   The minimum right-of-way of residential streets, marginal
access streets or cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with
a minimum diameter of 100 feet, or other arrangement for the turning of all
vehicles conveniently within the right-of-way and acceptable to the
Commission.



   (G)   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts but
should be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for
loading and unloading or access purposes, and where platted, shall be at
least 20 feet in width.



   (H)   The center line of streets should intersect as nearly at right
angles as possible.



   (I)   At intersections of streets and alleys, property line corners
shall be rounded by arcs of at least 16-1/2 feet radii or by chords of like
arcs.



   (J)   At intersections of streets the property line corners shall be
rounded by arcs with radii of not less than 20 feet, or by chords of like
arcs.



   (K)   If the smaller angle of intersection of 2 streets is less than
60 degrees, the radius of the arc at the intersection of property lines shall
be increased as deemed advisable by the Commission.



   (L)   Intersections of more than 2 streets at 1 point shall be
avoided.



   (M)   Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the
Commission may apply special standards to be followed in their design.



   (N)   Whenever the proposed subdivision contains, or is adjacent to
a railroad right-of-way, or a highway designated as a limited access highway
by the appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a
marginal access street, or a parallel street at a distance acceptable for the
appropriate use of the land between the highway or railroad and like streets.



   (O)   Horizontal visibility on curved streets and vertical
visibility on all streets must be maintained along the center lines as
follows:



      (1)   Arterial streets-500 feet;



      (2)   Feeder streets and parkways-300 feet; and



      (3)   Residential streets-150 feet.



   (P)   Curvature measured along the center line shall have a minimum
radius as follows:



      (1)   Arterial streets-500 feet;



      (2)   Feeder streets and parkways-300 feet; and



      (3)   Residential streets-150 feet.



   (Q)   Between reversed curves on arterial streets there shall be a
tangent of not less than 100 feet and on a feeder and residential streets the
tangent shall be not less than 40 feet.



   (R)   Maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:



      (1)   Arterial streets-not greater than 6%; and



      (2)   Feeder and residential streets and alleys-not greater
than 8%.



   (S)   The minimum graded of any street gutter shall not be less than
0.4%.



(1982 Code, § 154.17)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.068  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Blocks should not exceed 1,500 feet in length.



   (B)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit 2 tiers of lots
of appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels a limited
access highway or an arterial street or a railroad right-of-way.



(1982 Code, § 154.18)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.069  LOTS.



   (A)   All lots shall abut on a street or place.



   (B)   Side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Some variation from
this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots should be
avoided.



   (C)   Double frontage lots should not be platted, except that where
desired along arterial streets, lots may face on an interior street and back
on thoroughfares. In that event, a planting strip or a screen, at least 20
feet in width shall be provided along the back of the lot.



   (D)   Widths and areas of lots shall be not less than provided in
the Zoning Code.



   (E)   Wherever possible, unit shopping centers, based on sound
development standards, should be designed in contrast to the platting of lots
for individual commercial use.



   (F)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal in order to
permit appropriate setbacks from both streets.



(1982 Code, § 154.19)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.070  EASEMENTS.



   Where alleys are not provided, easements for utilities shall be
provided. Easements shall have minimum widths of 10 feet, and where located
along lot lines, 1/2 of the width shall be taken from each lot. Before
determining the location of easements the plan shall be discussed with the
local public utility companies to assure their proper placing for the
installation of services.



(1982 Code, § 154.20)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.071  BUILDING SETBACK LINES.



   Building setback lines shall be as provided in the Zoning Code, or as
provided by the Commission.



(1982 Code, § 154.21)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.072  PUBLIC OPEN SPACES.



   Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public uses are
located within the subdivision area as shown on the Comprehensive Master
Development Plan, the Commission may request their dedication for some
purposes, or their reservation for a period of 1 year following the date of
the approval of the final plat. In the event a governmental agency concerned
passes a resolution expressing its intent to acquire the land so reserved,
the reservation period shall be extended for an additional 6 months.



(1982 Code, § 154.22)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.073  CONFORMANCE AND INSTALLATION.



   The final plat of the subdivision shall conform to the standards of
improvements in this subchapter, which shall be installed under the
supervision of an inspector whose qualifications meet the approval of the
city engineer, and the cost of inspection shall be borne by the subdivider.



(1982 Code, § 154.25)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.074  MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.



   (A)   Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the center of
the pipe or marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of
lines to be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the finished grade.



   (B)   Monuments shall be set:



      (1)   At the intersection of all lines forming angles in the
boundary of the subdivision; and/or



      (2)   At the intersection of street property lines.



   (C)   Markers shall be set:



      (1)   At the beginning and ending of all curves along street
property lines;



      (2)   At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either
front or rear;



      (3)   At all angles in property lines of lots; and/or



      (4)   At all other lots corners not established by a monument.



   (D)   Monuments shall be of stone, precast concrete or concrete
poured in place with minimum dimensions of 4 inches by 30 inches, set
vertically in place. They shall be marked on top with an iron or copper dowel
set flush with the top of the monument, or deeply scored on top with a cross.
Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least 30 inches long,
and not less than 5/8-inch in diameter.



(1982 Code, § 154.26)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.075  STREETS.



   (A)   Streets (and alleys, where provided), shall be competed to
grades shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections, provided by the
subdivider, and prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved
by the Commission.



   (B)   (1)   The streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved to
the dimensions required by the cross-section and the work shall be performed
in the manner prescribed in the latest issue of "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction" of the State Highway Commission of Indiana.
Streets shall be surfaced to the following minimum widths:



         (a)   The width of standard pavements (which shall
include curbing) required is 31 feet; and



         (b)   Alleys shall be surfaced to a minimum width of 16
feet. Cul-de-sac turn-arounds shall be paved to within 5 feet of the
right-of-way.



      (2)   In a subdivision proposed to contain lots having a
minimum area of less than 20,000 square feet, or in a subdivision proposed to
have streets which are extensions of existing paved streets, the streets
shall be surfaced with portland cement concrete or a flexible pavement, and
constructed in accordance with design characteristics at least equal to those
given below.



      (3)   In a subdivision proposed to contain lots having a
minimum area of 20,000 square feet, the streets shall be surfaced with a
minimum of 9 inches of compacted aggregate laid on prepared subgrade
constructed in accordance with "Section C-9 Compacted Aggregate Base" in the
latest issue of "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" of
the State Highway Commission of Indiana.



 


Design Characteristics of Street Pavement




Kind of Pavement

 

Type of Street




Arterial

 

Feeder

 

Residential and Alley





Concrete


Balanced design thickness*
 
9 x 6 x 9 inches
 
8 x 5-1/2 x 8 inches
 
7-1/2 x 5 x 7-1/2 inches


Uniform design thickness
 
70-1/4 inches
 
6-1/2 inches
 
6 inches


*Intersections to be of uniform design using edge thickness.



Kind of Pavement

 

Arterial

 

Feeder

 

Residential and Alley



Flexible**


Asphaltic surface course
 
3 inches
 
2 inches
 
1 inch


Base: Bituminous coated aggregate
 
4 inches
 
3 inches
 
3 inches


Sub-base:


Compacted aggregate
 
7 inches
 
6 inches
 
6 inches


Total thickness
 
14 inches
 
11 inches
 
10 inches


**For intersections and parking strips on residential streets, use feeder
street design characteristics.




 



   (C)   Prior to the construction of street or alley surfaces and
pavements, adequate drainage facilities shall be installed by the subdivider,
according to plans furnished by the subdivider, prepared by a registered
professional engineer or a registered land surveyor and approved by the
Commission.



   (D)   (1)   A storm drainage analysis based on a 5-year, 1-hour
rainfall shall be used as the basis for the drainage system. A copy of the
analysis is to be submitted to the Commission with the drainage facility
plans.



      (2)   Pipe used for drainage shall be of coated corrugated
metal, concrete or vitrified clay of an approved design and of size and
strength to meet the requirements of the specific conditions which may be
encountered.



   (E)   Minimum diameters of pipe to be used shall be as follows:



      (1)   Roadway cross-drains-12 inches;



      (2)   Entrance culverts-12 inches; and



      (3)   Perforated under-drains-8 inches.



   (F)   On completion of the street improvements, a minimum of 2 sets
of as-built plans and profiles shall be filed with the Commission.



(1982 Code, § 154.27)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.076  SEWERS.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with sanitary
sewage facilities in accordance with 1 of the 3 following procedures.



      (1)   Public collection system. In all cases where it is
possible the developer shall construct a sanitary sewer system connected to a
municipal sewer. The plans for the system shall be approved by the affected
municipality and the Commission, and shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the municipal specifications.



      (2)   Local treatment system. Where it is not practical to
connect the subdivision sanitary sewer system to the municipal sewer, the
subdivider shall construct a local treatment system consisting of the
necessary house laterals, service mains and interceptors required to conduct
the subdivision's sewage to a single treatment facility. All aspects of a
system, including the treatment facility, shall be designed and constructed
by the developer in accordance with the requirements of the State Board of
Health and the Clay County Health Officer.



      (3)   Private disposal system. Where divisions 1 and 2 above
are not practical, the Commission may permit the develop to install on each
lot an individual sewage disposal system consisting of a septic tank and the
absorption field or other approved disposal system. These systems shall be
designed and constructed by the developer in accordance with the regulations
of the State Board of Health and the Clay County Health Officer. In no case,
however, shall private disposal systems be permitted where rock or impervious
clay conditions exist which would prevent percolation of effluent.



   (B)   The plans for the installation of the sanitary sewage
facilities shall be provided by the subdivider, prepared by a registered
professional engineer and approved by the State Board of Health, the State
Stream Pollution Control Board, the Clay County Health Officer and the Board
of Public Works. On the completion of sanitary sewer installations, 2 sets of
the as-built plans for the system shall be filed with the Commission.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section and in § 156.077 below, the
phrase "The subdivider shall provide" shall mean that the subdivider shall
install the facility referred to, or whenever a private sewage disposal
system or an individual water supply is to be provided, that the subdivider
shall require, as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel in the
subdivision, that the facilities referred to in these sections shall be
installed by the developer of the lots in accordance with these regulations.



(1982 Code, § 154.28)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.077  WATER.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
water main supply system which shall be connected to a municipal or community
water utility system, except, that when water supply is not available, the
subdivider shall provide an individual water supply on each lot in the
subdivision in accordance with requirements of the State Board of Health and
the Clay County Health Officer.



   (B)   The plans for the installation of a water main supply system
shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the affected utility, and
the State Board of Health and the Clay County Health Officer and the Board of
Works. The plans for the water main system shall include fire hydrant
locations. Construction of water mains and house services to be placed within
the improved portion of the street right-of-way shall be completed prior to
the placement of the surface improvements. On the completion of the water
supply installation 2 sets of the plans for the system as-built shall be
filed with the Commission.



(1982 Code, § 154.29)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.078  PUBLIC UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.



   Improvements required in this subdivision to be installed by the
subdivider, which are of a public utility nature, specifically §§ 156.075
through 156.077, may provided benefits to other properties in the vicinity of
land to be subdivided. On the installation of improvements which cross or
adjoin other properties and can be used by properties, the subdivider and the
city may by contract agree that on the connection or use of the installation
made by the subdivider or by others, within a period of 10 years following
their installations, the new user shall pay to the city a fee in an amount
agreed on by the subdivider and the city, the amount of the fee to be
credited to and paid to the subdivider.



(1982 Code, § 154.30)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.079  CURB AND GUTTER.



   (A)   In a subdivision proposed to contain lots having a minimum
area of less than 20,000 square feet the Commission shall require curb and
gutter to be installed on each side of the street surface. The plans for the
installation of the curb and gutter shall be approved by the Commission.



   (B)   The curb and gutter shall be of 1 of the construction types
shown in (B)(3) below and shall be constructed according to the following
specifications.



      (1)   The base for the curb and gutter shall be well-compacted
on the existing base or grade.



      (2)   The minimum specifications shall be as shown for the 3
types of cross-sections in division (B)(3) below.



      (3)   All concrete used in the curb and gutter shall meet the
State Highway Commission specifications.



(1982 Code, § 154.31)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)







 



§ 156.080  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The Commission shall not require sidewalks in a subdivision
proposed to contain lots having a minimum area of 20,000 square feet or more,
but may require the subdivider to install sidewalks in a subdivision proposed
to contain lots having a minimum of less than 20,000 square feet for the
following conditions:



      (1)   On each side of a street classified as arterial in the
thoroughfare plan;



      (2)   On streets which are proposed to be extensions of
streets already having sidewalks on either 1 or both sides;



      (3)   On streets in the vicinity of schools or other public
buildings which, in the Commission's judgement, sidewalks would be necessary
for the safety, welfare and convenience of pedestrians; and



      (4)   On all streets within the city.



   (B)   If sidewalks are provided, they shall be constructed of
portland cement concrete, at least 4 inches thick and 4 feet wide, and the
edge of walks adjacent to the property line of the street shall be placed at
least 1 foot from the property line.



   (C)   If sidewalks are not provided, the street grade shall be
completed so that additional grading would not be necessary for any future
provisions of sidewalks.



(1982 Code, § 154.32)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.081  SIGNS.



   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with street signs
acceptable to the Commission at the intersection of all streets.



(1982 Code, § 154.33)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.082  STREET LIGHTS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.



   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with street lights, and
when a water main supply is utilized, with fire hydrants, the quantity and
location of which will be determined by the Commission.



(1982 Code, § 154.34)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)




PLAT CERTIFICATES AND DEED OF DEDICATION




§ 156.095  COMMISSION CERTIFICATES.



   The following form shall be used in final plats:



Under authority provided by Chapter 174 - Act of 1947 - Enacted by the
General Assembly of the State of Indiana, and all acts amendatory thereto,
and an ordinance adopted by the Common Council of the City of Brazil,
Indiana, this plat was given approval by the City of Brazil as follows:



Adopted by the Brazil City Plan Commission at a meeting held



__________________, 20____.



Brazil City Plan Commission



                           _________________________
___________________



                           President



(Seal)



                           _________________________
_________________



                           Secretary



(1982 Code, 154.40)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.096  COUNTY COMMISSIONER'S CERTIFICATE.



   The following certificate shall also be used if the plat lies wholly,
or partly, outside the city:



Under authority provided by Chapter 47, Acts of 1951, of the General
Assembly, State of Indiana, this plat was given approval by the Board of
County Commissioners of Clay County, Indiana, at a meeting held on
the   ______ day of ____________,  20____.



                           _________________________
__________________



                           _________________________
__________________



(Seal)



                           _________________________
__________________



(1982 Code, § 154.41)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.097  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE.



   Registered land surveyor's certificate shall also be provided for any
work on a plat prepared by a registered professional engineer. The following
forms shall be used in final plats:



I, _______ , hereby certify that I am a registered land surveyor, licensed in
compliance with the laws of the State of Indiana;




That this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on ___________;
that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist; and that all other
requirements specified herein, done by me have been met.




(Seal)                                 _______
_____________________________



                                    Signatu
re



(1982 Code, § 154.42)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.098  DEED OF DEDICATION.



   (A)   Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall
carry a deed of dedication in substantially the following form:



We, the undersigned _____________, owners of the real estate shown and
described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off, platted and
subdivided, and do hereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real estate in
accordance with the within plat.



This subdivision shall be known and designated as ___________________, an
addition to ________________. All streets and alleys shown and not heretofore
dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public.



Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown on
this plat, between which lines and the property lints of the street, there
shall be erected or maintained no building or structure.



There are strips of ground (____) feet in width as shown on this plat and
marked "easement," reserved for the use of public utilities for the
installation of water and sewer mains, poles, ducts, lines and wires, subject
at all times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved.
No permanent or other structures are to be erected or maintained upon said
strips of land, but owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their
titles subject to the rights of the public utilities.



   (B)   Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private
restrictions would be inserted here on the subdivider's initiative or the
recommendations of the Commission, important provisions are those specifying
the use to be made of the property and, in the case of the residential use,
the minimum habitable floor area.



(1982 Code, § 154.43)  (Ord. 19-1964, passed - -)




OFFICIAL THOROUGHFARE PLAN




§ 156.110  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the official
thoroughfare plan of the city.



(1982 Code, § 155.01)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.111  MAPS OF THOROUGHFARES.



   (A)   The official thoroughfare plan of the city consists of 2 maps,
1 entitled "major street or highway plan" and the other entitled "planning
area, major street or highway plan,” which show the location of existing
and proposed thoroughfares within the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission,
and are declared to be a part of this subchapter.



   (B)   Notations, references, indications and other details shown on
the official thoroughfare plan maps are as much a part of this subchapter as
if they were fully described in the text of this subchapter. Those maps are
on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and available for public
inspection during regular business hours.



(1982 Code, § 155.02)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.112  DRAWING.



   A drawing entitled, "major street and highway plan, thoroughfare plan,
typical thoroughfare cross-sections" which shows cross sections for streets
as designated on the official thoroughfare plan maps, is here made a part of
this subchapter.



(1982 Code, § 155.03)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.113  DESIGNATION OF THOROUGHFARES.



   (A)   The thoroughfares are classified as to width and type in
accordance with their function as a part of the thoroughfare system, and are
designated as arterial, feeder and residential streets as shown on the
official thoroughfare plan maps.



   (B)   Streets are to be provided with the right-of-way widths shown
on the official thoroughfare plan as set out in Section 10-94 of this
subchapter and are to be improved as required by §§ 156.045 through
156.098, providing for the control of the subdivision of land.



(1982 Code, § 155.04)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.114  STREET OPENING OR WIDENING REGULATIONS.



   Whenever a street designated on the official thoroughfare plan is to be
platted as a part of a subdivision of land, the right-of-way shall conform to
the policies and specified designations and indications in the official
thoroughfare plan, provided that where a street borders a tract of land to be
subdivided, the owner of that land shall be required to plat only 1/2 of the
right-of-way width designated for the streets, measured at 90 degrees to the
center line thereof.



(1982 Code, § 155.05 A)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.115  LOCATION OF STREETS.



   (A)   (1)   Wherever the locations of streets are indicated on
the official thoroughfare plan as following existing roads or streets, or
section or half-section lines, or other established property lines, they
shall conform to those locations.



      (2)   However, streets lying wholly within a subdivision, and
not designated as following as existing road or a section line, may be varied
in their alignment when a variance promotes the plan of a neighborhood
development unit in accordance with good site planning principles, and if
alignment provides for the continuity of traffic movement.



   (B)   (1)   Streets which follow irregular alignment, or indicate
revised alignments, or are not referenced to established lines, shall follow
in a general manner the alignments shown on the official thoroughfare plan.



      (2)   Their alignment shall be subject to detailed surveys
which may be made by the city, the Plan Commission, by other public agencies
or by the owners of land to be subdivided.



      (3)   Surveys shall be subject to the approval of the Plan
Commission prior to the acquisition of land or the filing of subdivision
plans affecting those streets.



(1982 Code, § 155.05 9 B)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.116  CONSIDERATION OF PUBLIC AGENCIES.



   After adoption of the official thoroughfare plan and this subchapter,
the Common Council shall be guided by and give consideration to the general
policy and pattern of development set out in the official thoroughfare plan
in the authorization, construction, alteration or abandonment of public
highways and structures.



(1982 Code, § 155.05 C)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.117  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   In the case of permits authorized by the Common Council for the
erection or alteration of structures and other improvements, the permit shall
be issued only if the proposed street and thoroughfare rights-of-way as set
forth by this subchapter will be protected from encroachment and, for
planning and zoning purposes, the proposed street and thoroughfare
right-of-way lines will be considered as the front line of lots and tracts
bordering those streets and thoroughfares.



(1982 Code, § 155.05 9 D)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.118  STREET IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works is authorized to use funds available
for street improvement purposes to participate with the owners of lands
abutting streets within the city in the improvement of streets in accordance
with the requirements of the Board of Public Works and the standards for
street improvement established in ordinance number ____, passed on 19___.



   (B)   For any participation project, the Board shall be governed by
the following policies.



      (1)   All alley and street intersections will be paved at city
expense and the cost of the work is not to be considered as a part of the
city's share of other street improvements.



      (2)   The cost of grading and excavating in connection with
the improvement of alleys and streets existing at the time of passage of this
subchapter is to be considered a city expense and not as a part of the city's
share of other street and alley improvements.



      (3)   The cost of grading and excavating in connection with
improvement of street and alleys hereafter dedicated is not to be considered
a part of the improvement cost in which the city can participate.



      (4)   The city may participate to the extent of 50% of the
cost of improving an alley located in a Business District or Industrial
District, as shown in the Zone Map. The city shall not participate in the
cost of improving alleys other than those indicated above.



      (5)   The amount of the participation by the city in the cost
of street improvements is indicated below as a percentage of the total of the
cost, as may be modified by proceeding statements, in accordance with the
street designation and width of surface to be improved, which may include
curb and gutter of the integral roll-type where that type of curb may be
installed.



 


Street or Thoroughfare Designation




Width of Improved Surfaces

 

Arterial

 

Feeder

 

Residential





24 to 28 feet
 

50%

 

40%

 

30%



29 to 30 feet
 

60%

 

50%

 

40%



31 to 35 feet
 

70%

 

60%

 

50%



36 to 40 feet
 

80%

 

70%

 

60%





 



(1982 Code, § 155.05 5 E)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.119  THOROUGHFARE FUND.



   The Common Council may levy a tax annually of not to exceed $0.15 on
each $100 of taxable property with the city for the purpose of a Thoroughfare
Fund, which when collected shall be kept separate from the other funds of the
city and shall be a continuing fund to be drawn on by the Board of Public
Works for work done under, or in furtherance of, or in carrying out a part of
the official thoroughfare plan.



(1982 Code, § 155.06)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.120  AUTHORITY FOR PROCEDURE.



   In the carrying out of any project under the official thoroughfare
plan, the Board of Public Works shall proceed, and shall have authority under
the provisions of Chapter 44, Acts of the General Assembly of Indiana for
1931, and all acts amendatory thereto, and the method of procedure shall
comply with the provisions of an Act of the General Assembly of the State of
Indiana entitled "An act concerning municipal corporations," approved March
6, 1905, and all acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, except that
the provisions for remonstrance of resident freeholders shall not apply.
However, if it shall be determined that property shall be assessed within a
special benefit district, the Board shall determine the boundaries of the
district.



(1982 Code, § 155.07)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.121  METHOD OF PROCEDURE; ROLE OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The Board of Public Works, in the carrying out of any project under the
official thoroughfare plan adopted by this subchapter shall consider and
determine what proportionate part of the cost of the project; or of any
separate phase of improvement thereunder, shall be paid by the city out of
the Thoroughfare Fund, including any increase of damages ordered by any court
on appeal, as benefit to the city at large, and, at that time, shall
determine the amount, if any, of the total cost of any phase of improvement
under the project, including damages awarded by the Board, which shall be
assessed as benefits on the real estate within a special benefit district.



(1982 Code, § 155.08 5 A)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.122  METHOD OF PROCEDURE; ROLE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL.



   In the event the cost of acquisition and the benefits assessed against
the city, by reason of any project, shall, at any time, be in excess of the
amount of money then standing to the credit of the Thoroughfare Fund, the
city shall have the power, and the Common Council is authorized to issue a
bond in a sum sufficient to pay for the benefit, or any part thereof, as it
may be deemed necessary, the same to be issued and sold in the same form and
manner, and with the same rate or interest and with maturities as are by law
provided for the issuance and sale of bonds of the city for the general
purposes thereof. The proceeds of the sale of bonds shall be deposited in,
and credited to, the Thoroughfare Fund, to be used in the payment for the
cost of acquisition and the benefits assess against the city at large and any
increased damages which may be ordered paid by the court on appeal.



(1982 Code, § 155.08 5 B)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.123  PRIORITY OF THOROUGHFARE IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Plan Commission may recommend to the Board of Public Works the
order in which improvements made pursuant to this subchapter and to be paid
for in part out of the Thoroughfare Fund shall be undertaken and carried out;
and when so made, the Board of Public Works shall not start or commence by
resolution or otherwise, any work, appropriation or improvement pursuant to
this subchapter, other than in the order designed by recommendation.



(1982 Code, § 155.09)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.124  CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF THE PLAN COMMISSION.



   Subsequent to the adoption of the official thoroughfare plan and the
passage of this subchapter, the Plan Commission may:



   (A)   Determine lines for new, extended, widened or narrowed
thoroughfares in any portion of its jurisdiction; and/or



   (B)   Certify to the Common Council the amended or additional plan
under the same procedure as established for the certification and approval of
the official thoroughfare plan.



(1982 Code, § 155.10)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.125  AMENDMENTS.



   In addition to the provisions of § 156.124, amendments may be
initiated as follows.



   (A)   The Common Council may direct the Plan Commission to prepare
an amendment, as desired, and submit it to public hearing within 60 days
after formal written request by the Common Council.



   (B)   The owners of 50% or more of the area of property abutting on
that part of a street which is proposed to be changed may also petition the
City Council requesting an amendment to the official thoroughfare plan.



(1982 Code, § 155.11)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)



§ 156.126  COPIES ON FILE IN THE OFFICE OF THE CLERK-TREASURER.



   Two copies of the official thoroughfare plan and chapter and 2 copies
of the typical thoroughfare cross-sections shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk-Treasurer and shall be subject to public examination
during the regular office hours of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(1982 Code, § 155.12)  (Ord. 20-1964, passed - -)




ZONING CODE




§ 156.140  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited hereafter, as the
Zoning Code of the city.



(1982 Code, § 156.01)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.141  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING.  Bordering.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE.  A building or use subordinate to another
structure or use located on the same lot and which does not change or alter
the character of the premises and which is not used for human occupancy; such
as public utility installation, electric distribution and secondary power
lines, gas, water and sewer lines, their supports and poles, guy wires, small
transformers, wire or cable, incidental equipment and public telephone booths.



   AGRICULTURE.  The art of science of cultivating the ground, and
raising and harvesting crops, also often including feeding, breeding and
management of livestock; tillage, husbandry; farming; in a broader sense, the
science and art of the production of plants and animals useful to humans,
including to a variable extent the preparation of these products for
humans’ use and their disposal by marketing or otherwise. In this broad use
it includes farming, horticulture, forestry, dairying and sugar making.



   AIRPORT.  A use devoted to the take-off, landing and storing of
aircraft.



   ALLEY.  A permanent public service way providing a secondary means of
access to abutting lands.



   ALLEY LINE.  A lot line bordering on an alley.



   ALTERATION.  Any addition, removal, extension, or change in the
construction or occupancy of any existing building or structure.



   APARTMENT.  A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by
more than 2 families; a multi-family dwelling.



   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA.  An open area, other than a street,
used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers,
and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair work is done
except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be displayed,
sold or rented on the premises.



   BASEMENT.  A story, wholly or partly underground, which unless
subdivided into rooms and used for tenant purposes, shall purposes of height
measurement.



   BLOCK.  A unit or property bounded by streets, or by streets and
railroad rights-of-way, waterways or other barriers.



   BLOCK FRONTAGE.  Property having frontage on 1 side of a street and
lying between the 2 nearest intersecting streets, or nearest intersecting
street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or other barrier.



   BOARD.  The Board of Zoning Appeals.



   BOARDING HOUSE or LODGING HOUSE.  A building where meals are regularly
served for compensation for 3 or more persons, but not exceeding 12 persons,
not open to transients, in contradistinction to hotels and restaurants open
to transients.



   BUILDING.  A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
for shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels
or other property. When separated by party walls, without opening through
walls, each portion of a BUILDING shall be considered a separate structure.



   BUILDING AREA.  The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal
and accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed porches
not exceeding 1 story in height or architectural appurtenances projecting not
more than 2 feet.



   BUILDING, DETACHED.  A building having no structural connection with
another building.



   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF.  The line of the face of the building nearest
the front lot line.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance measured from the lot
ground level to the highest point of the roof for a flat roof; to the deck
line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line nearest the front of
and across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between
the front line of a building or structure and the front lot line.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated. Where a
substantial part of an accessory building is attached to the PRINCIPAL
BUILDING in a substantial manner, as by a roof, an accessory building shall
be counted as a part of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



   BUSINESS.  The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or services, the maintenance or operation of
offices or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.



   CAMP, PUBLIC.  Any area or tract of land used or designed to
accommodate 2 or more camping parties, including cabins, tents or other
camping outfits.



   CEMETERY.  Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of a
CEMETERY.



   CLUB.  Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a person for a
social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or
to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.



   COMMERCIAL FARM ENTERPRISE.  An operation or use inherent to or
closely associated with a farm or agriculture, such as the buying, selling or
distribution of livestock, farm or agricultural products; or products
essential to farm operation; but not including industrial grain elevators,
industrial mills, abattoirs, commercial hatcheries and poultry processing
plants, the manufacture of commercial fertilizers and similar enterprises
which are of an industrial nature.



   COMMISSION.  The Plan Commission.



   COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN.  The complete plan or any of its parts for
the development of the city, prepared by the Plan Commission and adopted in
accordance with Chapter 174, Acts of 1947, General Assembly of Indiana, as is
now or may hereafter be in effect.



   DECIBEL.  A unit of measurement of the intensity of loudness of sound.
Sound level meters are used to measure intensities and are calibrated in
DECIBELS.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A drawing, including a legal or site description,
of the real estate involved, which shows the location and size of the
following, both existing and proposed: all buildings, structures and yards;
location and dimensions of building lines and easements; widths and lengths
of all entrances and exits to and from real estate; location of all adjacent
or adjoining streets, service facilities and other improvements such as
planting areas.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN, RESIDENTIAL.  A plan proposed to use a tract of land
for residential development in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter, even though the use of the land, the location of the buildings to
be erected in the area, and the yards and open spaces provided in the plan do
not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the district in which
the residential development is proposed to be located.



   DISTRICT.  A section of the territory within the jurisdiction of the
Plan Commission for which uniform regulations governing the use, height,
area, size and intensity of the use of buildings and land, and open spaces
about buildings, are herein established.



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof, used primarily as a place of
abode for 1 or more human beings, but not including hotels, motels, lodging
or boarding houses or tourist homes.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A dwelling or portion of a dwelling used for 1 family
for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  Public or parochial preprimary, primary,
grade, junior high, high preparatory school or academy; junior college,
college or university, if public or founded or conducted by under the
sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization.



   FAMILY.  One or more persons occupying a building and living as a
single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel,
club, nurses home, fraternity or sorority house.



   FARM.  A tract of land comprising an area which is devoted to
agricultural operations, such as forestry, the growing of crops, pasturage,
the production of livestock and poultry, the growing of trees, shrubs and
plants and other recognized agricultural pursuits and including accessory
buildings essential to the operation of the farm. Accessory buildings may
include barns; equipment and animal sheds; farm residences for the owner,
operator or farm assistants; roadside sales structure for the sale of
products of the farm; and signs displaying subject matter directly related to
the name or the products of the particular farm; but not including industrial
or commercial operations or structures.



   FILLING STATION.  Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of
fuels or oils for motor vehicles. When the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage.



   FLASH POINT.  The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid
under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will burn
momentarily using the closed cup method.



   FLOOR AREA, GROUND.  The square foot area of a residential building
within its largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the
ground floor level exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages
and exterior stairways.



   FLOOR AREA, NET.  The total area, computed on a horizontal plane, used
for a particular business category; exclusive of entrances, hallways, stairs
and other accessory areas used for ingress or egress.



   FREE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a material which
burns actively, and easily supports combustion.



   FRONTAGE.  All the property on 1 side of a street between 2
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on
1 side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  An accessory building with capacity for not more
than 3 motor vehicles per family, not more than 1 of which may be a
commercial vehicle of not more than 3 tons capacity. A garage designed to
house 1 or 2 motor vehicles for each family housed in a multi-family dwelling
shall be classed as a PRIVATE GARAGE.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  Any building, except those defined herein as a
private garage, used for the storage, or care of motor vehicles, or where
vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.



   GRADE or LOT GROUND LEVEL.  For buildings having walls adjoining 1
street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall
adjoining the street. For buildings having walls adjoining more than 1
street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all
walls adjoining streets. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street,
the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building. Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than 5 feet from a
street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.



   GROUP HOUSE.  A group of dwellings constructed in a row, with the
dwelling units separated by vertical party walls without openings. A
multi-family dwelling.



   HARDSHIP.  A perceived difficulty with regard to one's ability to
improve land stemming from the application of the development standards of
this subchapter, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of
variance. In and of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a
perceived reduction of our restriction on economic gain shall not be
considered hardship. Self-imposed situations include: The purchase of land
with actual or constructive knowledge that, for reasons other than physical
characteristics of the property, the development standards herein will
inhibit the desired improvement initiated in violation of the standard of
this subchapter; any results of land division requiring variance from the
development standards of this subchapter in order to render that site
buildable.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and
participated in solely by members of the family, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and
does not change the character thereof and in connection with which there is
no commodity sold on the premises except that which is produced thereon,
provided that no sign other than a nameplate is attached to the building.



   HOSPITAL.  An institution licensed by the State Department of Health
and providing health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical
care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such as
laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility,
provided the institution is operated by, or treatment is given under direct
supervision of a licensed physician. Types of HOSPITALS include general,
mental, chronic disease and allied special hospitals such as cardiac,
contagious disease, maternity, orthopedic, cancer and the like.



   HOTEL.  A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding or loading house.



   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.  A permit signed by the Planning
Administrator stating that a proposed improvement complies with the
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances as may be applicable.



   INDUSTRIAL PARK.  A single structure or group of structures for
industrial operations forming a comprehensive arrangement of buildings,
grounds and access ways planned in accordance with harmonious principles of
architectural and landscape architectural design, and industrial management.



   INTENSE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a material that
burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.



   JUNK YARD.  Any place at which personal property is or may be salvaged
for reuse, resale or reduction or similar disposition and is owned,
possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or assorted, including but not
limited to, used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, papers, rags, glass, rubber,
lumber, millwork, brick and similar property except animal matter; and used
motor vehicles, machinery or equipment which is used, owned or possessed for
the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.



   JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION.  The territory for planning and zoning
within the jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission.



   KENNEL.  Any lot on which 4 or more dogs, or small animals, at least 4
months of age are kept.



   LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.  The off-street area required for the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, which in this
chapter is held to be a 12 by 45-foot loading space with a 14-foot height
clearance; 50% of the lot width prescribed for the district in which the lot
is located. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat
which is recorded in the Office of the Recorder of the County, or it may
include parts of, or a combination of parcels when adjacent to one another
and used as 1. In determining lot area and boundary lines no part thereof
within the limits of a street or place shall be included.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot at the junction of and abutting 2 or more
intersecting streets.



   LOT COVERAGE.  The percentage of the lot area covered by the building
area.



   LOT, DEPTH OF.  The mean horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured in the general direction of the
side lot line.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  In the case of an interior lot, a line separating
the lot from the street or place; and in the case of a corner lot a line
separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street, except in cases
where deed restrictions in effect specify another street right-of-way line as
the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  A lot line which is opposite and most distant from
the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular-shaped lot,
a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Clay County,
Indiana, or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the
office of the County Recorder Clay County, Indiana, on or before the date of
passage of this chapter.



   LOT, REVERSED INTERIOR.  An interior lot, the front lot line of which
is formed by a street, which street also forms the side lot line of an
abutting corner lot. The corner lot is considered abutting even though
separated from the interior lot line by an alley.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot having frontage of 2 parallel or approximately
parallel streets.



   LOT WIDTH.  The dimension of a lot, measured between side lot lines on
the building line.



   MOBILE HOME.  Any vehicle either self-propelled or propelled by means
of being attached to a motor vehicle, which may be used as a place of abode
or sleeping place by 1 or more persons, and which has no foundation other
than the wheels required for its movement from 1 place to another.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  An area of land on which 2 or more mobile homes are
harbored for the purpose of being occupied either free of charge or in
consideration of the payment of rental for the mobile home or the site on
which it rests, and within which area a mobile home may be supported either
by its wheels or by a foundation of any sort.



   MODERATE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.



   MOTEL.  Any building or detached building used as dwelling units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space, and each unit having
convenient access to a parking space for the use of the unit's occupants. The
units, with the exception of the apartment of the manager or caretaker, are
devoted to the use of automobile transients.



   NURSING HOME.  A facility licensed by the State Board of Health, which
provides nursing services on a continuing basis; admits the majority of the
occupants on the advice of physicians as ill or infirm persons requiring
nursing services; provides for licensed physicians services or supervision;
and maintains medical recorded. These facilities may also provide other and
similar medical or health services, provided that no occupant requires
physical restraint within the facility. Examples of nursing home facilities
that provide health services may include, if they comply with all the above
criteria, nursing homes, convalescent homes, maternity homes, rest homes,
homes for the aged and the like.



   NURSING HOME CONVERSIONS.  A dwelling which is converted for the use
of a nursing home and licensed by the State Board of Health.



   OCTAVE BAND.  A narrow range of sound frequencies which classify
sounds according to pitch. In the octave band analyzer the audible sound
spectrum is divided into 8 OCTAVE BANDS.



   OCTAVE BAND ANALYZER.  An electrical device used with the sound level
meter that sorts a complex noise or sound into the various octave bands.



   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC.  An open area, other than a street or alley
designed for use or used for the temporary parking of more than 4 motor
vehicles when available for public use, whether free or for compensation, or
as an accommodation for clients or customers.



   PARKING SPACE.  A space other than on a street or alley designed for
use or used for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle, and being not less
than 9 feet wide and 20 feet long exclusive of passageways.



   PARTICULATE MATTER.  Finely divided liquid or solid material which is
discharged and carried along in the air. This shall not include water
droplets, commonly called steam.



   PLACE.  An open, unoccupied, officially designated space other than a
street or alley, permanently reserved for use as the principal means of
access to abutting property.



   PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR.  The official designated by the Common Council
and authorized to enforce this chapter.



   PLAT.  A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land, intended to be filed for record.



   PREMISES.  A lot or plat including buildings thereon, if any.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL.  Private, primary, grade, high or preparatory school
or academy.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.  Office of a member of a recognized profession as
defined by the United States Bureau of the Census.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE CENTER.  An architectural and functional grouping
of professional offices and appropriate associated and accessory uses which
is the central feature of a site plan composed of building area, parking
area, landscaped reservation and plantation and other land features
appropriate for its use as a professional office enterprise, designed to
serve residential neighborhoods, and shall conform to the standards and
requirements of this chapter.



   PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATION.  The erection, construction, alteration
or maintenance by public utilities, municipal departments, commissions or
common carriers of underground, surface or overhead gas, oil, electrical,
steam, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, towers and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by public utility or municipal departments, commissions or common
carriers, for the public health, safety or general welfare.



   RINGELMANN NUMBER.  The number of the area of the Ringelmann Chart
that most nearly matches the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. The
Ringelmann Chart is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information
Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in
estimating smoke density. Smoke below the density of Ringelmann No. 1 shall
be considered no smoke, or Ringelmann 0.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  An architectural and functional grouping of retail
stores, generally oriented around supermarket or department store, and
appropriate associated and accessory uses, which is the central feature of a
site plan or development plan composed of building areas, parking areas,
access streets and circulatory ways for vehicles and pedestrians, landscape
reservations and plantations and other land features appropriate for its
operation as a business enterprise, designed to serve residential
neighborhoods or communities and which conforms to the requirements of this
ordinance.



   SLOW BURNING or INCOMBUSTIBLE.  Materials which do not in themselves
constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will
not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for 5 minutes
to a temperature of 1200°F.



   SMOKE.  A suspension of fine particles, excluding water droplets, in a
gaseous plume, which obscure more or less the transmission of light.



   SMOKE UNIT.  The number obtained when the smoke density in Ringelmann
Number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of
this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at lease once a
minute during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied by
the time in minutes during which it is observed. The various products are
then added together to give the total number of SMOKE UNITS observed during
the entire observation period.



   SPECIAL SCHOOL.  Any school which has as its primary purpose the
instruction, care and rehabilitation of atypical or exceptional children or
adults so that the usual statutory educational requirements expressly or
implicitly do not apply.



   STORY.  That portion of a building, included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it
shall be the STORY.



   STORY, HALF.  That portion of a building under a sloping, gable, hip
or gambrel roof, the wall plates on at least 2 opposite exterior walls of
which are not more than 3 feet above the floor level of a HALF STORY.



   STREET.  A right-of-way or thoroughfare, other than an alley or place,
dedicated or otherwise legally established to the public use, usually
affording the principal means of access to abutting property.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof.



   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE.  A swimming pool used only by the owner of the
pool and friends as an accessory use at a private residence.



   TOURIST HOME.  A building in which 1 but not more than 5 rooms are
used to provide or offer overnight accommodations to transient guests for
compensation.



   TRADE SCHOOL or BUSINESS SCHOOL.  Secretarial or business school or
college when not publicly owned or owned or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious, charitable or nonprofit organization; or a school
conducted as a commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music,
dancing, barbering or hair dressing, drafting or for teaching industrial or
technical arts.



   USE.  The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land
for a person's service, benefit or enjoyment.



   USE, NONCONFORMING.  An existing use of land or building which fails
to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to the
district in which the use is located.



   VARIANCE.  A modification of the specific requirements of this chapter
granted by the Board in accordance with the terms of this chapter for the
purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances
applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and district.



   VIBRATION.  Oscillatory motion transmitted through the ground.



   VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS.  A triangular space at the street
corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between
the heights of 3 and 12 feet above the established street grade. The street
grade is measured at the intersection of the center lines of the intersecting
street pavements, and the triangular space is determined by a diagonal line
connecting 2 points measured 15 feet along each of the street property lines
equidistant from the intersection of the property lines or the property lines
extended, at the corner of the lot.



      (1)   Three feet above established street grade.



      (2)   Twelve feet established street grade.







 



      (3)   Point of established street grade.



      (4)   Diagonal line forming rear line of triangle.



      (5)   Intersection of right-of-way or property lines.



      (6)   Fifteen feet from intersection of right-of-way or
property lines.







 



   YARD.  A space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending across the full width of the lot
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and
similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the
front lot line and the building line.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear of the principal building the rear lot line unoccupied other than by
accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the required space,
and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts and similar structures, the
depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear
of the principal building.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard between the principal building and the side lot
line, extending from the front year or from the front lot line where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required SIDE YARD is
measured horizontally at 90 degrees with the side lot line, from the nearest
part of the principal building, except in cases where irregular or pie-shaped
lots are located, then the width of the required SIDE YARD shall be an
average of the width of the area between the side lot line and the principal
building measured horizontally at 90 degrees with the side lot line.



   ZONE MAP.  A map entitled “Brazil, Indiana, Zone Map,” dated
January, 1964.







 



(1982 Code, § 156.02)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964; Am. Ord. 40-2006,
passed 12-12-2006)



§ 156.142  INTERPRETATION.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare. The
Commission has given consideration to the existing and future probable use of
land in the territory affect by this chapter, and has prepared a
Comprehensive Master Development Plan showing the future development of this
area, which has served as a guide in the preparation of this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.03)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.143  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; nor any
ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, or
which shall be adopted or issued and which are not in conflict with any of
the provisions of this chapter; except that, where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction on the use of buildings or land, or requires larger open
spaces or greater lot area per family than are required; larger open spaces
or greater lot area per family than are required or imposed by easements,
covenants or agreements between parties; or by ordinance, rules, regulations
or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control.



(1982 Code, § 156.04)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.144  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   In determining the boundaries of districts, and establishing
the provisions applicable to each district, due and careful consideration has
been given to existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in each
district, the most desirable use for which the land in each district may be
adapted, and the conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction
of the Commission.



   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of the any
district as shown on the Zone Map, the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   In unsubdivided areas, or where a district boundary
subdivides a lot, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by
use of the scale of the Zone Map; and



      (2)   In case of further uncertainty, the Board shall
interpret the intent of the Zone Map as to the location of the boundary in
question.



(1982 Code, § 156.05)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.145  ANNEXED OR VACATED AREAS.



   (A)   Territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall
remain as zoned unless changed by amendment to this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way,
waterway or other similar area is vacated by proper authority, the districts
adjoining each side of the street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way
or similar areas shall be extended automatically to the center of the
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and thenceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. In the
event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district or district nearest the
portion vacated, shall be extended automatically to include all of the
vacated area.



(1982 Code, § 156.06)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.146  USE.



   No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and
specified in a district in which the building or land is located.



(1982 Code, § 156.07)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.147  ENCROACHMENTS.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered in
any manner which will encroach on, or reduce in any manner, the yards, lot
area per family, ground floor area of dwellings or lot coverage provisions
established and specified for the use and the district in which the building
is located.



(1982 Code, § 156.08)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.148  LOTS.



   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot. In no case
shall there be more than 1 principal building used for residential purposes,
and its accessory buildings, located on 1 lot.



(1982 Code, § 156.09)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.149  LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.



   For each building erected and for certain other uses of land, parking
spaces for motor vehicles and loading and unloading berths as specified for
the use to which a building or land is to be devoted shall be provided,
except that parking spaces may not be required in a block frontage contained
in a Business District in which the ground floor area of business or
industrial structures, including their accessory buildings, existing at the
time of passage of this chapter equaled 50% or more of the entire area of the
block frontage.



(1982 Code, § 156.10)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.150  SURFACING PARKING AREA.



   All public parking areas, and all parking spaces required for business,
enclosed industrial or open industrial use and loading and unloading berths,
shall be surfaced with a dustproof and hard surface.



(1982 Code, § 156.11)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.151  FILING FEES.



   Applications and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be accompanied by the filing fees hereinafter specified, which
shall be paid to the Planning Administrator who shall forthwith pay over to
the Clerk-Treasurer to the credit of the general fund of the city.



   (A)   For each application for an improvement location permit, a fee
of $10 shall be paid.



   (B)   For each application for a certificate of occupancy, a fee of
$5 shall be paid.



   (C)   For each application for the approval by the Board of a
special exception, a fee of $30 shall be paid, except that an application for
a shopping center plan, a fee of $300 shall be paid.



   (D)   The following fee shall be paid for the following designated
categories:



      (1)   No permit is required for any building under $500.



      (2)   All residences, garages and room additions:



 

 
 

Fee





$500 to $5,000
 

$12



$5,000 to $10,000
 

$15



$10,000 to $15,000
 

$20



$15,000 to $20,000
 

$25



$20,000 to $25,000
 

$30



$25,000 to $30,000
 

$35



$30,000 to $35,000
 

$40



$35,000 to $40,000
 

$45



$40,000 to $50,000
 

$50





 



      (3)   Any building over $50,000 will be charged a fee at the
rate of $1 per $1,000.



 



Mobile homes
 

$55



Swimming pools
 

$20



Rezoning
 

$50



New plats or additions
 

$50





 



   (E)   Except for the fee for a certificate of occupancy, no part of
any filing fee paid pursuant to this section shall be returnable to the
applicant or petitioner.



(1982 Code, § 156.12)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.152  AMENDMENTS.



   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with §§ 37
through 42, and 64 of Ch. 174 of the Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of
1947, and all acts amendatory thereto.



(1982 Code, § 156.13)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.153  FARMS EXEMPT.



   Land, farm houses, farm barns, farm outbuildings or other buildings,
structures or erections which are adapted, by reason of nature and area, for
use for agricultural purposes, while so used, shall not be affected by
restrictions or regulations of this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.14)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.154  PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS EXEMPT.



   Structures and land used for public utility installations, while so
used, shall not be affected by restrictions or regulations of this chapter.
However, power substations, terminal facilities and treatment or processing
plants are contingent uses and are subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.15)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.155  MINERAL EXTRACTION EXEMPT.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, URBAN AREA shall include any
land or lots used for residential purposes where there are 8 or more
residences within 1/4 mile square area and other lands or lots as have been
or are planned for residential areas contiguous to incorporated cities or
towns.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent, outside or urban areas, the
complete use and alienation of any mineral resources or forests by the owner
or alienee thereof.



(1982 Code, § 156.16)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.156  ESTABLISHMENT OF 10 DISTRICTS AND ZONE MAP.



   (A)   The territory within the jurisdiction of the City Plan
Commission is classified and divided into 10 districts designated as follows:



 


District Designation

 

Type of District






S

 
Suburban Residence



R-1

 
Residence



R-2

 
Residence



R-3

 
Residence



T

 
Transition



LB

 
Local Business



RB

 
Roadside Business



GB

 
General Business



I-1

 
Open Industrial



I-R

 
Reserved Industrial




 



   (B)   The Zone Map, here made a part of this chapter, shows the
boundaries of the area covered by the districts and notations, references,
indications and other matters shown on the Zone Map are as much a part of
this chapter as if they were fully described herein.



(1982 Code, § 156.20)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.157  RESIDENTIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The residential uses defined below, including accessory
buildings and uses, are permitted in the districts indicated in § 156.164
when complying with the requirements listed therein, subject also to the
provisions of division (B) herein.



      (1)   A single-family dwelling is a detached building designed
for or occupied by 1 family, exclusively.



      (2)   A 2-family dwelling is a detached building designed for
or occupied by 2 families, exclusively.



      (3)   A multi-family dwelling is a building designed for or
occupied by 3 or more families, exclusively.



   (B)   Other provisions for residential uses are as follows.



      (1)   Use of existing lots deficient in area or width. A
single-family dwelling may be located on any lot in any district in which
single-family dwellings are permitted if the lot was a single parcel in
single ownership or a single parcel separately described or included in a
deed or plat which was of record in the office of the County Recorder at the
time of passage of this chapter, even though the lot does not have the
minimum lot width or the minimum lot area specified for the district.



      (2)   Partial use of alley for yard. One-half of an alley
abutting the rear or the side of a lot may be included in the required rear
yard or side yard, respectively.



      (3)   Accessory building and uses.



         (a)   Accessory buildings are permitted in all
districts, but not prior to the erection of the principal building, except
for strictly storage purposes; and not for human occupancy.



         (b)   No detached accessory building or swimming pool
shall be located closer to a side or rear lot line than 5 feet; nor exceed 18
feet in height, and shall be set back at least 50 feet from the building line.



         (c)   Accessory uses such as public utility
installations, walks, driveways, curbs, retaining walls, mail boxes, fences,
lamp posts, bird baths and structures of a like nature are permitted in any
required yard, and without the issuance of any permit. Fences, lattice work,
screens, hedges or walls, not more than 7 feet in height, and fences
surrounding private swimming pools at least 3-1/2 feet high, maintained so as
to prevent the intrusion of small children or animals, may be located in the
required side or rear yard; however, they shall be located no closer than 1
foot from the side or rear lot line. A hedge or fence maintained so as not to
exceed 3-1/2 feet in height, may be located in any front yard, except that
vision clearance on corner lots shall be provided and the hedge or fence
shall be located no closer than 1 foot from a side lot line.



(Ord. 1-2005, passed 6-28-2005)



      (4)   Building lines.



         (a)   Where 25% of more of the lots in a block frontage
are occupied by buildings the average setback of a buildings determines the
location of the building line for the block frontage, but the front yard
dimension need not exceed 40 feet in any case.



         (b)   Building lines established in a recorded
subdivision shall establish the setback of buildings in subdivisions, except
when building lines may be less restrictive than provided in this chapter.



         (c)   On through lots a building line is required on
each street.



      (5)   Tapered yard formula. Where an interior lot fronts on a
side street in the rear of a corner lot which interior lot may or may not be
separated from the corner lot by an alley, an accessory building located on
the rear lot line of the corner lot shall set back from the side street as
far as the dwelling on the interior lot. For each foot that the accessory
building is placed from the rear lot line toward the front lot line of the
corner lot, the accessory building may be set 4 inches closer to the front
lot line along the side street, but in no case closer than the building
setback line along the side street required by this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.21)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.158  BUSINESS USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The business uses defined below are permitted in the districts
indicated in § 156.165, when complying with the requirements specified in
§§ 156.165 through 156.167, and subject to the provisions of division (F)
herein.



   (B)   Roadside business uses are also subject to the provisions of
division (G) herein; and local business uses proposed to be located in the
Transitional Business District are also subject to the provisions of division
(H) below.



   (C)   A local business use is one which is primarily of a retail or
service nature and is specifically classified or implied in the following
categories of uses:



      (1)   Automobile service including:



         (a)   Filling station;



         (b)   Public garage, but not including major repair or
body work;



         (c)   Public parking area; and



         (d)   Sales room.



      (2)   Business service including:



         (a)   Bank;



         (b)   Office building;



         (c)   Postal station;



         (d)   Telegraph office;



         (e)   Telephone exchange; and



         (f)   Utility company business office.



      (3)   Clothing service including:



         (a)   Laundry agency;



         (b)   Self-service laundry or self-service dry cleaning
establishment;



         (c)   Dry cleaning establishment using not more than 2
clothes-cleaning units, neither of which shall have a rated capacity of more
than 60 pounds using cleaning fluids which is nonexplosive and nonflammable;



         (d)   Dressmaking;



         (e)   Millinery;



         (f)   Tailor and pressing shop; and



         (g)   Shoe repair shop.



      (4)   Equipment service including:



         (a)   Radio and television shop;



         (b)   Electric appliance shop; and



         (c)   Record shop.



      (5)   Food service including:



         (a)   Grocery;



         (b)   Meat market;



         (c)   Supermarket;



         (d)   Restaurant;



         (e)   Delicatessen;



         (f)   Cold storage lockers, for individual use;



         (g)   Bakery, provided floor area used for production
shall not exceed 750 square feet; and



         (h)   Roadside sales stand.



      (6)   Personal service including:



         (a)   Barber shop;



         (b)   Beauty shop;



         (c)   Reducing salon; and



         (d)   Photographic studio.



      (7)   Retail service, retail stores generally including:



         (a)   Drug store;



         (b)   Hardware or paint store;



         (c)   Stationer;



         (d)   Newsdealer;



         (e)   Showroom and sales area for articles to be sold at
retail;



         (f)   Commercial greenhouse not exceeding 1,000 square
feet in area;



         (g)   Apparel shop;



         (h)   Flower shop;



         (i)   Antique shop;



         (j)   Shoe store;



         (k)   Variety store;



         (l)   Toy store; and



         (m)   Jewelry store.



      (8)   Business recreational uses including:



         (a)   Billiard room;



         (b)   Dancing academy; and



         (c)   Tavern or night club, only in conformity with
requirements of laws or ordinances governing the use.



      (9)   Private club or lodge;



      (10)   Advertising sign or billboard;



      (11)   Accessory building or use customarily incident to the
above uses which may not have more than 40% of floor area devoted to storage
purposes, and provided that not more than 5 persons are employed at 1 time or
on any 1 shift in connection with the incidental use;



      (12)   Local business uses, divisions (2) through (9) and
(11), shall be conducted within buildings so constructed that no noise of any
kind produced therein by the business operations shall be audible beyond the
confines of the building.



   (D)   A roadside business use is one which normally requires
drive-in facilities related to a street or highway, and is primarily of a
retail or service nature and includes storage warehouse and wholesale
establishments and enclosed industrial use, specifically stated or implied in
the following categories:



      (1)   Local business uses;



      (2)   Automobile, truck or trailer rental and sales area;



      (3)   Automobile and truck repair, entirely within enclosed
buildings;



      (4)   Indoor theater;



      (5)   Bowling alley or roller rink, entirely within enclosed
buildings;



      (6)   Department store;



      (7)   Hotel or motel;



      (8)   Veterinary hospital for small animals;



      (9)   Kennel;



      (10)   Radio and television studios;



      (11)   Newspaper publishing;



      (12)   Motor bus or railroad passenger station;



      (13)   Storage warehouse;



      (14)   Wholesale establishment;



      (15)   Any business use not specifically stated or implied
elsewhere in this chapter; and



      (16)   Accessory buildings or use customarily incidental to
the above uses.



   (E)   A general business use including accessory buildings and uses
includes the uses, specifically stated or implied, as follows:



      (1)   Local business uses;



      (2)   Roadside business uses;



      (3)   Storage warehouse;



      (4)   Wholesale establishment;



      (5)   Any business use not specifically stated or implied
elsewhere in the chapter; and



      (6)   Accessory buildings or use customarily incidental to the
above uses.



   (F)   Other provisions and requirements for business uses are as
follows:



      (1)   Parking spaces shall be provided on the lot, or as a
special exception within 300 feet thereof, as indicated in § 156.167;



      (2)   Loading and unloading berths shall be provided on the
lot as indicated in § 156.166;



      (3)   Parking spaces may not be required in a block frontage
contained in a Business District in which the ground floor area of business
or industrial structures, including their accessory buildings, existing at
the time of passage of this chapter, equaled 50% or more of the entire area
of the block frontage;



      (4)   Groups of uses requiring parking space may join in
establishing private parking area with capacity aggregating that required for
each participating use;



      (5)   One-half of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be
included in the rear yard, but the alley space shall not be included for
loading and unloading berths;



      (6)   Where 25% or more of the lots in a block frontage are
occupied by buildings, the setback of the buildings shall determine the
location of the building line, except for the Roadside Business District;



      (7)   Loading and unloading berths shall not be required for
business uses which demonstrably do not receive or transmit goods or wares by
truck delivery; and



      (8)   Parking spaces and accessory uses are permitted in the
required front yard in the Local Business District, on lots where business is
located.



   (G)   Additional provisions for roadside business uses are as
follows:



      (1)   On a through lot, front yards shall be provided on each
street;



      (2)   A planting screen consisting of suitable shrubbery,
either formally or informally planted so as to provide a year-round screen,
maintained at a minimum height of 6 feet, shall be planted in the front yard
wherever a Roadside Business District Use adjoins or is across the street
from a Residence District or land being used for residential purposes;



      (3)   Off-street parking spaces and accessory uses such as
filling station pumps and light standards, may be located in the required
front year, but not within 20 feet of land which is used for or zoned for
residential use;



      (4)   Where a Roadside Business District use adjoins a
Residence District or land being used for residential purposes, the side yard
dimension shall be 20 feet, and a planting screen consisting of suitable
shrubbery, either formally or informally planted so as to provide a
year-round screen maintained at a minimum height of 6 feet shall be provided;



      (5)   On a corner lot, the side yard dimension shall be 60
feet along the side street line, and off-street parking space is permitted in
a side yard;



      (6)   Roadside business uses shall be conducted within
buildings so constructed that no noise of any kind produced therein shall be
audible beyond the confines of the building;



      (7)   Roadside business uses shall not include open storage
use on the lot, except for the temporary storage of automobiles or trailers
for retail sale on a lot devoted to open automobile or trailer sales area
use, and for the temporary parking of vehicles in off-street parking space
permitted for the use;



      (8)   The front yard shall be maintained as a lawn which may
include landscape plantations; and



      (9)   The emission of smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, noise or
vibrations, which is noxious or offensive, in the judgment of the Planning
Administrator, beyond the confines of the building, is not permitted.



   (H)   Procedure for making application for local business uses in
the Transition District. When application is made for a local business use
within a Transition District, and when an application is accompanied by
written approval of the owner or owners of at least 75% of the total area of
the entire block frontage involved, the Planning Administrator shall issue an
improvement location permit for local business use provided the application
also meets the additional requirements of this chapter.



(1982 Code, 156.22)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.159  SHOPPING CENTER PLAN.



   A shopping center plan may be permitted by the Board as a special
exception, and subject to compliance with the following requirements and
procedure in accordance with § 156.163.



   (A)   The local business uses in § 156.158, also a bowling alley or
a roller rink and department stores, are permitted on a tract of land
proposed for a shopping center, provided that the proposed plan includes at
least 4 separate types of business uses as are specifically classified or
implied in the local business use categories in § 156.158, and provided
further that not more than 1 of which shall be an automobile service, as set
forth in § 156.158.



   (B)   The tract of land proposed for a shopping center plan shall be
of an area of not less than 10 acres and the tract shall have a reasonable
configuration for its intended uses.



   (C)   The Board may order an improvement location permit issued for
a shopping center plan in accordance with the procedure and provisions of
this chapter and on an affirmative finding by the Board that the following
requirements have been met by the owner or developers of the tract of land
proposed for a shopping center plan.



      (1)   A market analysis:



         (a)   To determine the number, size and type of stores
which could be expected to operate with a reasonable margin of profit in the
proposed center; and



         (b)   To evidence the advisability of locating the
proposed center (where the developers propose to locate it) so as to serve an
existing and potential customer demand.



      (2)   Financial report to include a statement of financial
responsibility which demonstrates the ability of the developer of the center
to proceed with and complete construction and development.



      (3)   Development plan to include the additional requirements:



         (a)   A plan of landscape development which shall
include, among other considerations, an area of at least 10 feet in width
along all streets, with the exception of approved entrances, which border the
proposed center, to be planted and maintained with trees and shrubbery to
serve as a screen for the parking area;



         (b)   A planting screen, consisting of suitable
shrubbery, maintained at a 6-foot height by 6-foot width, to be planted
wherever the proposed center would abut residential use;



         (c)   Provision for 1 off-street parking space, at least
270 square feet in area, for each 60 square feet of sales area in the center;



         (d)   No buildings or paved areas (other than access
drives) may be located closer than 50 feet to any area used or zoned for
residential purposes, in order to create a greenbelt, and the greenbelt shall
be maintained as lawn together with appropriate landscape development and
screen planting hereinbefore specified; and



         (e)   An adequate number and proper arrangement of
loading and unloading berths shall be shown in the development plan and
provided by the developer.



      (4)   Other authority approval. Any other authority approval
required when applicable, such as State Board of Health or State Highway
Department, shall accompany the application.



      (5)   Outdoor signs and lighting. The location, effect and
arrangement of all outdoor advertising signs proposed to be erected shall be
subject to the approval of the Board.



      (6)   Architectural control. Architectural plans of the
building and structures proposed to be constructed shall be subject to the
approval of the Board. The Board's approval shall be based on the
architectural plans creating a unified design which will be in character and
proper relationship to the surrounding areas.



(1982 Code, § 156.23)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.160  INDUSTRIAL USES, STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The industrial uses defined below, including accessory
buildings and uses, are permitted in the districts indicated in § 156.168,
in accordance with the requirements of this section.



   (B)   No activity involving the storage, utilization or manufacture
of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted
unless specifically approved by the Council. Activity shall be conducted in
accordance with the rules promulgated by the State Fire Marshal. Materials
shall include, but are not limited to, all primary explosives such as lead
azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives such as
TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such
as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its
derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetyrides, tetrazoles and
ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid,
perchlorates, chlorates and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than
35%; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products; and reactor
elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.



   (C)   No activity involving the storage, utilization or manufacture
of materials or products which contain arsenic, cyanide, warfarin, strychnine
or other poisonous substances shall be permitted unless specifically approved
by the Council. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the
activities of the site preparation or construction, maintenance, repair,
alteration, modification or improvement of buildings, equipment or other
improvements on or within the lot line; the operation of motor vehicles or
other facilities for the transportation of personnel, materials or products;
conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire, explosion, accidents,
failure or breakdown of equipment or facilities or emergencies; or safety or
emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the protection of life,
limb or property.



   (D)   An enclosed industrial use is one which is conducted entirely
with enclosed buildings of any size provided they meet the yard requirements
and conform to the standards in division (F) below.



   (E)   An open industrial use is one which requires both buildings
and open area for manufacturing, fabricating, processing extraction, heavy
repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment raw materials,
manufactured products or wastes; and land or buildings in the district
permitting an open industrial use; and shall be used so as to comply to the
standards in division (F) below.



   (F)   Standards for enclosed and open industrial uses:



      (1)   Smoke.



         (a)   For enclosed industrial use the emission of more
than 70 smoke units per hour per stack and emissions in excess of Ringelmann
No. 2 are prohibited, except that for 1 hour during any 24-hour period, this
rate may be increased to 80 smoke units per stack up to and including
Ringelmann No. 3 for the purging, soot blowing and fire cleaning.



         (b)   For open industrial use the emission of more than
90 smoke units per hour per stack and emission in excess of Ringelmann No. 3
are prohibited, except that for a 1-hour period during the 24 this rate may
be increased to 120 smoke units per hour per stack, still at Ringelmann No.
3, for purposes of process purging, soot blowing and fire cleaning.



      (2)   Particulate matter. The rate of emission of particulate
matter from an individual process within the boundaries of any lot shall not
exceed a figure of 0.06 pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas for enclosed
industrial use, nor 0.2 pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas for open
industrial use. For enclosed industrial use and open industrial use not more
than 50% by weight of particles larger than 44 microns (325) mesh shall be
allowed.



      (3)   Odor. Any enclosed or open industrial use activity or
operation which releases odors to the atmosphere shall be so controlled as to
ensure that it will produce no public nuisance or hazard at or beyond the
nearest Residence or Suburban Residence District boundary line.



      (4)   Poisonous and injurious fumes and gases. The emission of
toxic or injurious fumes and gases shall be controlled so as to comply with
the following:



         (a)   The emission from any source shall not cause at or
beyond any lot line, concentrations of toxic or injurious fumes and gases in
excess of 10% for an enclosed industrial use, and 25% for an open industrial
use, of the threshold limit as set for the fume or gas in question in the
latest issue of "Threshold Limit Values for Toxic Materials in Industry"
issued by the Indiana State Board of Health, from the American Conference of
Governmental Hygienists; and



         (b)   The emission of any gas or fumes across lot lines
in concentrations so as to be detrimental to or endanger public health,
safety, comfort and welfare or shall cause injury or damage to property or
business is prohibited.



      (5)   Glare and heat. No enclosed or open industrial use
operation, activity or structure shall cause heat or glare in a manner so as
to be a public nuisance at or beyond any Residence, Suburban Residence,
Transition or Business District boundary.



      (6)   Vibration.



         (a)   Any enclosed or open industrial use creating
intense earth-shaking vibrations that are created by heavy drop forge shall
be set back from a Residence of Suburban Residential District boundary at
least 250 feet, or at least 150 feet, from a Business District boundary.



         (b)   Earth-shaking vibrations at the industrial
property line shall not be in violation of this chapter as long as the
vibrations not perceptible without the aid of instruments.



      (7)   Noise.



         (a)   At no point 125 feet from the boundary of a
Reserved Industrial District, or any district which permits an enclosed
industrial use, shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant
(other than background noises produced by sources not under the control of
this chapter) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below.



 


Enclosed Industrial Use




Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second)

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Residence or Suburban District Boundaries

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Business District Boundaries





0 to 75
 

75

 

80



75 to 150
 

70

 

75



150 to 300
 

65

 

70



300 to 600
 

59

 

64



600 to 1200
 

53

 

58



1200 to 4800
 

48

 

53



2400 to 4800
 

48

 

49



Above 4800
 

41

 

46





 



         (b)   At no point 15 feet from the boundary of an Open
Industrial District, shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant
(other than background noises produced by sources not under the control of
this chapter) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below.



 


Open Industrial Use




Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second)

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Residence or Suburban District Boundaries

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In Decibels) 125 Feet From District Adjoining
Business District Boundaries





0 to 75
 

75

 

81



75 to 150
 

70

 

76



150 to 300
 

66

 

72



300 to 600
 

62

 

68



600 to 1200
 

57

 

63



1200 to 4800
 

53

 

59



2400 to 4800
 

49

 

55



Above 4800
 

45

 

51





 



         (c)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level
meter and associated octave band analyzer or filter, manufactured in
compliance with standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.



      (8)   Fire hazards.



         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted
provided the following conditions are met:



            1.   For enclosed industrial use and open
industrial use the materials shall be stored, utilized and manufactured in a
like manner and protected by the means as approved by the Indiana State Fire
Marshal; and



            2.   For enclosed industrial use and open
industrial use the storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids
or gases which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted in
accordance with the following table (exclusive of storage of finished
products in original sealed containers). Distances shown are to nearest
adjoining property lines which may be built on.



         (b)   When flammable gases are stored, utilized or
manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at
S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed 300 times the quantities listed.



 


Flammable Liquid Storage




Capacity of Tank (Gallons)

 

Class* of Flammable Liquid

 

Distance (Feet)





0 to 275
 

III

 

0



275 to 750
 

III

 

5



0 to 750
 

I and II

 

10



751 to 12,000
 

III

 

10



751 to 12,000
 

I and II

 

15



12,001 to 24,000
 

I, II, III

 

15



24,001 to 30,000
 

I, II, III

 

20



30,000 to 50,000
 

I, II, III

 

25



*N.F.P.A. Classes of Flammable Liquids:


   Class I: Flash Point below 20°F


   Class II: Flash Point below 70°F


   Class III: Flash Point above 70°F




 



         (c)   Tanks in excess of 50,000 gallons, and those for
storage of crude petroleum shall be at a distance of 3 times the greatest
dimension of the diameter or height of tank, except that distance shall not
be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 350 feet.



         (d)   Other provisions and requirements for enclosed
industrial use and open industrial use are as follows:



            1.   Each use shall provide 1 parking space for
each 2 employees, on combined employment of the 2 largest successive shifts,
located on the same lot as the use, or as a special exception within 300 feet
thereof;



            2.   Groups of uses requiring parking space may
join in establishing a private parking areas with capacity aggregating that
required for each participating use;



            3.   Each use shall provide loading and unloading
berths, located on the same lot as the use, as specified in § 156.169;



            4.   The disposal of wastes discharge into public
streams and sewage systems shall meet the requirements of the Stream
Pollution Control Law of the State of Indiana (Ch. 214, Acts of 1943,
amended);



            5.   One-half of an alley abutting the rear of a
lot may be included in the rear yard, but the alley space shall not be
included for loading and unloading berths; and



            6.   In all districts permitting enclosed
industrial use or open industrial use, it is permissible to erect more than 1
principal building devoted to enclosed industrial use or open industrial use
on a lot.



(1982 Code, § 156.24)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.161  CONTINGENT USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   Contingent uses, including accessory buildings and uses, are permitted
in the districts indicated in § 156.170, subject to the provisions herein.



   (A)   A contingent use is one which is likely or liable, but not
certain, to occur and which is not inappropriate to the principal uses of the
district in which it may be located. When so located it shall conform to the
requirements of the district in which the contingent use is permitted, except
that the number of parking spaces to be provided shall conform to the
requirements of § 156.170. The required number of parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot with the use, or as a special exception within 300
feet thereof.



   (B)   A church or temple requiring parking area at times when nearby
uses do not need their parking facilities, may by agreement approved by the
Board, utilize facilities in lieu of providing their own parking facilities.



   (C)   An existing use which is included herein as a contingent use,
and which is located in a district in which the contingent use is permitted,
is a conforming use. Any expansion of the contingent use involving the
enlargement of the buildings, structures and land area devoted to the use
shall be subject to the requirements of this section.



(1982 Code, § 156.25)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.162  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The special exceptions listed in § 156.172 and their
accessory buildings and uses may be permitted by the Board in the districts
indicated therein, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section
and the requirements listed in § 156.172.



   (B)   Special exceptions are uses publicly operated and those uses
traditionally affected with a public interest and those uses entirely private
in character but of an unusual nature so that their operation may give rise
to unique problems with respect to their impact on neighboring property and
public facilities.



   (C)   On receipt of an application for an improvement location
permit for a special exception by the Planning Administrator it shall be
referred to the Board. A copy of each application shall be referred
concurrently to the Commission. The Board shall then proceed with a hearing.



   (D)   On the hearing, if the Board finds that:



      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
special exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare;



      (2)   The special exception will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property value
within the neighborhood;



      (3)   The establishment of the special exception will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district;



      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;



      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the
public streets; and/or



      (6)   (a)   The special exception will be located in a
district where the use is permitted and that all other requirements set forth
in § 156.172 applicable to the special exception will be met.



         (b)   The Board shall direct the Building Inspector to
issue the improvement location permit for the special exception, otherwise
the Board shall direct the Planning Administrator to reject the application.
The findings of the Board and its order to the Planning Administrator shall
be in writing.



   (E)   An existing use which is listed herein as a special exception,
and which is located in a district in which the special exception may be
permitted, is a conforming use. Any expansion of the special exception
involving the enlargement of buildings, structures and land area devoted to
the use, shall be subject to the requirements and procedure described in this
section.



   (F)   Any person to whom is issued an improvement location permit
for a special exception which fails to commence construction within 1 year
after the permit is issued, or who fails to carry to completion the total
development plan thereof within 3 years after construction is begun,
whichever is later, or who fails to conform to the provisions of the
development plan and supporting data finally approved by the Board and on the
basis of which the improvement location permit was issued, may be required by
the Board on its own motion, and shall be required by the Board on written
petition of any person deeming himself or herself aggrieved, to show cause
why the approval should not be withdrawn and the improvement location permit
revoked.



   (G)   The holder of an improvement location permit for a special
exception may apply to the Board at any time for an alteration, change,
amendment or extension of the application or development plan on which the
permit was based.



      (1)   On receipt of the application, the Board shall proceed
as in the case of original applications for an improvement location permit
tor a special exception.



      (2)   In the event the Board shall approve and order the
application or development plan changed, altered, amended or extended, it
shall notify the Planning Administrator who shall issue an amended
improvement location permit accordingly.



(1982 Code, § 156.26)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.163  NONCONFORMING USE.



   The lawful use of a building or premises, existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter, may be continued although the use does not conform
to all the provisions of this chapter, subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building
provided the size of the structure is not increased.



   (B)   A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or greater restrictions, provided the size of the structure
is not increased.



   (C)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming
use or to a use permitted in a district of greater restrictions, it shall not
thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a less restricted district.



   (D)   No building shall be erected on any premises devoted to a
nonconforming use, except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   The Board may authorize, by written permit, in a district
permitting residential use, for a period of not more than 1 year from the
date of the permit, a temporary building for business or industrial use
incidental to the residential construction and development of the district.



   (F)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building
permit has been heretofore issued, or the construction of which has been
diligently prosecuted within 90 days of the date of the permit of from the
date of passage of this chapter and which entire building shall be completed
according to the plans filed within 3 years from the date of passage of this
chapter.



   (G)   In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or
premises is discontinued for a period of 2 years, the use of the same shall
thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is
located.



   (H)   These provisions apply in the same manner to a use which may
become a nonconforming use as a result of an amendment to this chapter.



(1982 Code, § 156.27)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)

Zone standards

S R-1 R-2 R-3 T LB RB GB I-1 I-2
Minimum lot size 7,000 7,000 5,000 1,500 1,500 7,000 2,500 1,750 1,750
Minimum lot width 60 60 60 50 50 50 50 50 50 
Maximum building height 25 25 35 35 35 35 80 35 35
Minimum front yard 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 
Minimum side yard 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 
Minimum rear yard 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 



§ 156.164  RESIDENTIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


Requirements

 

Type of Residential Use




Single-Family

 

2-Family

 

Multi-Family





District in which use is permitted
 
S, R-1, R-2, R-3, T, LB, GB, RB and IR
 
S, R-2, R-3, T, GB and IR
 
R-3, T and GB


Minimum lot size in square feet per dwelling unit in districts indicated
 
R-2, R-3, T, GB 5,000
 
R-2        3,500
 
R-3, T and G  1,500


LB                    7,000
 
GB  2,500


Minimum lost size in square feet per dwelling unit in districts where the
following utility systems are installed and utilized:

(a) Approved sanitary system

(b) Approved public or community water supply system
 
S, R-1, RB and IR          7,000
 
S and IR  7,000
 

-



In the absence or nonutilization of any of the above described utility
systems, (a) and (b), add the following area in square feet per dwelling unit
to the minimum lot size in districts indicated as follows.
 
S, R-1 and IR

(a)   3,500

(b)   3,500
 
S, RB and I-2

(a)   1,750

(b)   1,750
 

-



Minimum lot width in feet in district indicated
 
R-2, R-3, T and GB 50
 
R-2, R-3, T, and GB 50
 
R-3, T and GB 50


LB 60


Minimum lot width in feet per dwelling unit in the districts indicated when
the following utility systems are installed and utilized:
 
S, R-1, RB and IR 60
 
S and IR 45
 

-



   (a)   Approved sanitary sewer system


   (b)   Approved public or community water supply system


In the absence or nonutilization of any of the above described utility
systems, (a) and (b), add the following width in feet per dwelling unit to
the minimum lot width per dwelling unit in districts indicated as follows
 
S, R-1 and IR
 
S and IR
 

-



(a)   15
 
(a)   7-1/2


(b)   15
 
(b)   7-1/2


Maximum building height in feet and stories in districts indicated
 
S, R-1, RB and IR or 2 stories    25
 
S and IR or stories  25
 
R-3 and T or 2-1/2 stories  35


R-2, R-3, T and GB or 2-1/2 stories 35
 
R-2, R-3, T and GB 35 or 2-1/2 stories
 
GB  80 or 7 stories 


Minimum front yard in percent of average depth of lots in block
 
20
 
20
 
20


Minimum side yard (1)
 
10% of the required lot width
 
10% of the required minimum lot width
 
10% of the required minimum lot width


Minimum side yards (both or 2) in percent of lot width
 
20
 
20
 
20


Minimum rear year in feet
 
20
 
20
 
20


(Minimum ground floor area in square feet in districts indicated)
 
1 story R-2, R-3, T and GB  720
 
1 story S and IR 1,200
 
R-3, T and GB  720


S, R-1, LB, RB and IR 846
 
R-2, R-3, T and GB 720


Number of vehicle parking space to be provided on the lot
 
1
 
2
 
1 per each dwelling unit


Vision clearance on corner lot
 
Yes
 
Yes
 
Yes




 



(1982 Code, Appendix A)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.165  BUSINESS USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


Requirements

 

Type of Business Use




Local Business

 

General Business

 

Roadside Business





Districts in which use is permitted
 
LB, T, GB, RB, and I-1
 
GB, RB, and I
 
RB


Minimum front yard in feet in districts indicated
 
T 25
 
GB None
 
RB 75


LB and I-1  15
 
RB 75


GB None
 
I-1 15


RB 75


Minimum side yard in feet along the side street line of a corner lot where
block is adjoined by a Residential District
 
LB, T, GB and I-1    5
 
GB and I-1 5
 
RB 10


RB 10
 
RB 10


Minimum side yard in feet where a Business District adjoins a Residential
District within the block
 
LB, GB and I-1          5
 
GB and I-1 5
 
RB 10


RB 10
 
RB 10


Minimum side yard in blocks not including a Residential District
 
LB, GB and I-1        none
 
GB and I-1 none
 
RB 5


T and RB  5
 
RB 5


Maximum building height in feet in districts indicated
 
LB, T, RB and I-1      35 or 2-1/2 stories
 
GB and I-1    100 or 8 stories
 
RB    352-1/2 stories


GB or 8 stories          100
 
RB 35 or 2-1/2 stories


Minimum rear yard in feet
 
GB 10
 
GB and I 10
 
RB 15


LB, T, RB and I-1              15
 
RB 15


Vision clearance on corner lots
 
LB, T and RB  Yes
 
RB  Yes
 
RB Yes


GB and I-1  No
 
GB and I-1  No




 



(1982 Code, Appendix B)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.166  BUSINESS USES; LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.



 


Type of Use

 

Gross Floor Area

 

Loading and Unloading Berths Required





Retail stores
 
3,000 to 15,000
 

1



Department stores
 
15,000 to 40,000
 

2



Wholesale establishments, storage uses and other business uses
 
Each 25,000 additional
 

1 additional



Office buildings
 
100,000 or less
 

1



 
100,001 to 336,000
 

2



 
Each 200,000 additional
 

1 additional





 



(1982 Code, Appendix C)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.167  BUSINESS USES; PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.



 


Type of Use

 

Number of Parking Space Required




Local Business Uses (Based on divisions in § 156.158)





(C)(1)(d)
 
1 for each 125 square feet of floor area


(C)(2) through (C)(7)
 
1 for each 125 square feet of floor area


(8)(c)
 
1 for each 125 square feet of floor area


(C)(8) and (D)
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area


(C)(9)
 
Space to accommodate 50% of the active membership at 1 space per each 3
members, or as determined by the Board. The determination shall be based on
the expected number of parking spaces the particular lodge or club use would
require to satisfy estimated peak parking load requirements.



Roadside Business Uses (Based on divisions in § 156.158)



Automobile and truck repair
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area


Indoor theater
 
1 for each 6 seats


Bowling alley, roller rink
 
3 for each land plus 1 for each 6 spectator seats


Department store
 
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area


Hotel or motel
 
1 for each 3 employees plus 1 for each unit


Veterinary hospital, kennel
 
1 space for each 3 animals to be confined in temporary or permanent pens or
cages


Radio and television studios
 
1 per employee, plus 1 for each 6 seats in main auditorium


Newspaper publishing
 
1 per employee on largest shift


Motor bus; railroad passenger station
 
1 for each 3 employees plus 1 for each 10 seats in waiting room. Other retail
uses in connection therewith shall provide 1 space for each 2 employees


Storage warehouse; wholesale establishment
 
1 for each 3 employees or occupants. The maximum number of employees or
occupants to be used in determining spaces


Any business not specifically stated or implied
 
As determined by the Board. The determination shall be based on the expected
number of parking spaces the particular type of business use would require to
satisfy estimated peak parking load requirements




 



(1982 Code, Appendix D)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.168  INDUSTRIAL USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


Requirement

 

Type of Use




Enclosed Industrial

 

Open Industrial





Districts in which use is permitted
 
RB, GB, I and IR
 
I-1


Minimum front yard in feet
 
RB and IR-75
 
I-1 15


GB-None
 


I-1-25
 


Minimum side yard and rear yard required in feet when district indicated
abuts or adjoins (or is within) a GB, T, RB, I-1 or IR District
 
GB-5
 
I-1:20


RB-10
 


I-1 and IR-20
 


Minimum side yard in feet, if provided
 
5
 
5


Vision clearance on corner lots
 
GB and I-1    No
 
Yes


RB and IR   Yes


Maximum building height in feet and stories in districts indicated
 
GB and I-1-100 or 8 stories
 
I-1:100 feet or 8 stories


Minimum rear yard in feet
 
15
 
15




 



(1982 Code, Appendix E)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.169  INDUSTRIAL USES; LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.



 


Gross Floor Area of Industrial Use in Square Feet

 

Number of Berths Required





15,000 or less
 

1



15,001 to 40,000
 

2



40,001 to 100,000
 

3



Each 40,000 additional
 

1 additional





 



(1982 Code, Appendix F)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.170  CONTINGENT USES AND REQUIREMENTS.



 


Type of Use

 

Districts in Which Use is Permitted

 

Number of Parking Spaces to be Provided





Boarding or lodging house
 
All, except S, R-1, R-2, RB and IR
 
1 for each 3 occupants


Church or temple
 
All, except I-1
 
1 for each 6 seats in main auditorium


Educational institution
 
All, except I-1
 
1 for each 3 members of staff plus 1 for each 8 seats in auditorium


Greenhouse, but not including retail sales, provided that a greenhouse shall
not be less than 150 feet in distance from every lot line
 
All
 
None required


Home occupation
 
All
 
1 additional


Lodge or private club (which is of a noncommercial character)
 
All, except S, R-1, R-2 and IR
 
1 for each 125 square feet floor area of buildings


Mortuary
 
All, except S, R-1, R-2 and IR
 
1 for each 6 seats in main auditorium


Municipal or governmental building
 
All
 
1 for each 125 square feet floor area of buildings


Power substation or telephone exchange
 
All
 
1 per 2 employees or combined employment of the 2 largest successive shifts


Public utility installation terminal facility
 
I-1 and IR
 
1 per 2 employees or combined employment of the 2 largest successive shifts


Professional office in residence
 
All
 
2 additional


Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a building or premises
 
All
 
Not applicable


Sewage treatment or disposal plant
 
All
 
1 per 2 employees or combined employment of the 2 largest successive shifts




 



(1982 Code, Appendix G)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.171  CONTINGENT USES; MAXIMUM HEIGHT.



 


Districts in Which Use is Permitted

 

Maximum Building Height in Feet





S, R-1, RB and IR
 

25 feet or 2 stories



R-2, R-3, LB and T
 

35 feet or 2-1/2 stories



GB and 1-1
 

60 feet or 5 stories





 



(1982 Code, Appendix H)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.172  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Special exceptions:



 


Special Exceptions

 

Districts in Which Use May Be Permitted

 

Requirement Designation





Airport
 
S, I and IR
 
All, d, gl, hl, i13, j, k, ml


Heliport
 
All
 
a10, d, g4, i13, i, k, ml


Artificial lake of 3 or more acres
 
S, R-1, I and IR
 
gl, j, m6


Cemetery
 
S and I
 
a12, f, hl, j, k, ml


Commercial farm enterprises
 
All
 
j


County club or golf course
 
All
 
al, i14, j, k, ml


Hospital
 
All except I-1
 
a4, b3, f, i5, j, m3


Junk yard
 
I-1
 
b2, d, g3 or g5, i6, k, ml


Mobile home park
 
All, except R-1 and R-2
 
a5, b3, f, hl, i8, j, k, ml


Nursing home
 
All, except R-1 and R-2
 
a7, b5, e2, f, hl, i10, j, ml


Nursing home conversion
 
R-3, T, LB, GB and RB
 
a9, b5, c2, f, hl, i10, ml


Outdoor commercial enterprise
 
All except R-1, R-2, R-3 and T
 
b2, cl, f, gl, hl, i9, j, k, ml


Outdoor theater
 
S, RB, 1-1 and IR
 
b4, g4, j, k, m3


Penal or correctional institution
 
I-1
 
a12, b4, d, g5, i15, j, m3


Private recreational
 
All
 
b2, f, jl, i 15, j, k, ml development


Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery
 
All, except R-I, R-2 and I-1
 
a8, b5, e2, g2, i7, j, k, ml


Produce terminal wholesale, or truck freight terminal
 
GB, RB, I-1 and IR
 
a6, b4, f, hl, i6, j, k, m5


Professional office center
 
All, except S, R-1 and IR
 
al, b5, c2, f, hl, i2, j, k, ml


Public camp
 
All, except S and IR
 
a4, b4, d, j, k, ml


Public or commercial sanitary fill
 
All
 
g4, m6


Public or employee parking areas
 
All
 
a2, j, k, 1, m6


Public park or public recreational facility
 
All
 
f, j, k, ml


Radio or television tower
 
All
 
d, j, k, m2


Raising and breeding of non-farm fowl and animals, commercially, except kennel
 
GB, RB, I-1, and R-2
 
a10, b4, d, ml


Refuse dump
 
S, I-1, and F-2
 
a4, d, gl, m6


Shopping center plan
 
All, except R-1
 
See original § 4


Special school
 
LB, T, GB, RB and I-1
 
a8, b5, g2, i3, ml


Stadium or coliseum
 
All
 
a4, b3, f, hl, ill, j, k, m4


Tourist home
 
All, except S, R-1, R-2, IR and 1-1
 
al, bl, el, i12, k, m4


If the nature of the special exception involves more than 1 of those listed,
the applicant may apply for an improvement location permit for the special
exception which most closely relates to the primary use; provided that the
requirements of all the related uses will be met.




 



   (B)   Use of # symbol in the figure indicates that the requirements
of the district apply to the special exception where located.



 


Requirement Designation

 

Requirement





a.
 
Minimum lot area or tract area


   1.
 
#


   2.
 
1,500 square feet


   3.
 
25,000 square feet


   4.
 
5 acres


   5.
 
2 acres including 2,500 square feet per mobile home stand


   6.
 
6 acres


   7.
 
15,000 square feet but not less than 1,500 square feet per person cared for


   8.
 
10,000 square feet


   9.
 
2,500 square feet, but not less than 750 square feet per person cared for


   10.
 
1 acre


   11.
 
80 acres


   12.
 
40 acres


   13.
 
20 acres (tract)


   14.
 
No requirement




 



 

b.
 
Minimum Yards (Feet)


 
 
Front
 
Side (each)
 
Rear




   1.
 
#
 
#
 
#


   2.
 
#
 
40
 
40


   3.
 
60
 
30
 
40


   4.
 
100
 
75
 
40


(Abutting Residential)
 
 
 
 
 
 


   5.
 
#
 
10
 
#


   6.
 
25 feet plus add 1 foot for each 2 feet above 2 story level
 
12 feet plus add 1 foot for each 2 feet above 2 story level
 
20




 



 



c.
 
Building setback from centerline of interior road
 
40 (feet)


d.
 
Use permitted not closer than 200 feet to a residential use


e.
 
Minimum gross floor area of principal buildings (square feet)


   1.
 
#


   2.
 
Over 1,000


f.
 
Plan of landscape development to be submitted with application
 
(May be combined with development plan)




 



 

g.
 

Fence





   1.
 
6-foot wire mesh where accessible to the public


   2.
 
4-foot wire mesh around play area


   3.
 
Solid wall or solid painted fence 8 feet high


   4.
 
4-foot wire mesh abutting residential use


   5.
 
8-foot wire mesh fence covered and maintained with thick ivy growth


h.
 
Screen planting where abutting residential use (tight screen, effective at
all times)


   1.
 
6-foot height by 6-foot width


i.
 
Number of parking spaces required


   1.
 
#


   2.
 
3 per professional person plus 1 per each employee


   3.
 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 6 students


   4.
 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 125 square feet of sales area


   5.
 
1 per 4 beds plus 1 per doctor plus 1 per 3 employees plus 1 per hospital
vehicle


   6.
 
1 per 2 employees on largest shift


   7.
 
1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 5 children to be accommodated


   8.
 
1 per 2 employees plus 1 per mobile home stand


   9.
 
1 per 3 employees plus 1 per 500 square feet of use area


   10.
 
1 per each 5 patients, plus 1 per each staff member of Supervisor


   11.
 
3 per 4 employees plus 1 per 4 seats


   12.
 
1 per employee plus 1 per sleeping accommodation


   13.
 
1 per employee plus 1 per 3 seats in waiting room


   14.
 
30


   15.
 
As determined by the Board. The determination shall be based upon the
expected number of parking spaces the particular type of use would require to
satisfy estimated peak parking load requirements.




 



 

   16.
 

For Multi-Family Dwellings





      a.
 
With 1 bedroom or efficiency apartment
 
1 space


      b.
 
For 2 bedroom units
 
1-1/2 spaces


      c.
 
For 3 bedroom units
 
2 spaces


j.
 
Development plan to be submitted with application


k.
 
Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial lighting shall be approved
by the Board


l.
 
No sales, dead storage, repair work or dismantling on the lot




 



 

m.
 

Maximum Height of Structure (Feet)





   1.
 
#


   2.
 
As required by appropriate state or federal agency


   3.
 
65


   4.
 
35


   5.
 
45


   6.
 
No requirements, but in the case of multi-family use, structure shall not
exceed height protection limit of available fire or safety apparatus.




 



(1982 Code, Appendix I)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)




IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT




§ 156.185  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Within the territorial jurisdiction of the Plan Commission, no
structure, improvement or use of land may be altered, changed, placed,
erected or located on platted or unplatted lands, unless the structure,
improvement or use and its location conform with the Comprehensive Master
Development Plan, the ordinances of the city and an improvement location
permit for the structure, improvement or use has been issued.



   (B)   It is declared that the intent of the permit requirements of
this subchapter shall not prevail with respect to a structure including a
dwelling which is clearly incidental to agricultural operations, or a farm.



(1982 Code, § 156.01)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.186  ISSUANCE.



   The Planning Administrator shall issue an improvement location permit,
on written application, when the proposed structure, improvement or use and
its location conform in all respects to the Comprehensive Master Development
Plan for the city.



(1982 Code, § 156.02)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.187  APPLICATION AND FEES.



   (A)   Every application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the
structure, improvement or use to be altered, changed, placed, erected or
located, the dimensions of the lot to be improved, the size of yards and open
spaces, existing and proposed streets and alleys adjoining or within the lot,
and the manner in which the location is to be improved.



   (B)   Application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by a fee as specified in § 156.151(A) and (D).



(1982 Code, § 156.03)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964; Am. Ord. 5-1983,
passed 3-28-1983)



§ 156.188  APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Any decision of the Planning Administrator concerning the
issuance of an improvement location permit may be appealed to the Board of
Zoning Appeals when the decision in question involves a requirement of the
Zoning Code, or to the Plan Commission when the decision in question involves
the requirements of other parts of the Comprehensive Master Development Plan,
by any person claiming to be adversely affected by the decision.



   (B)   A decision of the Plan Commission may be reviewed by
certiorari procedures as provided for the appeal of zoning cases from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(1982 Code, § 156.04)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.189  AMENDMENTS.



   All amendments of this subchapter shall be in conformance with §§ 37
through 42, and 64 of Ch. 174 of the Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of
1947, and all acts amendatory thereto.



(1982 Code, § 156.05)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



§ 156.190  ENFORCEMENT THROUGH ABATEMENT AND INJUNCTIONS.



   (A)   The Commission, the Planning Administrator or any designated
enforcement official or any person, firm or corporation, jointly or severally
aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court of Clay
County to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Commission or the Board may also institute a suit for
mandatory injunction directing any individual, corporation or a governmental
unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Any building erected, raised or converted, or land or premises
used in violation of any provisions of this subchapter or the requirement
thereof, is declared to be a common nuisance and as so may be abated in a
manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under existing law.



(1982 Code, § 156.98)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964)




MANUFACTURED HOMES




§ 156.215  PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.



   It is deemed by the Common Council that it is in the best interests of
the city that the placement and location of manufactured homes upon real
estate within the corporate limits of the city be regulated.



(1982 Code, § 158.01)  (Ord. 6-1983, passed 4-11-1983)



§ 156.216  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling unit designed and built in a factory,
which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law (42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq.), and includes but is not necessarily limited to mobile
homes.



   MOBILE HOME or TRAILER.  Any vehicle either self-propelled or
propelled by means of being attached to a motor vehicle, which may be used as
a place of abode or residential dwelling, and which has no other foundation
other than the wheels required for its movement from one place to another.



(1982 Code, § 158.02)  (Ord. 6-1983, passed 4-11-1983)



§ 156.217  PLACEMENT OF MANUFACTURED HOME; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   No person shall place or locate a manufactured home of less
than 23 feet in width on a parcel of real estate or lot located within the
corporate limits of the city, or within the corporate limits of the city, or
within the 2-mile jurisdiction area surrounding the city without first
obtaining the necessary approvals and permits as provided for in this section.



   (B)   Any person desiring to place a manufactured home on any parcel
or lot located in the city shall first make application to the City Planning
Administrator on a form as established by the Administrator.



   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A plot plan showing the exact location and dimensions of
the parcel or lot;



      (2)   A description and dimensions of the proposed
manufactured home to be located thereon; and



      (3)   A drawing showing the exact location of the home on the
parcel or lot.



   (D)   The Planning Administrator shall submit the application to the
Board of Zoning Appeals for approval after reviewing the same for proper form
and compliance with the requirements of division (B) above.



   (E)   Upon submission of the application to the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the Board shall schedule a public hearing to review and consider the
application for approval and give notice of the hearing by sending written
notice thereof to the applicant by certified or registered mail and
publishing the notice in a local newspaper 1 time, at least 10 days before
the date of the hearing. The notice shall contain the name of the applicant,
the exact location of the parcel or lot where the proposed manufactured home
is to be placed and the date, time and the place of the hearing.



   (F)   If the Board approves the application, the applicant shall
then apply for an improvement location permit and a certificate of occupancy
as provided for in § 156.187, and pay the necessary filing fees therefore.



   (G)   Following the payment of the required fees and the issuance of
the improvement location permit and the certificate of occupancy by the
Planning Administrator, the applicant may place the manufactured home onto
the approved location or site.



(1982 Code, § 158.03)  (Ord. 6-1983, passed 4-11-1983)



§ 156.218  PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All mobile homes located within the jurisdictional area of
this subchapter shall have a perimeter enclosure or skirting installed within
a maximum of 60 days after the same has been placed onto the location or site.



   (B)   If the wheels are removed from any mobile home approved and
located pursuant to this subchapter, the owner thereof shall install and
place a permanent perimeter enclosure of brick or concrete block which shall
completely enclose the space underneath the mobile home.



   (C)   The owner of any manufactured home placed pursuant to this
subchapter shall further comply with all requirements of applicable federal
and state laws pertaining to the placement of manufactured or mobile homes,
plus any additional requirements as established by the Planning Administrator
and approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(1982 Code, § 158.04)  (Ord. 6-1983, passed 4-11-1983)



SIGNS



§ 156.230  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED SIGN.  A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts
any person, advertises a bonafide business, lessor, owner, project, or
activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is
displayed.



   ANIMATED SIGNS.  Any sign which includes action or motion. For
purposes of this subchapter, this term does not refer to flashing or
changing, all of which are separately defined.



   BANNER. A sign made of fabric, plastic, paper, or other light pliable
material, not enclosed in a rigid frame and characteristically suspended
along or across a public street.



   BUILDING FACE OF WALL. All window and wall area of a building in 1
plane or elevation.



   CANOPY. Any structure attached to a building at the inner end and
supported on the other end, or a free-standing structure, with 1 or more
supports, meant to provide shelter from weather elements, onto which signs
may be affixed or incorporated.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL). A sign on which copy is changed manually
in the field, such as, reader boards with changeable letters or changeable
pictorial panels.



   CHANGING SIGNS (AUTOMATIC). A sign such as an electronically or
electrically controlled public service time, temperature, and date sign,
message center or reader board, where different copy changes are shown on the
same lamp bank.



   CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD. A sign attached to the exterior of a church or
located elsewhere on church premises and used to indicate the services and/or
other activities of the church, and including the church name, if desired.



   COPY. The wording or graphics on a sign surface.



   ERECT. To build, construct, reconstruct, attach, hang, re-hang, alter,
place, affix, enlarge, move, or relocate and includes the painting of
existing sign structures.



   FACADE. The front or main part of a building facing a street.



   FACE OF SIGN. The entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed.
The area of a sign which is visible from 1 direction as projected on a place.



   FLASHING SIGN. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing
light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light
source. Automatic, changing signs such as public service time, temperature,
and date signs or electronically controlled message centers are not classed
as FLASHING SIGNS.



   ILLEGAL SIGNS. A sign which contravenes this subchapter, or a
nonconforming sign for which a permit required under a previous ordinance was
not obtained.



   LOGO. A letter, character, or symbol used to represent a person,
corporation, or business enterprise.



   PREMISES. An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which,
because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit
of real estate.



   READER BOARD. Any sign that has changeable or removable lettering.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW). The actual road right-of-way or the proposed
right-of-way as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan and/or as set forth in
the city subdivision ordinance.



   ROOF LINE. The highest point of the coping on a flat roof, false
mansard, or parapet wall; the deckline of a true mansard roof; the ridge line
between the upper and lower slopes of a gambrel roof; or the mean height
level between the eaves and ridge for a gable or hip roof.



   SEASONAL OR SPECIAL OCCASION TEMPORARY SIGNS. A sign which is not
permanent and is limited to a specific activity or in the celebration of
holidays or other special events.



   SHOPPING CENTER. A building containing 4 or more shops, stores, and
other places of business, and providing off-street parking facilities in
common for all of the businesses and their customers.



   SHOW WINDOW SIGN.  Any temporary sign advertising sales or specials
attached to or within 3 feet of the glass surface of any fixed window
(glazing) visible from a public right-of-way.



   SIGN.  Any identification, description, illustration, or device
illuminated or non-illuminated which is visible from any public place or is
located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs
attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution,
business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated
merchandise or any emblem, painting banner, pennant, or placard designed to
advertise, identify, or convey information, with the exception of window
displays and national flags. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also
include all sign structures. Not included are decorative devices or emblems
as may be displayed on a residential mailbox. For the purpose of this
subchapter, this definition shall include those signs painted directly upon a
building or other structure. A visual device or structure used for
advertising, display, or publicity purposes.



   SIGN AREA. The area of the sign face. The SIGN AREA of multi-faced
signs is the sum of the sign areas of each face, including structural trim
which can be seen from a single location on an adjacent street. If a sign is
attached to a building or suspended in any manner whereby there is no
apparent trim or confining border, the sign area shall be computed by drawing
an imaginary straight line around a generally rectangular margin and
measuring the area so encompassed upon a building or other structure.



   SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign erected or placed upon the wall of any building
with the plane of the face parallel to the plane of the wall below the roof
line.



   SIGN, COMMERCIAL DIRECTORY. A permanent pole sign designating the name
of a commercial center and listing the various tenants of the center.



   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign used during construction of new
buildings or reconstruction of or additions to existing buildings, such as
those identifying the project and denoting the owner, architect, engineer,
contractor, and/or financing institutions of the project.



   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign which indicates a direction for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or other movement.



   SIGN, FLUTTERING. A sign which flutters and includes banners, flags,
pennants, or other flexible material which moves with the wind or by some
artificial means.



   SIGN, GROUND. Any detached sign on the same lot or parcel as the use it
advertises which has its bottom portion erected upon or supported by the
ground, a ground planter box, or other supports.



   SIGN, HANGING. Any sign hanging entirely beneath a canopy, portico, or
marquee.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which is illuminated by light sources
mounted on or in the sign or at some other location.



   SIGN, MEMORIAL OR TABLETS. The permanent part of a building which
denotes the name of the building, date of erection, historical significance,
dedication, or other similar information.



   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign legally erected under the previously
existing ordinances of the city, but which does not conform to the provisions
of this subchapter.



   SIGN, OCCUPATIONAL AND/OR IDENTIFICATION. An attached wall sign not
larger than 1 square foot in area identifying the name of a person occupying
a building.



   SIGN PERMIT. A location improvement permit as discussed in the legal
provision, §§ 150.08 through 150.12.



   SIGN, POLITICAL. A temporary sign advocating or opposing any political
proposition or candidate for public office.



   SIGN, POLE. Any detached sign located on the same lot or parcel as the
use it advertises which is supported by 1 or more stationary poles no taller
than 35 feet above the mean grade line of the ground at its base provided
that this shall not include a permitted ground sign as set forth.



   SIGN, PROJECT IDENTIFICATION. A permanent ground sign identifying an
apartment complex, condominium project, or mobile home development entry,
name and/or street names within the project.



   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which projects more than 12 inches beyond
the plane of the wall on which the sign is erected or attached.



   SIGN, PROPERTY REAL ESTATE. A sign pertaining only to the prospective
rental, lease, or sale of the property upon which it is located. Real estate
signs shall be excluded from the definition of POLE SIGNS.



   SIGN, RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION PROJECT. Any temporary sign that
provides direction to any residential development under construction, or
promotes the residential development on the project site.



   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected on a roof but excluding marquee and canopy
signs and wall signs. The generally vertical plane of a mansard-type roof
shall be interpreted as the same as a wall of a building.



   SIGN, STRUCTURE. The sign and all parts associated with its
construction.



   SIGN, SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION. A permanent ground sign identifying a
subdivision entry, subdivision name, and/or street names within the
subdivision.



   SIGN, SUPPORTS. All structures by which a sign is held up, including,
for example, poles, braces, guys, and anchors.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign intended for a limited or intermittent period
of display.



   SIGN, WINDOW TEMPORARY. A temporary sign affixed to the inside of an
exterior window or glass door.



   SPECIAL DISPLAYS. Signs not exceeding 32 square feet, used for
holidays, public demonstration, or promotion of civil welfare or charitable
purposes.



   STANDARD OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE AND/OR BILLBOARD. Any sign
intended to attract general public interest concerning a commercial
enterprise, product, service, industry, or other activity not conducted,
sold, or offered on the premises upon which the sign is erected. This
includes billboards, detached pole signs on separate parcels, wall signs and
signs otherwise attached to buildings and/or supported by uprights or braces
on the ground. Real estate signs and political signs are excluded from this
definition.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is not permanent and is allowed for a
specific time period.



   TRAFFIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign which aids the flow of traffic.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 156.231  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to regulate and control the
location, erection, number, and maintenance of signs and matters relating
thereto within the city and the jurisdiction area of the Advisory Plan
Commission in order to promote public safety, health, and general welfare of
the community. These regulations are specifically designed to:



   (A)   Provide for uniform regulations and orderly development of
signs consistent with established policies and ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Prohibit hazardous and dangerous signs.



   (C)   Provide a desirable and attractive living environment through
harmonious and uniform signage.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 156.232  SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the erection,
alteration, and maintenance of all signs and outdoor display structures,
together with their appurtenant and auxiliary devises, with respect to
location, size, content, construction, structure, and fire safety.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Flags of any nation, state, county, city, or other
governmental unit and any not-for-profit organization.



      (2)   Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the
occasion of traditionally a patriotic, religious, or local holidays or events.



      (3)   The action, construction, and maintenance of official
traffic fire and police signs, signals, and devices and markings of the
state, county, or city.



      (4)   Nonilluminated directional or informational signs of a
public nature.



      (5)   Political signs or signs announcing political candidates
or issues, provided that such signs must be removed within 10 days after the
election.



      (6)   Residential garage, patio, or yard sale signs not to
exceed 6 square feet and located upon the premises where the sale is taking
place.



      (7)   Property real estate signs not exceeding 6 square feet
in area on each street frontage or a lot, which advertise the sale, rental,
or lease of the premises upon which the signs are located only. The real
estate signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height, and shall not be illuminated
in any way.



      (8)   Bulletin boards not over 32 square feet in area, for
public charitable, or religious institutions which are located on the
premises of said institutions. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 feet in
height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (9)   Memorial signs or tablets, names or buildings and date
of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze
or other incombustible material.



      (10)   Professional name plates, or occupational signs, and
home occupation signs not exceeding 2 square foot in area, wall-mounted and
unlit, adjacent to the main entrance of the building.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 156.233  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Administration. Except where otherwise stated in this
subchapter, the provisions of this section shall be administered by the
Advisory Plan Commission and Planning and Zoning Department  or by its
designee. The Department (or its authorized representative) is hereby
empowered in performance of departmental functions to enter upon any land in
the city for the purpose of making inspections, examinations, and surveys, or
to place and maintain thereon markers, notices, or signs required to effect
provisions of this chapter. The above authorization person shall be required
to present proper credentials upon demand when entering upon any land or
structure for the purpose of this subchapter.



   (B)   Duties of the Planning and Zoning Department. The Department
shall have the power to grant sign permits, and to make inspections of
buildings or premises necessary to carry out the Department’s duties in the
enforcement of this subchapter.



      (1)   It shall be improper for the Department to approve plans
or issue any permits or certificates for any sign until plans have been
inspected in detail and found to be in conformance with this subchapter, nor
shall the Department vary or change any terms of this subchapter.



      (2)   If the Department shall find that any of the provisions
of this subchapter are being violated, the Department shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation. The Department shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structures; removal of illegal signage; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
subchapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.



   (C)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful to commence or to
proceed with the erection, construction, reconstruction, conversion,
alteration, enlargement, extension, or moving of any sign or sign structure
or any portion thereof without first having applied in writing to the
Department for a sign permit to do so and a sign permit has been granted
therefore. Primary responsibility for securing the necessary permits shall be
the property owner's. However, if the property owner should contract part or
all of the proposed work, it shall become the responsibility of the person or
firm hired to ensure that all required permits and approvals have been
secured prior to any work being initiated.



      (1)   Blank forms shall be provided by the Department for the
use of those applying for permits as provided in this subchapter. Any permits
issued by the Department shall be on standard form of such purpose. There
shall be a separate permit for each sign to be constructed, altered, or
erected.



      (2)   Any sign permit under which no construction work has
been commenced within 6 months after the date of issuance of the permit or
under which proposed construction has not been completed within 1 year of the
time of issuance shall expire by limitation.



   (D)   Voiding of sign permit. A permit may be revoked by the
Department at any time prior to the completion of the sign for which was
issued, when it shall appear to him or her that there is any departure from
the plans, specifications, or conditions, as required under terms of the
permit, that the same was procured by false representation, or that any
provisions of this subchapter are being violated.



Written notice of the revocation shall be served upon the owner, his or her
agent, or contractor, or upon any person employed of the building or
structure for which such permit was issued, via a stop work order, which
shall be posted in a prominent location, and thereafter no construction shall
proceed.



   (E)   Compliance with sign permits. Sign permits issued on the basis
of approved plans and applications authorized only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this section as
provided in this subchapter.



   (F)   Violations. If it is found that a sign is in violation of this
subchapter, the Department, or its designee, shall give notice to the owner
of the sign, or if the owner cannot be located, to the owner or property
management agent of the premises on which the sign is located or, if the sign
erection is not complete, to the sign is located or, either personally, by
United States mail, or by posting such notice on the premises, such notice
stating:



      (1)   The violation found;



      (2)   That the violation must be brought into compliance
within the requirements of this and all other city ordinances within 10 days
from the date of the notice.



      (3)   The requirements which must be met; and



      (4)   That any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this subchapter shall be subject to the penalties established in
§ 156.999 of this chapter.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.234  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs and advertising devices are hereby declaimed to be
unlawful:



   (A)   Animated signs;



   (B)   Any sign-erected in a location prohibited by this chapter;



   (C)   Any sign erected in a public easement or right-of-way;



   (D)   Any sign erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress
from any door or window, or any other exit way required by the building or
fire codes of the city;



   (E)   Any sign attached to any public utility pole, tree, fire
hydrant, curb, sidewalk, or other surface located on public property;



   (F)   Any sign erected in any location where, by reason of its
location, will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal, or
other traffic-control devices. Nor may any sign, by reason, of its shape,
position, or color interfere with or be confused with any authorized traffic
signal sign or device. Further, no sign shall be erected in a location where
it will obstruct vision of the public right-of-way to a vehicle operator
during ingress to, egress from, or while traveling on the public right-of-way;



   (G)   Any on-premises sign advertising an article or product not
manufactured, assembled, processed, repaired, or sold or a service not
rendered upon the premises upon which the sign is located, and not located or
constructed such as to qualify as a “standard outdoor advertising structure
or billboard;”



   (H)   Any sign or advertising device such as banners and pennants
affixed on poles, wires, ropes, or streamers, wind-operated devices,
fluttering signs, pinwheels, streamers, banners, street banners, and “A”
frames or other portable signs of like nature, and other similar contraptions
or techniques except that these devices may be used for a period of 30 days
in any 12-month period by permit from the Department and must be kept in safe
and orderly fashion, except as permitted in § 153.12;



   (I)   Vehicle signs, except for standard advertising or
identification markings which are painted on or permanently attached to the
side of a business or commercial vehicle. Business or commercial vehicles
shall not be parked in any required parking space, nor in any excess parking
space adjacent to a street right-of-way;



   (J)   Off-site or off-premises signs expect as provided in this
section;



   (K)   Flashing signs including electronic message centers; however,
not including digital time, and temperature signs, involving only that
information and no further or additional information of any advertising
nature. Time/temperature signs shall be constant or steady in nature, and
shall not grow, melt, x-ray, up or down scroll, write on, travel, inverse,
roll twinkle, snow, or present pictorials or other animation;



   (L)   Portable signs, signs not permanently affixed to the ground;



   (M)   Signs which contain characters or cartoons, or contain
statements, words, or pictures of any obscene, indecent, prurient, or immoral
character.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.235  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   Any sign legally existing prior to enactment of this subchapter but
which shall violate any provision of this subchapter, may continue to be
maintained and used after passage of this subchapter subject to the following
provisions:



   (A)   Enlargement. No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged,
expanded, or extended to occupy a greater square footage of height than was
occupied on the date of adoption or amendment of this subchapter.



   (B)   Relocation. No nonconforming sign shall be moved in whole or
in part to any other portion of the lot, parcel, or building not so occupied
on the date of adoption of this subchapter, except that any sign which is
hereafter required to be moved by a governmental body for the purpose of
construction, relocation, widening, or improvement of a street, highway, or
other public purpose, may be relocated once and allowed to be maintained and
used as before.



   (C)   Discontinuance. If the business or service advertised or
identified by a nonconforming sign ceases to be conducted for a period
exceeding 30 calendar days, the nonconforming sign shall be classified as an
“Abandoned Sign” and removed.



   (D)   Destruction. Should any nonconforming sign be destroyed by any
means to an extent of up to 50% of its surface area or structure, it shall
not be reconstructed, except in conformance with the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (E)   Violations not made valid. Any sign which is prohibited by
this subchapter, and was erected in violation of the requirements of the
previous sign ordinance shall not be considered to be granted nonconforming
status by the passage of this subchapter.



   (F)   In any instance, in cases of doubt or a specific question
raised, whether a nonconforming sign exists, shall be a question of fact, and
shall be determined on appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.236  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any aggrieved person, firm, corporation, or any governmental
officer, department, board, or bureau may appeal a decision of the Department
before the Board of Zoning Appeals as established and in conformance with the
requirements of § 156.031, subject to the further requirements of this
section.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances from this
subchapter for any permitted form of signage where it is found that because
of the limitations on character, size, or dimensions of a sign, or the
regulations controlling the erection or installation of a sign, the applicant
would be subject to undue hardship. Undue hardship is not considered the loss
of possible advantage, economic loss or gain, or mere inconvenience to the
applicant.



   (C)   Appeals from decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
to the Circuit or Superior Court of the county.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 156.237  GENERAL SIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Structural requirements. All signs shall comply with the
pertinent requirements of the Building Code.



   (B)   Safety. Any existing sign which is or becomes an immediate
danger or hazard to persons or property because of being in an unsafe
condition, or which obstructs any fire escape, window, or door, is subject to
immediate removal without notice and at the expense of the property and/or
sign owner.



   (C)   Maintenance. Each sign shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable, and good condition. All existing signs shall be painted every 2
years except where the sign is of a noncorroding material, galvanized, or
otherwise treated to prevent rust. Broken panels, missing letters, flaking or
peeling paint, and other visual damage to a sign shall be repaired within 45
days of occurrence or within 10 days' notification by the Department,
Planning and Zoning Administrator, and/or the Board of Public Works and
Safety, weather permitting.



   (D)   Abandoned signs. Any sign or sign structure which advertises a
business no longer conducted or service no longer rendered, or a product no
longer sold on the premises or lot shall be classified an abandoned sign and
shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the
premises or lot upon which the sign is located within 10 days following
written notice by the Department, Planning and Zoning Administrator, and/or
the Board of Public Works and Safety concerning its removal.



   (E)   Illumination. Neither the direct nor reflected light from
primary light sources shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor
vehicles on public thoroughfares.



   (F)   State right-of-way requirements. All signs erected within the
jurisdiction of state right-of-way requirements shall meet both state and
city requirements. Signs shall not project over any city or county public
right-of-way.



   (G)   Lot lines. Signs shall not project over lot lines.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.238  RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL SIGNAGE.



   One-, 2-, multi-family residential, and agricultural signs must comply
with the general sign provisions in § 150.237 of this subchapter. The
allowable signage includes all permitted uses in § 156.237 of this
subchapter.



   (A)   Allowable signs.



      (1)   Identification signs. One identification sign may be
erected on each perimeter street frontage of a multi-family development,
manufactured/mobile home park, single-family subdivision, or permitted
nonresidential uses, including special exceptions. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 32 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed 12 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by a
constant light. Additional or multiple signs may be permitted by the Advisory
Plan Commission for 1 or more entrances. See §§ 156.045 through 156.098.



      (2)   Church, public or semi-public buildings or public park
identification sign.  Not more than 1 sign per street frontage not exceeding
50 square feet in size per face. The sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height,
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



      (3)   Construction sign. During the period of construction, a
temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises
may be erected on each perimeter street of frontage of the development. The
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area, nor 12 feet in height,
and illumination, if any shall be by constant light.



      (4)   Directional signs. Two signs per entry/exit not
exceeding 6 square feet in size per face.



      (5)   Memorial or tablet sign. One sign not exceeding 6 square
feet in size per face unless signs are installed by the federal, state,
county, or city government or agencies thereof.



      (6)   Property real estate signs. One sign per lot frontage
not exceeding 6 square feet in size per face.



      (7)   Special displays and other temporary signs. See §
156.241 of this subchapter.



      (8)   Informational signs.  Informational signs not exceeding
2 square feet in size per side nor a height of 4 feet from the ground which
identify the occupants, occupation, address, and/or information. Examples of
permitted informational signs generally include: privacy sign, trespassing
sign, seed sign, and the like.



      (9)   Nonilluminated home occupation sign.  Nonilluminated
home occupation wall sign not exceeding 2 square feet wall-mounted on the
dwelling, and; if allowed with the special exception, 1 nonilluminated yard
sign not exceeding 6 square feet in size per face. (See § 156.030)



   (B)   Location and height.



      (1)   No sign placed upon the ground shall be located closer
than 10 feet to any property line and shall meet the vision clearance on
corner lots requirements of § 156.141 of this chapter.



      (2)   No sign attached to the wall of a building or other
structure shall extend above the roof line of that building or structure.



      (3)   For residential signs without a specific height
standard, the sign(s) shall not exceed 8 feet in height from the surrounding
grade to the highest point of the sign.



      (4)   Direction signs. No sign shall exceed 3-1/2 feet above
the elevation of the adjacent driveway at the point where it meets the street
right-of-way.



      (5)   Memorial or tablet signs. No sign shall exceed 6 feet in
height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign.



      (6)   Property real estate signs. No sign shall exceed 6 feet
in height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign.



   (C)   Other requirements.



      (1)   Mobile construction signs. Signs identifying mechanics,
painters, architects, engineers, and similar artisans and workmen which are
attached to or on trailers on the site of construction shall be permitted
provided that upon completion of the project, the trailer must be removed
within 1 week. These trailers shall not be located closer than 10 feet to the
property line if signs are visible from the street.



      (2)   Residential construction project sign.



         (a)   On-site sign. The sign shall be removed either at
such time as the permanent subdivision entrance sign is erected, or when 80%
of the lots and/or dwelling units have been sold, whichever circumstance
occurs first.



         (b)   Off-site signs. The signs shall be removed either
within 2 years from the date of issuance of the sign permit, or when 80% of
the lots and/or dwelling units have been sold, whichever circumstance occurs
first.



         (c)   Property real estate signs. Shall be removed
within 10 days following the date of closing or lease initiation.



   (D)   Directional sign. May contain the street address and/or name
of the business center or the name of the use of the building, trademark,
logo, or similar matter, provided that not more than 50% of the sign area is
used for this purpose.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.239  BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL SIGNAGE.



   Commercial signs must comply with the general sign provisions in §
156.237 of this subchapter. The allowable signage includes all permitted uses
in § 156.232 of this subchapter.



   (A)   Allowable signs.



      (1)   Pole signs. One pole sign per lot and shall not have an
aggregate (total from each side combined) surface area greater than 3 square
feet for each foot of width of the principal structure on the premises. Total
pole signage shall not exceed 300 square feet.



      (2)   Ground-mounted signs. One ground mounted sign per lot
may be substituted for the allowable pole sign. Same surface area
requirements as for pole signs.



      (3)   Attached signs. One attached sign for each side of the
building not exceeding 10% of the total square footage of the building face
upon which it is placed.



      (4)   Window/door signs. Shall not cover more than 50% of the
total window area or door to which they are applied.



      (5)   Under canopy sign. One sign not exceeding 2 square feet
in size displaying the name, occupation, address, and/or service located upon
the premises.



      (6)   Directories. For buildings with multiple occupancies, a
directory sign may be substituted in lieu of the allowable pole sign subject
to review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals as to height and
overall square footage.



   (B)   Location and height.



      (1)   Pole signs. Signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height
from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign and the overhang
shall not be located any closer than 1 foot to any property line. Signs shall
meet the vision clearance on corner lots requirements of § 156.141 of this
subchapter.



      (2)   Ground-mounted sign. Signs shall not exceed 6 feet in
height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign and shall
be located no closer than 1 foot to any property line. Signs shall meet the
vision clearance on corner lots requirements of § 156.141 of this subchapter.



      (3)   Attached signs. Shall be face mounted on the building
wall, projecting not more than 12 inches from the face of the building. Signs
shall not project above the parapet wall, mansard, or other roof line, shall
maintain a clearance of 10 feet above the ground or pavement, and shall be
recessed where involving a pitched roof location.



      (4)   Window/door signs. Signs may be attached to either the
interior or exterior of a window or glass door and shall be maintained in
good repair.



      (5)   Under canopy signs. Signs may be attached to the
building or canopy and shall maintain a head clearance of 8 feet.



      (6)   Directories. As approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (C)   Other requirements.



      (1)   Canopy use. An attached or detached canopy sign may be
used as an attached and/or pole sign. However, the canopy's size does not add
to the width or face of the building when calculating for allowable signage.



      (2)   Portable signs. The use of portable signs for the
advertisement of cigarettes, food, or other sundry items is specifically
prohibited.



      (3)   Changeable copy signs. A manual changeable copy sign may
be incorporated as an integral part of the permanent pole, ground, or
attached signage permitted upon the property.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.240  SPECIAL DISPLAYS AND OTHER TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Banners and pennants are a permitted use. However, the Planning and
Zoning Administrator and/or the Board of Public Works and Safety can require
removal of banners and pennants if they are not kept in a safe and orderly
fashion. The following temporary signs may be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Administrator and/or the Board of Public Works and Safety for up to a
30-day time period. The signs may be extended beyond the 30-day time period,
but only upon review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special
exception.



   (A)   Signs announcing openings.



   (B)   Seasonal or special occasion signs such as special events and
special business hours.



   (C)   Yard signs, such as “Siding by...”.



   (D)   Subdivision directional signs not exceeding 3 square feet in
size per face.



   (E)   All other temporary signs not specifically referenced in this
subchapter.



   (F)   Portable signs, signs not permanently affixed to the ground.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.241  STANDARD OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE (BILLBOARDS).



   (A)   Where permitted. Advertising signs complying with all the
requirements of this subchapter shall only be allowed if they are located
easterly from Lambert Street and westerly from Depot Street on U.S. Highway
40 or southerly from Pinckley Street on Indiana State Road 59. Additionally,
they are required to be in a Suburban Residential (S), local business (LB),
general business (GB), or open industrial (I1), or reserved industrial (IR)
zoning district .



   (B)   Area and height.



      (1)   The maximum area for any 1 sign shall not exceed 672
square feet in size per face excluding extensions and embellishments, with a
maximum height of 14 feet and a maximum width of 48 feet inclusive of border
and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural
members.



      (2)   Extensions to the top of advertising signs are
permitted. However, in no case shall any extensions exceed 96 square feet in
total feet in total area or extend more than 5-1/2 feet in height above top
of the sign. Other extensions are permitted as follows:



         (a)   Side extension: 2 feet on each side.



         (b)   Bottom extension: 1 foot.



         (c)   Embellishments to advertising signs shall not
exceed 1 foot out from the facing of the sign.



      (3)   The maximum height shall not exceed 30 feet from the
highest point on the sign to surrounding grade or street level, whichever is
higher.



      (4)   The maximum size limitations shall apply to each side of
a sign structure, and signs may be placed back-to-back or in V-Type
construction with not more than 3 side-by-side displays to each facing but
such sign structures shall be considered as 1 sign. A group of not more than
2 advertising signs shall be permitted on 1 sign structure. However, there
shall be no vertical stacking signs.



   (C)   Location.



      (1)   No sign shall be erected within 1,000 lineal feet of an
existing sign on the same side of the road.



      (2)   No sign shall be located within 500 lineal feet of a R1,
R2, or R3 residential zoning district along the street on which the sign is
intended to be located.



      (3)   No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct
or otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of an official
traffic sign, signal, or device or obstruct or physically interfere with a
motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting
traffic.



      (4)   No sign shall be placed closer than 500 feet to an
intersection with a limited access highway and measured from the nearest edge
of the right-of-way. No sign shall be so located to obstruct the vision of
traffic using entrance ways, driveways, or any public road intersection.



      (5)   The minimum front yard setback for signs shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from any public right-of-way and/or private roadway
easement.



      (6)    No sign shall be located on any public or private
utility easement, road, drainage easement or railroad right-of-way.



      (7)   All lineal distances required by this section shall be
measured from the nearest outside edge of the subject sign, whether a
support, structural member, or the sign surface itself to the nearest outside
edge of the corresponding sign, building, right-of-way or easement involved.



   (D)   Prohibited outdoor advertising structure signage.



      (1)   Roof-mounted signs or signs affixed directly to the side
of any building.



      (2)   Flashing signs, including automatic changing signs such
as time, temperature, and date signs as well as electronically controlled
message centers.



      (3)   Fluttering signs, pinwheels, pennants, streamers, and
banners.



      (4)   Moving signs or swinging signs.



      (5)   Signs which contain characters, cartoons, or statements,
words, or pictures of any obscene, indecent, prurient or immoral character.



      (7)   Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official
traffic sign or signal, or which are of a size, location, movement, content,
coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with or constructed
as a traffic-control device, or which may hide from view any traffic or
street sign or signal.



      (8)   Any sign constructed or located in such a manner that it
becomes an immediate hazard or danger to persons or property because of being
in an unsafe condition, or which obstructs any window, door, or fire escape
of a building. Signs will be subject to immediate removal by the Building
Inspector or his or her designee, without notice, at the expense of the
property owners.



   (E)   Maintenance. All signs and sign supports shall be maintained
in good repair so as to prevent rust, peeling, flaking, or fading. Broken
panels, missing letters, flaking or peeling paint, and other visual damage to
a sign shall be repaired within 45 days of occurrence or within 30 days of
notice from the Planning and Zoning Department or the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (F)   Illumination. Neither the direct nor reflected light from
primary light sources shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor
vehicles on public thoroughfares, nor shall the light sources be oriented
such that either direct or reflected light creates a nuisance to adjoining
properties.



   (G)   Plans required. An application to erect such a sign shall be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A set of plans, to scale, approved, and sealed by a
licensed engineer in the state, providing all necessary construction and
electrical details of the sign and sign structure, including height.



      (2)   A site plan, to scale containing:



         (a)   The proposed location of the sign upon the
property.



         (b)   The distance from the proposed sign location to
any buildings upon the property, and adjoining street right-of-way lines, and
driveway entrances.



         (c)   The distance from the proposed sign location to
the next nearest billboard sign on either side of the street in either
direction.



         (d)   The distance from the proposed sign location to
the nearest street intersection in either direction.



      (3)   A representation of the proposed sign, to scale,
including the width and length of the sign faces, and height from surrounding
grade.



   (H)   Construction specifications. Henceforth, any sign erected
under this subchapter shall be a single pedestal type, constructed of
nonflammable material, excluding wood. Construction of the sign and material
specifications shall comply with the following sections of the “Indiana
Department of Highways Standard Specifications: 802, 803, 909.14, 909.19, and
912.10,” as applicable, and must meet the structural requirements of the
Building Code.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 156.020 through 156.034
for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not less than $10
nor more than $300. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that a violation occurs or continues.



(1982 Code, § 156.99)  (Ord. 12-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 156.185 through 156.190
for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined not less than $10
nor more than $300. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that a violation occurs or continues.



(1982 Code, § 156.99)  (Ord. 13-1964, passed 8-11-1964)



   (D)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 156.230 through
156.241 for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not ore
than $500.  A separate offenses shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



   (E)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 156.232 and 156.234
for which no other penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined $25 for each
violation, a maximum of $500.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 40-2006, passed 12-12-2006)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   STREETS, ALLEYS AND PARKING



      II.   FUNDS



      III.   ZONING



TABLE I.  STREETS, ALLEYS AND PARKING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




8-2001
 
9-11-2001
 
Vacating a portion of a 15-foot wide public alley running north and south a
distance of approximately 440 feet between Lennox Street on the north and a
previously vacated alley south of lots 382 and 447 in the Oak Park Addition
as a public way


9-2001
 
9-14-2001
 
Vacating a 12-foot alley running north and south of Thorp’s Original Plat
as a public way


9-2002
 
6-11-2002
 
Designating and naming a lane located at the intersection of Nabuco Drive in
Forest Park which runs in a southerly direction “L.T. Clark Lane”


13-2002
 
8-13-2002
 
Vacating a part of a 15-foot alley running north and south in Oak Park
Addition as a public way


6-2003
 
5-27-2003
 
Designating and naming a certain roadway located immediately east of Roy
Brann Stadium in Forest Park “Tobe Sutherlin Lane”


7-2004
 
4-13-2004
 
Vacating a 12-foot alley running east and west in Shattuck’s Third Addition
of the city as a public way


13-2004
 
7-13-2004
 
Names the drive located in the south western quarter of the city, beginning
between the 600 and 700 block of West Jackson Street, Wesleyan Church Drive


16-2004
 
8-10-2004
 
Designating and naming a certain roadway located in the north eastern quarter
of the city, in the middle of the 800 block of Mary Patton Drive and
continuing eastwardly to between the 300 and 400 blocks of North Elm Street
“Boone Dunbar Drive”


13-2005
 
6-16-2005
 
Designating and naming a certain roadway located immediately west of Forest
Park Golf Course and running in a southerly direction from the intersection
of John A. Stelle Drive and Nabuco Drive in Forest Park “Bill Beeler/Santa
Claus Lane”


16-2005
 
7-13-2005
 
Vacating a public alley beginning at the southeast corner of lot 64 in
Hendrix’s Eighth Addition as a public way


27-2005
 
8-10-2005
 
Repeal of Ord. 16-2003, which made South Wheeler Street a temporary 1-way
street


37-2005
 
11-9-2005
 
Vacating McDonald Street (40 feet in width), running easterly and westerly


16-2006
 
5-23-2006
 
Vacating alley of approximately 230 feet in length and located east of the
east right-of-way of Lambert Street and being the first alley south of Main
Street


22-2006
 
8-22-2006
 
Vacating a portion of a public street and alleyways


25-2006
 
9-12-2006
 
Vacating 2 alleyways in the Stunkard Addition


26-2006
 
9-12-2006
 
Vacating a portion of Lincoln Street


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II.  FUNDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




4-2002
 
2-12-2002
 
Creation of Police Grant Fund


11-2003
 
8-12-2003
 
Establishes Riverboat Wagering Tax Revenue Fund


5-2004
 
2-24-2004
 
Rainy Day Fund established


6-2004
 
4-14-2004
 
Provides additional appropriation from the Rainy Day Fund


5-2005
 
4-27-2005
 
Establishes a fixed asset capitalization policy for the city and its various
departments


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III.  ZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




4-2001
 
5-22-2001
 
Piece of land located at 8719  North County Road 50 East rezoned to a GB
District


3-2001
 
6-12-2001
 
Piece of land at 601 Edgewood Drive rezoned to a GB District


10-2001
 
9-11-2001
 
Rezones 2 parcels of land at 303 North Forest Ave to LB District


8-2002
 
6-11-2002
 
Rezones real estate at 403 West Hendrix Street to a LB District


19-2002
 
12-23-2002
 
Rezones part of northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 12, Range 7 West, to
a I-1 Open Industrial


1-2003
 
1-28-2003
 
Annexes territory; part of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 12
North, Range 7


5-2003
 
4-22-2003
 
Rezones real estate south of the former Pennsylvania Railroad and west of
Murphy Ave. to a R-1 District


12-2004
 
6-29-2004
 
Rezones real estate at 905 and 907 King Avenue, Brazil, IN 47834 to R-2
District


15-2004
 
7-27-2004
 
Grants a variance for real estate at 611 East Jackson Street, Brazil, IN 47834


25-2004
 
9-29-2004
 
Real estate located between Warren and Luther Streets and Knight Street and
the old railroad tracks rezoned to R-1 District


30-2004
 
12-15-2004
 
Real estate located at 704 North Meridian rezoned to T District


8-2005
 
4-26-2005
 
Deer Run Condominiums are rezoned from R-1 District to R-3 District


25-2005
 
8-24-2005
 
21 S. Depot Street rezoned to R-1 Residential Single-Family District


34-2005
 
9-14-2005
 
2 parcels of land at 303 N. Forest Avenue rezoned to a Local Business District


19-2006
 
6-27-2006
 
Rezones the northwest corner of E. Hendrix and N. Vandalia/Mary Patton Dr.
from R-1 to GB


4-2007
 
2-27-2007
 
Rezones the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 13,
Township 12 North, Range 7 West from S to LB


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to 1982 Code





References ro Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Section
 
Code Section




1-1-1-5
 
10.04


1-1-1-7
 
10.12


1-1-1-8
 
10.06


1-1-4-1
 
10.05


1-1-4-5
 
10.05


1-1-5-1
 
10.11


1-1-6-1
 
10.08


3-10-6
 
30.040, 31.02, 31.03


3-10.1-1-3
 
33.01


3-10.1-3
 
33.04


3-14-24-1 et seq.
 
98.01


4-21.5-3-7
 
150.19


4-22-2 et seq.
 
150.40


5-3-1
 
30.043, 31.07, 70.19, 150.34, 150.44


5-13-7
 
30.102


5-14-1.5-1 - 5-14-1.5-7
 
97.48


5-22
 
30.060, 30.069, 30.071


6-1.1-17
 
32.31, 32.32


6-1.1-17-1 et seq.
 
30.103


6-1.1-17-3
 
32.32


7.1-1-3-5
 
91.01


7.1-1-3-13
 
91.01


8-14-2-1 et seq.
 
30.109, 30.110


8-22-2-1 et seq.
 
30.015


8-22-2-5
 
30.015


8-22-2-18
 
30.015


9-13-2-105
 
91.01


9-13-2-150
 
91.01


9-13-2-188
 
91.01


9-20-1-3
 
73.42


9-24-1-2
 
91.02


14-28-1
 
151.37


14-28-1 - 14-28-6
 
151.12


14-28-1-22
 
151.05, 151.12


14-28-1-26
 
151.37


22-9-1-4 et seq.
 
92.02


22-9.5-2-10
 
92.02


22-9.5-2-10(b)
 
92.02


22-9.5-2-11
 
92.02


Title 22-9.5-3
 
92.03


Title 22-9.5-3 et seq.
 
92.09


22-9.5-4-8
 
92.10


22-9.5-5-1 et seq.
 
92.01


22-9.5-5-1
 
92.03


22-9.5-5-5
 
92.02


22-9.5-6
 
92.02


22-9.5-6
 
92.10


22-12
 
150.19


22-12-1-3
 
95.07


22-12-1-4
 
150.02


22-12-1-5
 
150.02


22-12-1-7
 
150.02


22-12-1-14
 
150.02


22-12-1-16
 
150.02


22-12-1-17
 
150.02


22-12-1-18
 
150.02


22-12-1-22(b)(12)
 
150.21


22-12-1-24
 
150.02


22-12-1-26
 
150.02


22-12-7
 
150.03


22-13
 
150.19


22-13-2-3(b)
 
150.20


22-13-2-6
 
150.04


22-13-2-7
 
150.19


22-13-2-7(b)
 
150.20


22-13-2-9
 
150.04


22-13-2-11
 
150.03


22-14
 
150.19


22-15
 
150.19


22-15-3
 
150.08


22-15-4
 
150.04


32-25-2-9
 
150.02


33-10.1
 
33.02


33-10.1-1-3(b)
 
33.03


33-35
 
30.003


33-37-5-17
 
72.04


33-39-1-8
 
72.03


34-28-5-1
 
72.02 - 72.04


Title 36
 
30.002


36-1-3-8(a)(10)
 
10.99


36-1-3-8(a)(10)(13)
 
52.999


36-1-4-5
 
32.50


36-1-5-4
 
150.20, 150.21


36-1-6-4
 
150.18


36-1-6-9
 
150.19


36-4-3-1 et seq.
 
32.30


36-4-3-13
 
32.30


36-4-4-4
 
32.04


36-4-5-3 - 35-4-5-7
 
31.01


36-4-5-6
 
31.06


36-4-6
 
30.003


36-4-6-5
 
32.01


36-4-6-7
 
32.06


36-4-6-8
 
31.04


36-4-6-9
 
30.041, 32.05


36-4-6-10 - 36-4-6-17
 
32.07


36-4-6-11
 
32.12


36-4-6-13
 
32.10


36-4-6-14 - 35-4-6-17
 
32.10


36-4-6-18
 
32.04


36-4-6-20
 
30.104


36-4-7-6
 
32.32


36-4-9-11
 
30.017


36-4-9-12
 
30.017


36-4-10
 
30.003


36-4-10-2.5
 
30.045


36-4-10-4.5
 
30.042


36-4-10-5
 
30.100


36-4-10-5.5
 
30.046


36-4-11-2
 
30.016


36-5-2-2
 
10.15


36-7-4
 
151.01, 151.25


36-7-4-100 et seq.
 
30.018


36-7-4-100
 
156.001


36-7-4-200
 
156.001


36-7-4-300
 
156.001


36-7-4-400
 
156.001


36-7-4-500
 
156.001


36-7-4-600
 
156.001


36-7-4-800
 
156.001


36-7-4-901 et seq.
 
30.019


36-7-4-1000
 
156.001


36-7-9
 
95.01


36-7-9-1 - 36-7-9-28
 
95.02, 150.30, 150.47


36-7-9-2
 
95.06


36-7-9-4
 
95.05


36-7-9-8
 
150.35


36-7-9-9
 
150.32


36-7-9-11
 
150.32


36-7-9-13(c)
 
150.40


36-7-9-13(d)
 
150.40


36-7-9-13(e)
 
150.40


36-7-9-14
 
30.106, 95.08


36-7-9-16
 
150.42


36-7-9-17
 
150.32, 150.43


36-7-9-17 - 36-7-9-22
 
150.41


36-7-9-18
 
150.43


36-7-9-20
 
150.41, 150.43


36-7-9-21
 
150.43


36-7-9-22
 
150.43


36-7-9-28
 
95.99


36-7-12
 
30.022


36-7-12-5
 
30.022


36-7-14
 
30.021, 32.39


36-7-18
 
30.024


36-7-18-7
 
30.024


36-7-18-9
 
30.024


36-7-4700
 
156.001


36-7-4900
 
156.001


36-8-3-3
 
30.025


36-8-6
 
30.025


36-8-7
 
30.025


36-8-8
 
30.025


36-8-17
 
150.14


36-9-27
 
51.04


36-9-27.4
 
51.36


36-10-3-1 - 36-10-3-14
 
30.023, 97.04


36-10-5-3(b)
 
97.45


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1982 CODE



 

1982 Code Section
 
2007 Code Section




11.01
 
30.001


30.01
 
30.002


30.02
 
30.003


30.03(A)
 
31.01


30.03(B)
 
30.016, 31.09


30.03(D)
 
31.08


30.03(E)
 
30.016


30.03(F)
 
30.017


30.03(G)
 
30.021


30.03(K)
 
30.023


30.03(L)
 
30.023


30.03(M)
 
30.024


30.03(N)
 
30.025


30.03(P)
 
30.026


30.04
 
32.01, 30.04, 98.01


30.04(A)
 
32.04


30.04(B)
 
32.05


30.04(D)
 
32.07 - 32.14


30.04(G)
 
32.03


30.05
 
30.100, 30.101


30.06(A)
 
33.02


30.06(B)
 
33.03


30.06(C)
 
33.04


30.18
 
97.20


51.01
 
53.001


51.10
 
53.002


51.11
 
53.015


51.12
 
53.016, 53.019


51.13
 
53.017


51.14
 
53.018


51.16
 
53.020


51.18
 
53.022, 53.041


51.19
 
53.023


51.20
 
53.024


51.21
 
53.025


51.22
 
53.026


51.23
 
53.026


51.24
 
53.027


51.25
 
53.028


51.26
 
53.029


51.27
 
53.040


51.29
 
53.042


51.30
 
53.043


51.31
 
53.044


51.32
 
53.045


51.33
 
53.045


51.34
 
53.045


51.35
 
53.046


51.36
 
53.047


51.37
 
53.048


51.38
 
53.048


51.39
 
53.049


51.40
 
53.050


51.41
 
53.051


51.42
 
53.052


51.43
 
53.053


51.44
 
53.053


51.45
 
53.054


51.46
 
53.054


51.47
 
53.055


51.48
 
53.056


51.49
 
53.057


51.50
 
53.058


51.51
 
53.058


51.52
 
53.059


51.53
 
53.060, 53.067


51.54
 
53.061


51.55
 
53.062


51.56
 
53.063


51.57
 
53.064


51.58
 
53.065


51.59
 
53.066


51.61
 
53.068


51.62
 
53.069


51.63
 
53.070


51.64
 
53.071


51.66
 
53.072


51.67
 
53.073


51.68
 
53.074, 53.999


70.01
 
70.01


70.10
 
70.02


70.11
 
70.03


70.20
 
71.01


70.21
 
71.02


70.22
 
71.03


70.23
 
71.04


71.01
 
73.01


71.02
 
73.02


71.03
 
73.03, 73.07


71.04
 
Ch. 75, Sch. VIII


71.05
 
73.04


71.06
 
73.05


71.07
 
73.06


71.09
 
73.08


71.10
 
73.09


71.11
 
73.10


71.12
 
73.11


71.13
 
73.12


71.14
 
73.13


72.01(A)
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


72.01(B)
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


72.02
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


72.10
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


72.12
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


72.13
 
Ch. 74, Schs. II, IV


72.20
 
73.55


72.21
 
73.56


72.22
 
73.57


72.23
 
73.58


72.99
 
73.99


Title IX, Appendix
 
153.35


90.01
 
93.01


90.02
 
93.02


90.05
 
93.04


90.06
 
93.05


90.07
 
93.06


90.08
 
93.07


90.10
 
93.08


90.11
 
93.10


90.12
 
93.11


90.13
 
93.12


90.15
 
93.14


90.16
 
93.15


90.17
 
93.16


90.98
 
93.17


91.01
 
98.03


91.02
 
98.04


91.03(A)
 
98.05


91.03(F)
 
98.05


91.04(C)
 
98.06


91.05
 
98.07


91.06
 
98.08


91.07
 
98.09


91.08
 
98.10


91.09
 
98.11


91.10
 
98.12


91.99
 
98.99


93.11
 
90.21


93.12(B)
 
90.22


93.12(D)
 
90.23


93.12(E)
 
90.24


93.12(F)
 
90.25


93.13(A)
 
90.26


93.13(C)
 
90.28


93.13(D)
 
90.29


94.01
 
97.05


94.10
 
97.45


94.11
 
97.45


94.12
 
97.46


94.13
 
97.46


94.14
 
97.47


94.15
 
97.48


94.16
 
97.48


94.26
 
97.21


94.27
 
97.22


94.28
 
97.23


94.29
 
97.24


94.30
 
97.25


94.31
 
97.26


94.32
 
97.27


94.33
 
97.28


94.34
 
97.28


94.35
 
97.29


94.36
 
97.29


94.38
 
97.31


94.39
 
97.32


94.40
 
97.49


94.41
 
97.50


95.01
 
153.01


95.02
 
153.02


95.03
 
153.03


95.05
 
153.04


95.06
 
153.05


95.07(A)
 
154.01


95.07(B)
 
154.02


95.07(C)
 
154.03


95.07(E1)
 
154.04


95.15
 
153.06


95.16
 
153.07


95.17
 
153.07


95.18
 
153.08


95.25
 
155.01


95.26
 
155.02


95.27
 
155.03


95.29
 
155.05


95.30
 
155.06


95.35
 
153.09, 153.12


95.36
 
153.10


95.37
 
153.11


95.38
 
153.12


95.40
 
153.13, 153.18


95.41
 
153.14


95.42
 
153.15


95.43
 
153.16


95.44
 
153.17


95.45
 
153.17


95.47
 
153.19


95.48
 
153.19


95.55
 
153.30


95.56
 
153.31


95.57
 
153.32


95.58
 
153.33


95.68
 
153.34


95.99(C)
 
153.99


95.99(E)
 
153.99


95.99(13)
 
153.99


110.01
 
110.25


110.02
 
110.26


110.10
 
110.27


110.10(E)
 
113.03


110.11
 
110.27


110.11(A)
 
112.01 - 112.05


110.11(C)
 
113.01


110.11(D)
 
113.02


110.11(F)
 
113.04


110.11(G)
 
113.05


110.11(H)
 
113.06


110.11(I)
 
113.07


110.11(J)
 
113.08


110.11(K)
 
113.09


110.11(M)
 
113.11


110.11(N)
 
113.12


110.11(P)
 
113.26


110.11(Q)
 
113.27


110.11(S)
 
113.29


110.11(T)
 
113.30


110.11(U)
 
113.31


110.11(V)
 
113.32


110.12
 
110.27 - 110.29


110.13(A)
 
110.30


110.13(B)
 
110.31


110.13(F)
 
113.01


110.13(O)
 
113.25


110.13(R)
 
113.28


110.99
 
110.99


113.01
 
114.01


113.03
 
114.03


113.04
 
114.04


113.05
 
114.05


113.06
 
114.06


113.07
 
114.07


113.08
 
114.08


113.10
 
114.09


113.99
 
114.99


114.01
 
115.01


114.02
 
115.02


114.03
 
115.03


114.04
 
115.04


114.99
 
115.99


130.03
 
90.60


130.04
 
90.61


130.05
 
90.63


130.06
 
90.64


130.99(B)
 
90.99


130.99(C)
 
90.99


130.99(D)
 
90.99


130.99(E)
 
90.99


153.01
 
156.002


153.02
 
156.002


153.03
 
156.003


153.04
 
156.004, 156.009


153.05
 
156.005


153.06
 
156.006


153.07
 
156.007


153.08
 
156.008


154.01
 
156.045


154.02
 
156.046


154.05
 
156.047


154.06
 
156.048


154.07
 
156.049


154.08
 
156.050


154.09
 
156.051


154.15
 
156.065


154.16
 
156.066


154.17
 
156.067


154.18
 
156.068


154.19
 
156.069


154.20
 
156.070


154.21
 
156.071


154.22
 
156.072


154.25
 
156.073


154.26
 
156.074


154.27
 
156.075


154.28
 
156.076


154.29
 
156.077


154.30
 
156.078


154.31
 
156.079


154.32
 
156.080


154.33
 
156.081


154.34
 
156.082


154.40
 
156.095


154.41
 
156.096


154.42
 
156.097


154.43
 
156.098


155.01
 
156.110


155.02
 
156.111


155.03
 
156.112


155.04
 
156.113


155.05 A
 
156.114


155.05 C
 
156.116


155.05 5 E
 
156.118


155.05 9 B
 
156.115


155.05 9 D
 
156.117


155.06
 
156.119


155.07
 
156.120


155.08 5 A
 
156.121


155.08 5 B
 
156.122


155.09
 
156.123


155.10
 
156.124


155.11
 
156.125


155.12
 
156.126


156.01
 
156.140, 156.185


156.02
 
156.141, 156.186


156.03
 
156.142, 156.187


156.04
 
156.143, 156.188


156.05
 
156.144, 156.189


156.06
 
156.145


156.07
 
156.146


156.08
 
156.147


156.09
 
156.148


156.10
 
156.149


156.11
 
156.150


156.12
 
156.151


156.13
 
156.152


156.14
 
156.153


156.15
 
156.154


156.16
 
156.155


156.20
 
156.156


156.21
 
156.157


156.22
 
156.158


156.23
 
156.159


156.24
 
156.160


156.25
 
156.161


156.26
 
156.162


156.27
 
156.163


156.28
 
156.020 - 156.029


156.29
 
156.030, 156.031


156.98
 
156.032 - 156.034, 156.190


156.99
 
156.999


Ch. 156, App. A
 
156.164


Ch. 156, App. B
 
156.165


Ch. 156, App. C
 
156.166


Ch. 156, App. D
 
156.167


Ch. 156, App. E
 
156.168


Ch. 156, App. F
 
156.169


Ch. 156, App. G
 
156.170


Ch. 156, App. H
 
156.171


Ch. 156, App. I
 
156.172


158.01
 
156.215


158.02
 
156.216


158.03
 
156.217


158.04
 
156.218


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




2-1989
 
6-13-1989
 
30.025


2-1991
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


3-1991
 
3-26-1991
 
Ch. 75, Schs. I, V


5-1991
 
9-10-1991
 
32.39


3-1992
 
12-22-1992
 
70.15 - 70.20


1-1999
 
10-12-1999
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VI


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




8-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
70.02, 70.03, 71.01 - 73.13; Ch. 75, Sch. VIII


9-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
Ch. 74, Schs. II, IV, V, VI, VIII; Ch. 75, Sch. V


12-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
90.61, 90.99


16-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
90.60, 90.99


17-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
115.01 - 115.04, 115.99


20-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
90.63, 90.99


21-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
53.016 - 53.020, 53.022 - 53.029, 53.040 - 53.072, 53.999


23-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.05


24-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.17 - 153.19


29-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.30 - 153.33


30-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.14


31-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.15


33-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.04


34-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.03


35-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.08


37-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.10 - 153.13


39-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.06, 153.07


47-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.99


55-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
90.21


61-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
110.26


63-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
114.01, 114.03 - 114.09, 114.99


64-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
110.27, 110.29, 110.99, 113.32


69-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
110.25


70-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
153.16, 153.99


71-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
90.64, 90.99


72-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
154.04


73-1931
 
9-22-1931
 
30.001


77-1932
 
2-23-1932
 
110.27


94-1933
 
11-28-1933
 
113.32


3-1935
 
4-9-1935
 
Ch. 74, Schs. II, V


4-1945
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. V


10-1945
 
8-28-1945
 
98.03, 98.04, 98.07 - 98.09, 98.11, 98.12


10-1945
 
10-28-1945
 
98.99


12-1948
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Schs. VI, VI


13-1948
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV; Ch. 75, Sch. V


9-1949
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


10-1949
 
8-2-1949
 
97.05


1-1951
 
4-10-1951
 
98.10


4-1953
 
7-21-1953
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


1-1957
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Schs. IV, VII


2-1957
 
4-23-1957
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


6-1960
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


10-1960
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


2-1962
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


6-1962
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


8-1962
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


3-1963
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. V


4-1963
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


1-1964
 
1-14-1964
 
53.001, 53.002


10-1964
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


10A-1964
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


12-1964
 
8-11-1964
 
56.020 - 156.034, 156.140 - 156.172, 156.999


13-1964
 
8-11-1964
 
156.185 - 156.190, 156.999


14-1964
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


18-1964
 
- -
 
156.002 - 156.009


19-1964
 
- -
 
156.045 - 156.051, 156.065 - 156.082, 156.095 - 156.098


20-1964
 
- -
 
156.110 - 156.126


2-1966
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. VII


3-1966
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


4-1966
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Schs. IV, V


10-1966
 
4-26-1966
 
153.01, 153.02, 153.99


11-1966
 
4-26-1966
 
73.09


23-1966
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


24-1966
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Schs. IX, X; Ch. 75, Schs. VII, VIII


10-1967
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


2-1968
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


3-1968
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


13-1968
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


20-1968
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


5-1969
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


1-1970
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


10-1970
 
10-13-1970
 
73.01, 73.02


12-1970
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


23-1996
 
2-1-1972
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


8-1971
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


3-1972
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


5-1972
 
5-23-1972
 
113.32


8-1972
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


20-1972
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Schs. IV, V


21-1972
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


22-1972
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


25-1972
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


2-1973
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


7-1973
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


1-1974
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Schs. III, V


1-1975
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


2-1975
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV; Ch. 75, Sch. III


3-1975
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


7-1975
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


9-1975
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Schs. III, IV


10-1975
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


12-1977
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


8-1978
 
4-11-1978
 
97.21 - 97.32, 97.49, 97.50


21-1978
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


25-1978
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


27-1978
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


2-1979
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


5-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


6-1980
 
5-2-1980
 
70.01


9-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


19-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Schs. III, VI


21-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


23-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


26-1980
 
11-10-1980
 
93.01, 93.02, 93.05 - 93.08, 93.10 - 93.12, 93.14 - 93.17


29-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


30-1980
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


3-1981
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV; Ch. 75, Sch. V


4-1981
 
4-13-1981
 
73.55 - 73.58, 73.99


8-1981
 
4-13-1981
 
97.45 - 97.48


9-1981
 
5-26-1981
 
53.015, 53.027 - 53.029, 53.052, 53.056


14-1981
 
9-28-1981
 
153.99, 155.01, 155.02, 155.04 - 155.06


37-1931
 
9-28-1981
 
153.09


16-1981
 
10-12-1981
 
53.015, 53.067, 53.073, 53.074


17-1981
 
10-12-1981
 
73.55 - 73.58, 73.99


18-1981
 
10-26-1981
 
90.21, 90.25


19-1981
 
10-26-1981
 
90.29


20-1981
 
11-23-1981
 
98.03 - 98.12, 98.99


5-1982
 
- -
 
90.25


9-1982
 
6-28-1982
 
97.46


13-1982
 
7-26-1982
 
153.34


4-1982
 
8-30-1982
 
30.003


14-1982
 
8-30-1982
 
30.002, 30.100, 30.101, 33.04, 98.01


23-1982
 
11-22-1982
 
30.026


5-1983
 
3-28-1983
 
156.187


6-1983
 
4-11-1983
 
156.215 - 156.218


–
 
10-24-1983
 
30.026


12-1983
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


13-1983
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


25-1983
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


27-1983
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


28-1983
 
- -
 
97.32


34-1983
 
- -
 
30.026


35-1983
 
- -
 
97.05, 97.20


36-1983
 
- -
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


3-1984
 
6-12-1984
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


4-1984
 
7-6-1984
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


7-1984
 
10-23-1984
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


8-1984
 
10-23-1984
 
70.01; Ch. 75, Sch. III


9-1984
 
11-13-1984
 
90.44, 90.45, 90.99


10-1984
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


14-1984
 
9-28-1981
 
155.03


2-1985
 
4-9-1985
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


7-1985
 
8-13-1985
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


8-1985
 
8-13-1985
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


13-1985
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


1-1986
 
1-14-1986
 
30.018, 30.019


4-1986
 
1-28-1986
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IV


7-1986
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


19-1986
 
12-23-1986
 
30.015


2-1987
 
2-24-1987
 
73.25


7-1987
 
7-14-1987
 
73.25


2-1988
 
2-23-1988
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


3-1988
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


4-1988
 
3-27-1988
 
95.01 - 95.08, 95.99


5-1988
 
4-12-1988
 
93.01, 93.03, 93.13


15-1988
 
6-28-1988
 
110.07


16-1988
 
6-28-1988
 
73.25


25-1988
 
10-25-1988
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


26-1980
 
11-10-1988
 
93.04


1-1990
 
2-13-1990
 
73.26, 73.41 - 73.44, 73.99


2-1991
 
2-12-1991
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


3-1991
 
5-28-1991
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


8-1991
 
7-9-1991
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


6-1991
 
8-13-1991
 
90.62


1-92
 
1-14-1992
 
32.06


3-1992
 
9-8-1992
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


6-1992
 
4-14-1992
 
110.04


4-1992
 
5-10-1992
 
97.02 - 97.04


9-1992
 
7-21-1992
 
90.20, 90.27


11-1992
 
8-11-1992
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


13-1992
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


14-1992
 
9-8-1992
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


17-1992
 
10-27-1992
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


22-1921
 
12-22-1992
 
Ch. 75, Sch. II


3-1993
 
2-9-1993
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


5-1993
 
2-23-1993
 
32.50 - 32.54


9-1993
 
8-10-1993
 
93.09


10-1993
 
9-14-1993
 
151.01 - 151.12


11-1993
 
9-28-1993
 
91.01 - 91.05, 91.99


12-1993
 
11-9-1993
 
111.01 - 111.10


14-1993
 
12-14-1993
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


2-1994
 
1-22-1994
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


3-1994
 
3-22-1994
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV; 92.02 - 92.10


11-1994
 
3-22-1994
 
92.01


4-1994
 
4-12-1994
 
98.06


6-1994
 
5-24-1994
 
71.99


2-1996
 
- -
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


5-1995
 
4-25-1995
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


6-1995
 
4-25-1995
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


5-1996
 
2-27-1996
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


6-1997
 
5-13-1997
 
30.108


8-1997
 
5-13-1997
 
72.01 - 72.06


10-1997
 
5-27-1997
 
73.25, 73.26, 73.99


19-1997
 
10-28-1997
 
30.020, 152.01 - 152.07, 152.09 - 152.17, 152.99


24-1997
 
11-10-1997
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


5-1998
 
7-14-1998
 
30.060, 30.061


6-1998
 
7-14-1998
 
30.062 - 30.068


7-1998
 
7-14-1998
 
30.069 - 30.071


13-1998
 
8-25-1998
 
30.107


14-1998
 
8-25-1998
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


2-1999
 
3-3-1999
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


1-1999
 
3-23-1999
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


4-1999
 
4-27-1999
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


12-1999
 
8-24-1999
 
93.99


13-1999
 
8-24-1999
 
90.99


14-1999
 
8-24-1999
 
95.09


15-1999
 
8-24-1999
 
95.99


16-1999
 
8-24-1999
 
154.99


7-2000
 
1-25-2000
 
94.05, 94.99


01-2000
 
7-18-2000
 
51.01 - 51.15, 51.30 - 51.41, 51.99


5-2000
 
9-26-2000
 
130.01 - 130.05, 130.99


4-2001
 
5-22-2001
 
T.S.O. III


3-2001
 
6-12-2001
 
T.S.O. III


8-2001
 
9-11-2001
 
T.S.O. I


10-2001
 
9-11-2001
 
T.S.O. III


9-2001
 
9-14-2001
 
T.S.O. I


4-2002
 
2-12-2002
 
T.S.O. II


7-2002
 
5-14-2002
 
70.04, 70.99


5-2002
 
6-11-2002
 
90.40 - 90.43, 90.99


8-2002
 
6-11-2002
 
T.S.O. III


9-2002
 
6-11-2002
 
T.S.O. I


13-2002
 
8-13-2002
 
T.S.O. I


16-2002
 
12-10-2002
 
32.01


19-2002
 
12-23-2002
 
T.S.O. III


1-2003
 
1-28-2003
 
T.S.O. III


5-2003
 
4-22-2003
 
T.S.O. III


6-2003
 
5-27-2003
 
T.S.O. I


11-2003
 
8-12-2003
 
T.S.O. II


12-2003
 
9-9-2003
 
112.06, 112.99


13-2003
 
11-11-2003
 
Ch. 75, Sch. IX


15-2003
 
12-30-2003
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


16-2003
 
12-30-2003
 
Ch. 75, Sch. V


4-2004
 
2-23-2004
 
98.05


5-2004
 
2-24-2004
 
T.S.O. II


7-2004
 
4-13-2004
 
T.S.O. I


6-2004
 
4-14-2004
 
T.S.O. II


9-2004
 
5-11-2004
 
114.02


11-2004
 
5-25-2004
 
53.075


14-2004
 
6-13-2004
 
94.05, 94.99


12-2004
 
6-29-2004
 
T.S.O. III


13-2004
 
7-13-2004
 
T.S.O. I


15-2004
 
7-27-2004
 
T.S.O. III


16-2004
 
8-10-2004
 
T.S.O. I


18-2004
 
8-10-2004
 
97.30, 97.99


25-2004
 
9-29-2004
 
T.S.O. III


26-2004
 
10-12-2004
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


29-2004
 
11-24-2004
 
90.22


30-2004
 
12-15-2004
 
T.S.O. III


2-2005
 
2-9-2005
 
90.22


4-2005
 
4-13-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


7-2005
 
4-13-2005
 
53.021


8-2005
 
4-26-2005
 
T.S.O. III


5-2005
 
4-27-2005
 
T.S.O. II


6-2005
 
4-27-2005
 
110.12


12-2005
 
4-27-2005
 
94.01, 94.03, 94.04


9-2005
 
5-11-2005
 
30.022


10-2005
 
5-11-2005
 
150.01 - 150.21, 150.99


11-2005
 
5-11-2005
 
150.22, 150.23


13-2005
 
6-16-2005
 
T.S.O. I


14-2005
 
6-16-2005
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


18-2005
 
6-26-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


19-2005
 
6-26-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


1-2005
 
6-28-2005
 
156.157


15-2005
 
6-29-2005
 
150.30 - 150.47


16-2005
 
7-13-2005
 
T.S.O. I


21-2005
 
7-27-2005
 
30.087


22-2005
 
8-10-2005
 
97.06


23-2005
 
8-10-2005
 
97.07


27-2005
 
8-10-2005
 
T.S.O. I


26-2005
 
8-23-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


25-2005
 
8-24-2005
 
T.S.O. III


28-2005
 
8-24-2005
 
113.10, 113.99


34-2005
 
9-14-2005
 
T.S.O. III


29-2005
 
9-27-2005
 
151.25 - 151.41, 151.99


33-2005
 
10-12-2005
 
30.086


36-2005
 
10-26-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


37-2005
 
11-9-2005
 
T.S.O. I


39-2005
 
11-9-2005
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


38-2005
 
12-14-2005
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


2-2006
 
1-24-2006
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


5-2006
 
2-15-2006
 
150.01 - 150.21, 150.99


7-2006
 
3-14-2006
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


10-2006
 
3-28-2006
 
150.22, 150.23


11-2006
 
3-28-2006
 
32.38


12-2006
 
4-11-2006
 
93.01, 93.18 - 93.22, 93.99


13-2006
 
4-11-2006
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


14-2006
 
4-25-2006
 
70.05


16-2006
 
5-23-2006
 
T.S.O. I


17-2006
 
6-13-2006
 
90.30


18-2006
 
6-27-2006
 
93.99


19-2006
 
6-27-2006
 
T.S.O. III


20-2006
 
6-27-2006
 
90.99, 94.01 - 94.04, 94.99


21-2006
 
8-8-2006
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


24-2006
 
8-8-2006
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


22-2006
 
8-22-2006
 
T.S.O. I


23-2006
 
8-22-2006
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


25-2006
 
9-12-2006
 
T.S.O. I


26-2006
 
9-12-2006
 
T.S.O. I


30-2006
 
10-24-2006
 
30.085


31-2006
 
11-14-2006
 
30.112


33-2006
 
11-14-2006
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


40-2006
 
12-12-2006
 
156.141, 156.230 - 156.241, 156.999


39-2006
 
12-28-2006
 
90.22


41-2006
 
1-9-2007
 
Ch. 75, Sch. III


2-2007
 
1-23-2007
 
52.001 - 52.004, 52.015 - 52.035, 52.045 - 52.048, 52.060, 52.070 - 52.072,
52.085 - 52.089, 52.100, 52.110 - 52.115, 52.999


4-2007
 
2-27-2007
 
T.S.O. III


 
 
 
 
 




 


