
Chandler, IN Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF CHANDLER, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018; and
State legislation current through 2018 Indiana Legislative Service, Pamphlet
No. 5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



TOWN OF CHANDLER ORDINANCE NO. 2008-9



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF CHANDLER, INDIANA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Chandler
are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the Town of Chandler and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and



WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and
authorize the Town of Chandler to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and



WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Town of Chandler has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town
of Chandler of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the Town
of Chandler and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the Town of Chandler that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF CHANDLER:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town of Chandler as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana."



Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:



CHANDLER, INDIANA



TABLE OF CONTENTS



   Chapter



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      10.   General Provisions



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      30.   Town Officials



      31.   Town Organizations



      32.   General Municipal Policies



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      50.   General Provisions



      51.   Sewers



      52.   Industrial Users; Pretreatment Program



      53.   Water



      54.   Storm Water Runoff; Construction Sites



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      70.   General Provisions



      71.   Traffic Schedules



      72.   Parking Schedules



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      90.   General Guidelines



      91.   Animals



      92.   Abandoned Vehicles



      93.   Streets and Sidewalks



      94.   Nuisances



      95.   Trees, Shrubs and Weeds



      96.   Unsafe Buildings



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      110.   General Provisions



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      130.   0ffenses Against Public Morals



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      150.   Building Regulations



      151.   Housing



      152.   Flood Hazard Areas



      153.   Subdivisions



      154.   Zoning



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   Funds



      II.   Closing/Vacating Streets



      III.   Designating/Naming Streets



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Indiana Code



References to Resolutions



References to Ordinances



INDEX



Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Town Council and the Clerk of the Town of
Chandler is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk of Warrick County, Indiana.



Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect on
November 1, 2008, as provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF CHANDLER ON THIS 17th
DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2008.



   Brian K. Lucas  /s/                       



                                       �
�  Board of Town Trustees



   Bob Hess  /s/                                 



                                       �
�  Board of Town Trustees



   Jeanette Lance  /s/                         



                                       �
�  Jeanette Lance, Member



                                       �
�  Board of Town Trustees



ATTEST:



Timothy D. Osha  /s/                 



Timothy D. Osha



Clerk/Treasurer



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



   10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Chandler Code,” for which designation “Code of Ordinances,”
“Codified Ordinances,” or “Code” may be substituted.  Code title,
chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto, and newly enacted laws.  Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code.  All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between 2 or more sections.



   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved
by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted.  The
section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this
code, as originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be
altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content.  These
descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect
the meaning, application, or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.



(I.C. 1-1-1-5)



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation.  This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense.  Technical  words and phrases having a peculiar
and appropriate  meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to 3 or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CLERK-TREASURER.  The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.



      COUNCIL.  The Town Council.



      COUNTY.  Warrick County, Indiana.



      HIGHWAY.  Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



      MONTH.  One calendar month.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, and bodies politic. 
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or
agents thereof.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  When referring to sections or
divisions in this code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or
next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is
designated.



      TOWN.  The Town of Chandler, Indiana.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.  Include printing, lithographing, or
other modes of representing words and letters.  Where the written signature
of a person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person,
or the person’s mark.



      YEAR.  One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.



(I.C. 1-1-4-5)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a non-severability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable.  If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



   (D)   The repeal of a statute stating that the provisions of an act
are severable as provided in division (B) does not affect the operation of
division (B) with respect to that act.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices.  Reference to a public office or
officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this
municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of
the Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date
of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties, or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality, whether correctly named in
the ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named
entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers, and rights
were transferred.



(I.C. 1-1-6-1)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall
be excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section
or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law
is not revived unless it so expressly provides.  The repeal of any section
shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability
incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly
provides.  The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement
of the penalty, forfeiture, or liability.



(I.C. 1-1-5-1)



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or
to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall
not be affected by the repeal and re-enactment; but all suits, proceedings,
and prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective
date of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if
this code had not been enacted.



Statutory reference:



   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In addition to an
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.  Example:



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example: 



(I.C. 36-5-2-2)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises



granted, the acceptance, establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the
election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this
code had not been enacted.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent
violations, except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and
parking.



   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



   30.   TOWN OFFICIALS



   31.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



   32.   GENERAL MUNICIPAL POLICIES



   33.   TOWN COUNCIL



CHAPTER 30:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section



   30.01   Town Council; purchasing agency



   30.02   Town Marshal



   30.03   Amount of individual surety bond for the Clerk-Treasurer



   30.04   Length of term of office



§ 30.01  TOWN COUNCIL; PURCHASING AGENCY.



   (A)   The Town Council shall be deemed the purchasing agency for the
town.



   (B)   The Town Council, as the designated purchasing agency,
reserves the right to designate in writing a purchasing agent for purposes of
performing those duties authorized under I.C. 5-22.



   (C)   The Town Council, as the designated purchasing agency,
reserves the right to adopt rules pertaining to the purchase of supplies
under $25,000.



   (D)   The Town Council, as the designated purchasing agency,
reserves the sole right to purchase services pursuant to those terms it
determines to be reasonable.



(Ord. 1998-12, passed 6-24-1998)



§ 30.02  TOWN MARSHAL.



   Ordinances numbered 1981-5 and 1988-4 are hereby vacated, and pursuant
to the Indiana Code, the following fees are approved to be collected by
services rendered by the Town Marshal:



   (A)   Criminal records check, $7 to be placed into the Law
Enforcement Continuing Education Fund;



   (B)   Limited criminal history check, $3 for visual review, and $7
for actual copy to be placed into the Law Enforcement Continuing Education
Fund;



   (C)   Seven dollars personal criminal record check to be placed into
the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund;



   (D)   Reserved



   (E)   Reserved



   (F)   Handgun permit fees shall be established and collected in the
amounts as set forth in I.C. 35-47-2-3 and, upon collection, shall be placed
in the Firearms Training Fund;



(I.C. 35-47-2-3)



   (G)   Photograph fee of $2 per photograph, to be placed into the Law
Enforcement Continuing Education Fund; and



   (H)   Any copies of any other documentation at $.50 per standard
page, or $.75 per legal page, or $1 per ledger page, to be placed into the
Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.



(I.C. 36-1-3)



(Ord. 1996-19, passed 12-4-1996; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 30.03  AMOUNT OF INDIVIDUAL SURETY BOND FOR THE CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The individual surety bond of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be and
the same is hereby fixed in the sum of $300,000 which shall continue from
year to year unless repealed or amended by the Town Council or by the
amendment of Indiana Law relative thereto.



   (B)   The Town Council adopts the provisions of I.C. 5-4-1, as the
same may be from time to time amended, as the same would relate to the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   No person elected or appointed to the office of
Clerk-Treasurer may take office until the person shall have filed an adequate
individual surety bond written for the term of office of the individual
filing the bond, approved by the Town Council.



   (D)   No Clerk-Treasurer may continue to serve in office if the
aforementioned individual surety bond should be cancelled and in that event,
the office shall be deemed vacant.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 12-3-2012)



§ 30.04  LENGTH OF TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   At the municipal election held in November, 2015 the Council
Member elected from the Second District and the Council Member elected from
the Fourth District shall be elected for a term of 3 years beginning at 12:00
p.m. January 1 following the election.  Thereafter, the Council Members for
the Second District and the Fourth District shall be elected to a 4-year term.



   (B)   Council Members from Districts 1 and 3 and the At-Large
Council Member shall be elected to a 4-year term commencing at 12:00 p.m.,
January 1, following the election of November, 2015.



   (C)   The office of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected to a 4-year
term at the municipal election held November, 2015.



(Ord. 2012-22, passed 12-17-2012)



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Economic Development Commission




   31.01   Chandler Economic Development Commission




Plan Commission




   31.15   Powers and duties




Departments




   31.30   Parks and Recreation



   31.31   Schedule of fees



   31.32   Redevelopment




Police Department




   31.50   Full-time officers; residency requirements



   31.51   Police reserves establishment



   31.52   Chandler Police Department Gift Fund



   31.53   Off-duty or outside employment




Bureaus




   31.65   Ordinance Violations Bureau



Cross-reference:



   Department of Storm Water Management, see §§ 53.070 et seq.



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 31.01  CHANDLER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created pursuant to the provisions of I.C.
36-7-12-4, and all amendments and supplements to the original act of 1971, a
Department of Development, which shall be under the control of a commission
to be known as the Chandler Economic Development Commission and which shall
be for the Town of Chandler, Indiana.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of 3 members who shall be
appointed as follows:



      (1)   One of the members so appointed shall be selected by the
President of the Board of Trustees.



      (2)   One of the members so appointed shall be nominated by
the County Council of Warrick County, Indiana.



      (3)   One of the members so appointed shall be nominated by
the Town Council of the Town of Chandler, Indiana.



   (C)   After the adoption of this subchapter creating the Chandler
Economic Development Commission, the Clerk-Treasurer shall promptly notify
the executive officers required to make selections and the governing bodies
required to make nominations as provided in this subchapter.



   (D)   The executive officers required to make selections and the
governing bodies required to make nominations shall do so within 15 days
after receiving the notice and each of the selectees and nominees shall be
appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees within 10 days after the
selection or nomination.



   (E)   (1)   The members of the Economic Development Commission
shall take office upon their appointment and their terms shall run the
following number of years from February 1 following their original
appointment:



      (a)   The Commissioner selected and appointed by the President
of the Board of Trustees shall serve for a period of 3 years from the date;



      (b)   The Commissioner nominated by the Board of Trustees of
the Town of Chandler shall serve for a period of 2 years from the date; and



      (c)   The Commissioner nominated by the Warrick County Council
shall serve for a period of 1 year from the date.



      (2)   At the expiration of the respective term of each of the
Commissioners originally appointed, their respective successors shall be
selected and nominated in the same manner as the original appointee, and
before the expiration of his or her term.



      (3)   Each succeeding member of the Commission shall serve for
a term of 4 years from the time of commencement of his or her term.



      (4)   In the event that the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Chandler or the Warrick County Council shall fail to make a nomination within
the time specified herein, the President of the Board of Trustees may select
and appoint a person without a nomination.



      (5)   In the event any person appointed as Commissioner shall
fail to qualify within 10 days after the mailing to him or her of the notice
of his or her appointment, or if any Commissioner, after



qualifying, shall die, resign or vacate the office or be removed, a new
Commissioner shall be selected or nominated and appointed to fill the vacancy
in the same manner as the Commissioner in respect to whom the vacancy occurs,
and the Commissioner so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the
vacated term.



      (6)   Commissioners shall hold over after the expiration of
their terms until their respective successors have been duly appointed and
have qualified.



   (F)   Commissioners shall receive no salaries but shall be entitled
to reimbursement for any expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of
their duties.



(Ord. 1980-2, passed 3-17-1980)



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 31.15  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   “The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Chandler”
enacted April 15, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in
full herein.



(Ord. 1980-5, passed 4-7-1980; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



DEPARTMENTS



§ 31.30  PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of I.C. 36-10-3 et seq.,  there is
now created a Department of Parks and Recreation, to be known as the Town of
Chandler Department of Parks and Recreation and the Department shall consist
of a Park and Recreation Board, a Superintendent and other personnel as the
Board may determine to be necessary. The Board shall be known as the Town of
Chandler Park and Recreation Board.



   (B)   After the creation of the Park and Recreation Board, all
books, papers, documents, and other property of any former park and
recreation authorities shall be transferred to and become the property of the
Board.



   (C)   (1)   The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of 4
members to be appointed by the Town Council. Members of the Board shall be
appointed on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and
recreation, and no more than 2 members may be affiliated with the same
political party.



      (2)   There may be, in addition, ex officio members, who shall
be either a member of the governing body of the Warrick County School
Corporation or a member of the Ohio Township Library Board, or both. Ex
officio members shall have all the rights of regular members, including the
right to vote, and a vacancy in an ex officio position shall be filled by the
appointing authority. A member of the Town Council shall not be eligible to
serve on the Board.



   (D)   (1)   Initial appointments to the Park and Recreation Board
shall be as follows:



         (a)   One member for a term of 1 year.



         (b)   One member for a term of 2 years.



         (c)   One member for a term of 3 years.



         (d)   One member for a term of 4 years.



      (2)   As a term expires, each new appointment shall be for a
4-year term. All terms shall expire on the first Monday in January, but a
member shall continue in office until his or her successor is appointed. The
initial appointments shall be within 90 days after the adoption of this
section. In the event an appointment for any new term is not made by the
first Monday in April, the incumbent shall serve another term. In making the
initial appointments, the Town Council shall give special consideration to
the appointment of members of previous park or recreation boards. In the
event of a vacancy of the Board, the Town Council shall appoint a person to
serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (E)   A member of the Board may be removed only for cause stated
upon specific written charges filed against him or her, which charges shall
be filed with and heard by the Town Council.



   (F)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and the
Board shall fix the time and place of regular meetings and shall meet at
least quarterly. Special meetings may be called by the President or by any 2
members by written request to the Secretary. Special meetings shall require
notice sent to each member at least 2 days before the special meeting, which
notice shall be in writing and shall fix the time, place and purpose of the
meeting. Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of
the special meeting is fixed at a regular meeting or if all members are
present at the special meeting.



   (G)   The Board shall elect a President and a Vice-President at its
first regular meeting each year. The Vice-President may act as President
during the absence of disability of the President. The Board may elect a
Secretary from within or outside its membership. A majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum. Action of the Board shall not be official unless
it is authorized by at least 3 members present and acting.



   (H)   The members of the Board may receive a salary not to exceed
$300 per year. The amount of the salary shall be fixed by the Town Council.



   (I)   The Board shall have all powers and duties provided by law
and, in particular, I.C. 36-10-3-10 and I.C. 36-10-3-11.



   (J)   The Board shall further be authorized to perform all acts
permitted by any other sections of Indiana law and to do all things necessary
to acquire and maintain real and personal property and to provide for the
raising of funds by all permissible means, and to prepare budget requests for
consideration of the Town Council.



(Ord. 3-1969, passed 8-18-1969; Am. Ord. 1998-19, passed 12-16-1998)



§ 31.31  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   The Chandler Community Center shall charge the fees of said facility as
follows:



 

Rental Fees:




Banquet room:
 
 


   Rental: $200
 
Deposit: $50


Meeting room:
 
 


   Rental: $53
 
Deposit: $25


Complete Facility
 
 


   Rental: $250
 
Deposit: $75


Early setup (previous day when available)


   Before 12:00 p.m. noon
 
Full rental


   After 12:00 p.m.
 
$75


   After 5:00 p.m.
 
$50


All fees include tax




 



(Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 31.32  REDEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Department of Redevelopment, which
shall be entitled to exercise all the rights, powers, privileges and
immunities accorded to it by I.C. 36-7-14 (the “act”).



   (B)   The Department of Redevelopment shall be under the control of
a board of 5 voting members and 1 non-voting member, to be known as the
Redevelopment Commission.



   (C)   There is hereby created a board to be known as the
Redevelopment Commission.



      (1)   Three of the Commissioners shall be appointed by the
President of the Town Council, and 2 shall be appointed by the Town Council.
In addition, the Town Council President shall appoint 1 non-voting member
from the membership of a school board of a school corporation located wholly
or partly within the town.



      (2)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner shall serve for 1 year
from January 1 after his or her appointment and until his or her successor is
appointed and has qualified, except that the original Commissioners shall
serve from the date of their appointment until January 1 in the second year
after their appointment. If a vacancy occurs, a successor shall be appointed
in the same manner as the original Commissioner, and the successor shall
serve for the remainder of the vacated term.



      (3)   Before beginning his or her duties, each Redevelopment
Commissioner shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the form
prescribed by law, to be endorsed on the certificate of his or her
appointment, which shall be promptly filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (4)   Before beginning his or her duties, each Redevelopment
Commissioner shall execute a bond payable to the state, with surety to be
approved by the Town Council. The bond must be in a penal sum of $15,000, and
must be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office, and the accounting for all monies and property that may come into his
or her hands or under his or her control. The cost of the bond shall be paid
by the Redevelopment District.



   (D)   The Commissioners shall have the qualifications prescribed by
the laws of the State of Indiana, as from time to time amended, and shall
qualify as therein provided; and shall exercise and enjoy the rights and
powers and assume the duties and obligations conferred and imposed by the
act, including but not limited to, the following qualifications:



      (1)   A Redevelopment Commissioner must be at least 18 years
of age and must be a resident of the town. If a Commissioner ceases to be
qualified under this division, he or she forfeits his or her office.



      (2)   No Redevelopment Commissioner shall receive a salary;
but Redevelopment Commissioners are entitled to reimbursement for expenses
necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.



      (3)   A Redevelopment Commissioner may not have a pecuniary
interest in any contract, employment, purchase or sale made under the
provisions of this section or the act. However, any property required for
redevelopment purposes in which a Commissioner has a pecuniary interest may
be acquired, but only by gift or condemnation. A transaction made in
violation of this division is void.



   (E)   The Clerk-Treasurer, charged by law with the performance of
duties with respect to the funds and accounts of the town, shall perform the
same duties with respect to the funds and accounts of the Department of
Redevelopment, except as otherwise provided for in the act.



(Ord. 2014-33, passed 8-4-2014)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 31.50  FULL-TIME OFFICERS; RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All full-time police officers in the Chandler Police
Department shall reside within the town limits.



   (B)   Those full-time officers that are employed by the Police
Department that are not currently residing within the town limits shall,
within 6 months of the adoption of this section, obtain residency within the
town limits.



   (C)   Those persons who after the adoption of this section become
full-time officers of the Police Department shall, within 6 months of their
hiring, obtain residency within the town limits.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 8-21-1996)



§ 31.51  POLICE RESERVES ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Marshal of the Town of Chandler is hereby authorized,
subject to the annual salary ordinance and appropriations restrictions, to
employ up to 12 police reserves pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3-20.



   (B)   Police reserves shall be known as deputy marshals or patrol
officers, as designated by the Town Marshal.



   (C)   All police reserves shall be subject to the same background
check before employment as a regular member of the Department. All reserves
shall receive training by the Office of the Marshal in criminal law, traffic
law, firearms, patrol procedure and the Department's operating procedures.



   (D)   No reserve officer shall be assigned alone to patrol duty
until the officer has been deemed qualified by the Town Marshal. The
requirement of this section may be waived on a case-by-case basis by the
Marshal if he or she does so in writing, setting out the need for the waiver.



   (E)   Compensation paid to police reserves is deemed compensation as
defined by I.C. 36-8-3-20.



(Ord. 1989-11, passed 11-6-1989)



§ 31.52  CHANDLER POLICE DEPARTMENT GIFT FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Chandler Police Department Gift Fund.  There is
hereby established a "Chandler Police Department Gift Fund ".



   (B)   Deposits into Chandler Police Department Gift Fund.  When the
Town of Chandler or Chandler Police Department receives gifts, donations
and/or subsidies for Police Department purposes, the funds shall be deposited
into the Chandler Police Department Gift Fund.



   (C)   Fund purpose.  Money in the fund may be used for any legal or
corporate purpose of the Chandler Police Department consistent with the
purposes specified by the grantor of such gift, donation and/or subsidy, if
any.



   (D)   Prohibited use.  The Chandler Police Department Gift Fund may
not be used to reduce the town's maximum or actual property tax levy.



   (E)   Fund expenditure process.  Before making an expenditure or
draw a warrant from the Chandler Police Department Gift Fund, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be presented a claim voucher approved by the Chandler
Town Council certifying that the proposed use of the Chandler Police
Department Fund is consistent with the intent of the fund.



   (F)   Administration of fund.  The Chandler Police Department Gift
Fund established under this section shall be administered by the
Clerk-Treasurer and the expenses of administering the fund, if any, shall be
paid from money in the fund. Money in the fund not currently needed to meet
the obligations of the fund may be invested in the same manner as other
public funds may be invested. Interest that accrues from these investments
shall be deposited in the fund. Money in the fund at the end of the fiscal
year shall not revert to the town's general fund.



(Ord. 2008-6, passed 7-21-2008)



§ 31.53  OFF-DUTY OR OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Policy statement.  Employees with law enforcement powers,
including officers, special officers and reserve officers, are permitted to
engage in off-duty or outside employment, including employment during which
they may be called upon to exercise law enforcement authority and powers,
unless that employment conflicts or interferes with the operation of the
Police Department, and subject to limitations that will promote the
efficiency of the Department and protect the officer, the Chief, the town and
community.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT.   Employment during which the officer is
not reasonably expected to use or threaten the use of law enforcement powers
or physical force. Examples would include landscaping, construction trades,
or sales.



      If there is any question or ambiguity, the employment shall be
treated as “law enforcement employment”.



      LAW ENFORCEMENT EMPLOYMENT. Employment during which it is
reasonably expected that the officer will use or threaten the use of law
enforcement powers or skills, or physical force to restrain or control
persons. Examples would include providing security or traffic control at a
retail business, party, function or school event; or patrolling private
property.



      OFF-DUTY OR OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.   Provision of any labor or
services for compensation or non-monetary consideration; or provision on a
volunteer or unpaid basis of services that would be “law enforcement
employment” as defined above.



      OFFICER or OFFICERS.   Officers of the Police Department with
law enforcement powers, including the Town Marshal, deputy town marshals,
marshals with departmental rank, probationary officers, reserve officers, and
part-time officers.



   (C)   Policies.



      (1)   General limitations on all outside employment.



         (a)   Officers may engage in outside employment, except
for the following:



            1.   Employment that interferes with the
officer’s ability to fully perform the officer’s regular duties,
including employment that:



               a.   Extends the officer’s waking hours so
that the officer is not fully rested when working.



               b.   Interferes with the officer’s regular
working hours, or requires special consideration in scheduling the
officer’s regular working hours.



               c.   Renders the officer unavailable to be
summoned for response during times other than the officer’s regular working
hours.



            2.   Employment that presents a conflict with the
deputy’s regular duties, including employment that:



               a.   Requires the officer to have access to
police information, files, records, databases or services as a condition of
employment.



               b.   Uses the police uniform in the
performance of tasks other than those of a police nature.



            3.   Puts the officer in conflict, or gives the
appearance of a conflict, with the mission of the Department, judicial system
or town, such as:



               a.   A bail bond agency.



               b.   An establishment or function at which
illegal activity is not actively forbidden or prohibited (for example:
underage drinking, nude dancing, prostitution, use of illegal drugs, or
illegal gambling).



               c.   A private detective or investigative
agency.



               d.   Work as a process server, repossessor
or bill collector; towing of vehicles; or any other employment in which
police authority might be used to collect money or merchandise for private
purposes.



               e.   Employment that assists the case
preparation for the defense of a criminal action, or for either side in a
civil action or administrative proceeding.



               f.   Employment by either management or an
employee organization during a labor dispute or strike.



            4.   Potentially brings the Department into
disrepute, such as establishments that sell or provide pornographic
materials, sexual devices, or that otherwise provide entertainment or
services of a sexual nature.



            5.   Employment while the deputy is on leave for
medical, disability or worker’s compensation.



         (b)   Officers must comport themselves in accordance
with Departmental rules at all times.



            1.   Sworn employees wearing the Department’s
uniform or badge, or otherwise presenting themselves as a member of the
Department, are subject to all rules and regulations of the Department.



            2.   All officers are subject to inspection for
compliance at all times.



            3.   Officers performing law enforcement
employment shall not consume alcoholic beverages while so employed.



         (c)   The officer shall never be in a situation where
the officer is being compensated by both the town and a private employer for
the same time period or portion thereof.



         (d)   The town will not be liable for medical expenses,
injuries, worker’s compensation expenses or losses, costs or civil
liability arising from the officer’s off-duty employment.



      (2)   Procedures.



         (a)   All outside employment of deputies must be
approved in writing and in advance, using a request for approval of outside
employment form. For employment that began before adoption of this policy, a
request must be submitted within 5 business days after adoption.



         (b)   For both law enforcement and civilian employment,
the request must include:



            1.   Name, address and phone number of employer;



            2.   Primary contact person and phone number;



            3.   Nature of employment;



            4.   Hours of employment;



            5.   Method to contact officer for emergency
response.



         (c)   For law enforcement employment only, the request
must be accompanied by an agreement to defend, indemnity and hold harmless,
signed by the employer, using the form provided by the Chief.



         (d)   The Chief or Assistant Chief shall act promptly on
the request, in most cases within 5 business days of its submission, by
approval, approval with additional conditions, or disapproval, and shall
state the reasons. The Chief or Assistant Chief may ask for additional
information or clarification of the employment before approval.



         (e)   The Chief or Assistant Chief may place reasonable
conditions on the approval (for example: work hours, distance out of county).



         (f)   Approval can be withdrawn or amended at any time.



         (g)   The officer shall submit a revised request for
approval if any of the information on the original request changes or is
learned to have been inaccurate or incomplete. The revised request must be
submitted within 5 business days of learning of revised information.



(Res. 2012-11, passed 8-20-2012)



BUREAUS



§ 31.65  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby created the Town of Chandler
Ordinance Violations Bureau under the authority of state law.



   (B)   Appointment of Violations Clerk.  The Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby appointed the Violations Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau.



   (C)   Duties of the Violations Clerk.  The Violations Clerk shall
accept written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and
payment of civil penalties of not more than $100 in ordinance violation cases
designated by the Town Council.



   (D)   Designation of ordinances subject to admission of violation
before the Violations Clerk.  All ordinances of the town wherein the penalty
for the charged violation is established in a fixed amount of not more than
$100 are subject to admission of violation before the Violations Clerk.



(Ord. 1991-15, passed 12-30-1991; Am. Ord. 2000-13, passed 8-7-2000)



Cross-reference:



   Trash collection within corporate limits, see § 50.01



CHAPTER 32:  GENERAL MUNICIPAL POLICIES



Section



   32.01   Town of Chandler Employee Handbook



   32.02   Town labor, equipment and supplies; rates and charges



   32.03   Smoking ban



   32.04   Copies of the Code of Ordinances



   32.05   Nepotism prohibited



   32.06   Disclosure of contracts with relatives



 



   32.99   Penalty



§ 32.01  TOWN OF CHANDLER EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK.



   The Town of Chandler Employee Handbook is hereby adopted by reference
as if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1998-14, passed 7- -1998; Am. Ord. 2001-4, passed
1-16-1998; Am. Ord. 2001-6, passed 2-1-2001; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed
11-17-2008; Am. Ord. 2012-4, passed 7-2-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-15, passed
8-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2015-2, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 32.02  TOWN LABOR, EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES; RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   The town shall charge the following rates and charges
for labor, equipment and services:



 


SERVICE

 

HOURLY CHARGES



 
Town Department
 

Other Entities





Administration
 

N/A

 

$40



Labor
 

$30

 

$60



Push mower with operator
 

$40

 

$80



Trimmer with operator
 

$40

 

$80



Riding mower with operator
 

$55

 

$100



Brush mower with operator
 

$60

 

$120



Dump truck with operator

   - Large

   - Small
 




$70



$60

 




$125



$95



Backhoe with operator
 

$70

 

$110



Directional bore machine with operator
 

$90

 

$120



Front-end loader with operator
 

$50

 

$90



Sewer jetter with operator
 

$110

 

$180



Hydroexcavator with operator
 

$80

 

$150



Camera

   - Full unit with 2 operators

   - Push unit with operator
 




$175



$75

 




$300



$150



Dewatering pump
 

$20

 

$30



Demolition saw
 

$25

 

$35



Chain saw
 

$20

 

$30



Rota tiller
 

$30

 

$60





 



      (2)   Any job site greater than 10 miles away will be charged
$0.75 per mile for each mile over 10 miles in each direction from the
maintenance facility.



      (3)   All of the above rates performed outside of normal
business hours will be billed at 1½ times the above-stated rate. There will
be a minimum charge of 1 hour for any of the above services.



   (B)   When the town supplies material or employs third parties for
such repairs necessary for the betterment of the town and that such materials
or subcontracting shall be billed back to another person, government or
entity, all such materials and work shall be billed at the last-invoiced
price of such materials or work plus 25% for handling, delivery and
restocking of such material.



(Ord. 2000-17, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord. 2008-3, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord.
2008-10, passed 11-17-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-2, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord.
2014-26, passed 4-21-2014)



§ 32.03  SMOKING BAN.



   (A)   Smoking banned in all town-owned buildings.



      (1)   The purpose of this section shall be the regulation of
smoking and the use of other tobacco products in all public buildings owned
by the town.



      (2)   It is the intent of the town to adopt I.C. 7.1-5-12 as
the policy of the town as it would relate to public properties and the town.



      (3)   For purposes of the section the definitions as set forth
in I.C. 7.1-5-12 shall apply.



   (B)   Smoking is prohibited in the following:



      (1)   A public place;



      (2)   A place of employment;



      (3)   A vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the town if the
vehicle is being used for a governmental function;



      (4)   The area within 8 feet of a public entrance to:



         (a)   A public place; or



         (b)   A place of employment.



   (C)   The town shall inform each of the town’s employees and
prospective employees of the smoking prohibition applying to the place of
employment.



   (D)   The official in charge of a public place or place of
employment shall remove ashtrays or other smoking paraphernalia for areas of
the public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited under
this section.



   (E)   The official in charge of a public place or place of
employment shall post conspicuous signs at each public entrance that read
“State Law Prohibits Smoking Within 8 Feet of this Entrance” or other
similar language.



(Ord. 96-3, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1996-5, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2012-2,
passed 6-18-2012)  Penalty, see § 32.99



§ 32.04  COPIES OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   A copy of the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana” shall be distributed by the Clerk-Treasurer of the town to the
Warrick Circuit Court; the Warrick Superior Court No. 1; the Warrick Superior
Court No. 2; and the Warrick County Clerk, without charge.



   (B)   A copy of each supplement or update of the “Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Chandler, Indiana” shall be distributed by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town to the Warrick Circuit Court; the Warrick
Superior Court No. 1; the Warrick Superior Court No. 2; and the Warrick
County Clerk, without charge.



   (C)   A copy of the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana” and the current supplement or update of the “Code of Ordinances
of the Town of Chandler, Indiana” shall be maintained for public inspection
by the Clerk-Treasurer of the town at the Town Hall during normal business
hours.



   (D)   Copies of the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana” may be purchased at a charge of $25 each. Copies of the current
supplement or update of the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana” may be purchased at a charge of $10 each.



(Ord. 2009-1, passed 2-2-2009)



§ 32.05  NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION.  An elected officer or employee who
is in a position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual’s
employment, including making decisions about work assignments, compensation,
grievances, advancement or performance evaluation.  The term does not
include the responsibilities of the Town Council to make decisions regarding
salary ordinances, budgets or personnel policies of the town.



      EMPLOYED.  An individual who is employed by the town on a full
time, part time, temporary, intermittent or hourly basis.  The term does not
include an individual who holds only an elected office.  The term includes
an individual who is a party to an employment contract with the town.  The
performance of the duties of a precinct election officer (as defined in I.C.
3-5-2-40.1) that are imposed by I.C. 3 is not considered employment by the
town.



      RELATIVE.  Any of the following: spouse, parent or stepparent, a
child or stepchild, brother, sister, stepbrother or stepsister, a niece or
nephew, an aunt or uncle, or a daughter-in-law or son-in-law.  An adopted
child of an individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.  The
terms brother and sister shall include a brother or sister by half blood (a
common parent).



   (B)   Nepotism prohibited.



      (1)   Individuals who are relatives shall not be employed by
the town in a position that results in one relative being in the direct line
of supervision of the other relative.



      (2)   An individual shall not be promoted to a position if the
new position would cause their relative to be in the direct line of
supervision of that individual.



      (3)   Individuals who are employed by the town on the date the
individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office in the
town and the individual is in the direct line of supervision of the newly
elected official are prohibited from remaining in that position.



   (C)   Exceptions to prohibition against nepotism. This section does
not abrogate or affect an employment contract with the town that an
individual is a party to and is in effect on the date the individual’s
relative begins serving a term of an elected office of the town.



   (D)   Impact on those individuals employed by the town on July 1,
2012.  An individual who is employed by the town on July 1, 2012, is not
subject to this section unless the individual has a break in employment with
the town.  The following are not considered a break in employment with the
town:



      (1)   The individual is absent from the workplace while on
paid or unpaid leave, including vacation, sick, or family medical leave, or
worker’s compensation.



      (2)   The individual’s employment with the unit is
terminated followed by immediate reemployment by the unit, without loss of
payroll time.



   (E)   Certification by elected officers of the town.  Each elected
officer of the town shall annually certify in writing, subject to the
penalties for perjury, that the officer has not violated this section.  An
elected officer shall submit the certification to the Town Council not later
than December 31 of each year.



(Res. 2012-5, passed 7-2-2012)



§ 32.06  DISCLOSURE OF CONTRACTS WITH RELATIVES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ELECTED OFFICIAL.  An elected official, Town Council member, or
Clerk-Treasurer.



      RELATIVE.  Any of the following: spouse, parent or stepparent, a
child or stepchild, brother, sister, stepbrother or stepsister, a niece or
nephew, an aunt or uncle, or a daughter-in-law or son-in-law.  An adopted
child of an individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.  The
terms brother and sister shall include a brother or sister by half blood (a
common parent).



   (B)   Application to certain contracts.



      (1)   The town may enter into a contract or renew a contract
for the procurement of goods and services or a contract for public works with
an individual who is a relative of an elected official or a business entity
that is wholly or partially owned by a relative of an elected official only
if disclosure requirements under this section are satisfied.



      (2)   Contracts in existence at the time the term of office of
the elected official begins are not affected until those contracts are
renewed.



   (C)   Disclosure of contracts with relatives.



      (1)   An elected official whose relative enters into a
contract with the town shall file a full disclosure of that contract.



      (2)   Disclosure statements must be in writing, describe the
contract or purchase to be made by the town, describe the relationship that
the elected official has to the individual or business entity that contracts
or purchases, and be affirmed under penalty of perjury.



      (3)   Disclosure statements must be submitted to the Town
Council and be accepted by the Town Council in a public meeting prior to
final action on the contract or purchase.



      (4)   Disclosure statements must be filed not later than 15
days after final action on the contract or purchase with the State Board of
Accounts, and the Warrick County Clerk of the Circuit Court.



   (D)   Actions by Town Council or appropriate agency.  The Town
Council or an appropriate agency of the town designated by the Town Council
shall make a certified statement that the contract amount or purchase price
was the lowest amount or price bid or offered or make a certified statement
of the reasons why the vendor or contractor was selected.



   (E)   Certification by elected officers of the town.  Each elected
officer of the town shall annually certify in writing, subject to the
penalties for perjury, that the officer has not violated this section.  An
elected officer shall submit the certification to the Town Council not later
than December 31 of each year.



(Res. 2012-6, passed 7-2-2012)



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who smokes or uses smokeless tobacco products in a
town-owned building in the non-smoking area after the aforementioned signs
have been posted commits a violation, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined $10, together with the court costs as may attach thereto.



(Ord. 96-3, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1996-5, passed 6-5-1996)



CHAPTER 33:  TOWN COUNCIL



Section



   33.01   Number of Town Council members



   33.02   Councilmanic districts



   33.03   Town Council meetings



Cross-reference:



   Length of term of office, see § 30.04



§ 33.01  NUMBER OF TOWN COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Town Council does hereby increase the number of the
members of the Town Council from 3 members to 5 members.



   (B)   This section shall become effective January 1, 2013.



(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-19-2012)



§ 33.02  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-5-2-4.1, each of the following described
areas constitutes a Councilmanic District in the town.  The Town Council
finds that each prescribed District is composed of contiguous territory, is
reasonably compact, contains, as nearly as possible, equal population, and
does not cross a census block boundary.  The Town Council finds that it is
not possible to create 4 Councilmanic Districts within the 3 precincts of the
town and not cross a precinct boundary for the reason that to do so each
district would not otherwise contain, as nearly as possible, equal population.



   (B)   District 1.  Councilmanic District 1 is hereby described as
follows: Commencing at the intersection of the town boundary and North State
Street; thence westerly along the town boundary to its intersection with
Inderrieden Road; thence south along the town boundary parallel with
Inderrieden Road; thence generally westerly along the town boundary until it
intersects with Heim Road; thence east along Heim Road to its intersection
with West Lincoln Avenue; thence easterly along West Lincoln Avenue to its
intersection with North Iowa Street; thence north along North Iowa Street to
its intersection with West Monroe Avenue; thence east along West Monroe
Avenue to its intersection with North State Street; thence north along North
State Street to the town boundary and the place of beginning.  The District
encompasses United States Census Block Tract Numbers as set forth in the
attachment to Ord. 2012-17, passed 12-17-2012 and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A which is incorporated herein by reference and is to be considered
an integral part of this section.



   (C)   District 2.  Councilmanic District 2 is hereby described as
follows: Commencing at the intersection of the boundaries of the town near
the intersection of Van Buren Avenue and North State Street; thence easterly
along the town boundary paralleling Van Buren Avenue to where the town
boundary approaches Hewins Road; thence south along the town boundary to its
intersection with East Lincoln Avenue; thence easterly along East Lincoln
Avenue (State Highway 62) to its intersection with North Plank Road; thence
southwesterly along North Plank Road to the intersection of North Plank Road
and the southern boundary of Census Block Tract # 181730304001028; thence
following the town boundary westerly along the boundary of the town the south
boundary of the Census Block Tract to a point directly south of the extension
of North Sixth Street in the town also being the boundaries of census tracts;
thence north along the boundaries of the census tracts being coextensive with
the southerly extension of North Sixth Street in the town north across
Lincoln Avenue and then north on North Sixth Street to the intersection with
East Adams Avenue; thence west along East Adams Avenue to its intersection
with North Fourth Street; thence north along North Fourth Street to its
intersection with East Monroe Avenue; thence west along East Monroe Avenue to
its intersection with North State Street; thence north along North State
Street to the town boundary and the place of beginning.  The District
encompasses United States Census Block Tract Numbers as set forth in the
attachment to Ord. 2012-17, passed 12-17-2012 and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A which is incorporated herein by reference and is to be considered
an integral part of this section.



   (D)   District 3.  Councilmanic District 3 is hereby described as
follows: Commencing at the intersection of North Iowa Street and West Monroe
Avenue; thence east along West Monroe Avenue and continuing east along East
Monroe Avenue to the intersection with North Fourth Street; thence south
along North Fourth Street to its intersection with East Adams Avenue; thence
east along East Adams Avenue to the intersection with North Sixth Street;
thence south along North Sixth Street and the extension thereof following
west boundaries of census block tracts to the boundary of the town; thence
westerly and southwesterly along the boundaries of the town following the
census tracts to a point that parallels the boundaries of the census tracts
and Thorpe Lane; thence westerly along said Census Block Tract #
181730304001035 paralleling Thorpe Lane to its intersection with South State
Street; thence south along South State Street to the intersection with
Greenwood Road; thence west along Greenwood Road to the Southwest corner
Census Block Tract # 181730304003023; thence easterly along the northern
boundary of Census Block Tract # 181730304003023 to its intersection with
Census Block Tract # 181730304003014; thence westerly and northerly with the
census block tract to its intersection with West Washington Street; thence
southwesterly with West Washington Street to its intersection with Delaware
Street; thence northeasterly along the north boundary of Census Block Tract #
181730304003006 to its intersection with South Iowa Street; thence north
along South Iowa Street and continuing north on North Iowa Street to its
intersection with West Monroe and being the place of beginning.  The
District encompasses United States Census Block Tract Numbers as set forth in
the attachment to Ord. 2012-17, passed 12-17-2012 and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A which is incorporated herein by reference and is to be considered
an integral part of this section.



   (E)   District 4.  Councilmanic District 4 is hereby described as
follows: Commencing at the intersection of Heim Road and the western boundary
of the town; thence easterly along the boundary of the town tracking Heim
Road to the intersection with West Lincoln Avenue; thence northeasterly along
West Lincoln Avenue to its intersection with South Iowa Street; thence south
along South Iowa Street to its intersection with Census Block Tract #
181730304003006; thence southwesterly along the north side of Census Block
Tract # 181730304003006 to its intersection with Delaware Street; thence
southwesterly along Delaware Street to the intersection with West Washington
Street; thence northeasterly along West Washington Street to the intersection
of Census Block Tract # 181730304003014; thence southerly along the census
block tract to where census block tract boundary turns toward the east and
following the census block tract and paralleling West Washington Street
generally along the south side thereof and to the intersection with the
census block tracts and Census Block Tract # 181730304003023; thence
southwesterly along the census block tract to its intersection with Greenwood
Road; thence east along Greenwood Road to the intersection with South State
Street; thence north along South State Street to Census Block Tract #
181730304001035; thence southeasterly and parallel to Thorpe Lane with the
said census block tract to the town boundary; thence southeasterly and
easterly along the town boundary to North Plank Road; thence southerly along
North Plank Road and Old Plank Road to the intersection of Gardner Road;
thence west along Gardner Road following the town boundary in its entirety
all to the intersection of the town boundary and West State Road 62; thence
following the town boundary northwesterly and then to the point where the
town boundary proceeds northeasterly following the same to the point where
the town boundary turns northerly following the census block tracts and
Wabash Circle to where the town boundary intersects Heim Road and being the
place of beginning.  The District encompasses United States Census Block
Tract Numbers as set forth in the attachment to Ord. 2012-17, passed
12-17-2012 and incorporated herein as Exhibit A which is incorporated herein
by reference and is to be considered an integral part of this section.



   (F)   At-large.  In addition to the above districts there shall be
one at-large member.



   (G)   Eligible voters.  Town Council Members serving as
representatives of the district Town Council seats shall be elected by the
voters of their respective districts.  The at-large Council Member shall be
elected by the voters of the whole town.  To be eligible to seek office,
take office and serve as a district Council Member, the councilperson shall
maintain residence within the district.  The at-large Council Member, to be
eligible to seek office, take office and serve as an at-large Councilperson,
shall maintain residence within the town.



   (H)   District map.  Attached to Ord. 2012-17, passed 12-17-2012
and incorporated herein as Exhibit B is a map depicting the Councilmanic
Districts as herein above described which said map is incorporated herein by
reference and is to be considered an integral part of this section.



(Ord. 2012-17, passed 12-17-2012)



§ 33.03  TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Meetings of the Town Council shall be held in compliance with
the Indiana Open Door Law found at I.C. 5-14-1.5-1.



   (B)   The Town Council shall meet at least once per month on Monday
evenings.



   (C)   Special meetings of the Town Council may be called by the Town
Council President or any three Town Council members. It shall be the duty of
the person or persons calling the special meeting to notify the
Clerk-Treasurer of the meeting, allowing the Clerk-Treasurer reasonable time
to prepare and serve notice. It shall be the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer to
duly notify all Town Council members and to serve notice of the time, date,
and place of said special meeting in writing 48 hours (excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays) prior to said meeting by posting notice in a
public place and mailing, emailing, or faxing notice to media representatives
who requested such notice on or before January 1.



   (D)   A quorum of the Town Council shall be a majority of all
elected Town Council members. A quorum shall be necessary for the transaction
of Town Council business unless otherwise required by statute or this code.
No ordinance or resolution shall be passed which shall not have received the
votes of a majority of all members of Town Council.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless context indicates or requires a different meaning:



      ORDINANCE. A local law that regulates persons or property and
relates to a matter of a general and permanent nature. Any Town Council
enactment that regulates persons or property and imposes a fine for
violations must be in the form of an ORDINANCE. No ORDINANCE shall be passed
on the same day or at the same meeting that it is introduced, except by a
unanimous consent of the Town Council, and then only if at least 2/3 of the
Town Council members are present and voting. An ORDINANCE is required to
amend or repeal an existing ORDINANCE.



      RESOLUTION. A stated position or policy of the Town Council or
the town. A RESOLUTION may be passed on the same day or at the same meeting
as it is introduced, unless it requires affirmative action on behalf of the
town, if it is otherwise required by law, or if it is requested by a majority
of the members of Town Council that it be treated with the formalities of an
ordinance. A RESOLUTION passed under this section requires a majority vote of
the Town Council members. A RESOLUTION may be passed by a voice vote rather
than a roll-call vote, unless a roll-call vote is requested by any member of
Town Council or unless the RESOLUTION requires affirmative action on behalf
of the town as required by law or it has been requested by a majority of the
members of Town Council that it be treated with the formality of an ordinance.



   (F)   The Clerk-Treasurer or Town Attorney may read an ordinance or
resolution by number and title only, unless the presiding officer and 2 Town
Council members request the item be read in its entirety.



(Ord. 2016-04, passed 6-6-2016)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



   50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   51.   SEWERS



   52.   INDUSTRIAL USERS; PRETREATMENT PROGRAM



   53.   STORM WATER RUNOFF; CONSTRUCTION SITES



   54.   WATER



CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Trash collection within corporate limits



   50.02   Water utility; expanding regulated area



   50.03   Water and sewer charge to Police Department



   50.04   Sewer utility; expanding regulated area



   50.05   Utilities policies



   50.06   Issuance of utility available connections (TAPS) policies




Drainage




   50.15   Obstructions in watercourse



   50.16   Altering watercourse



   50.17   Maintenance by property owner



   50.18   Utility Department



   50.19   Storm Management Utility; authority



   50.20   Permits and fees



   50.21   Procedure for obtaining permit



   50.22   General information



   50.23   Designation of enforcement authority



   50.24   Appeal of notice to remove obstructions; correct violations



   50.25   Removal of obstructions; correct violations



   50.26   Liability of costs of removal of obstructions; making
corrections



   50.27   Notice of costs incurred in removal



   50.28   Effective date




Management of Town Utilities




   50.40   Management of town utilities



   50.41   Utility Clerk created



   50.42   Duties of the Utility Clerk



   50.43   Duties of the Clerk-Treasurer



   50.44   Utility Clerk deputies and employees



   50.45   Bonding



 



   50.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  TRASH COLLECTION WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.



   (A)   Title.  This section shall be referred to as the Chandler
Trash Collection Ordinance.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PERSON.  Any natural person and any entity recognized as an
entity by the State of Indiana.



      TOWN.  All incorporated areas of Chandler, Warrick County,
Indiana.



   (C)   Regulated and prohibited acts.



      (1)   All residential garbage, curbside recycling and yard
waste collections will be made between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
on the contractors' designated collection day. Refuse containers, refuse
bags, garbage can liners, bulky waste, recycling containers, and/or yard
waste containers (excluding leaves placed at the curb as part of the town's
fall leaf collection) shall be set out at the refuse collection site,
curbside or alley, on the designated collection day before 5:00 a.m. and no
earlier than noon of the day preceding the regular collection day. The refuse
containers, refuse bags, garbage can liners, bulky waste, recycling
containers, and/or yard waste containers (excluding leaves placed at the curb
as part of the town's fall leaf collection) shall be removed from the refuse
collection site no later than noon on the day after the regular collection
day. The owner, tenant, lessee occupant, or agent of any property shall
promptly clean up and remove any scattered solid waste, rejected items,
recyclable material and/or yard waste (excluding leaves placed at the curb as
part of the town's fall leaf collection) from the property before noon on the
day after the scheduled date of regular collection. Missed collections that
are a result of the contractors' negligence will be an exception to having
solid waste materials removed from the refuse collection site no later than
noon the day after the regular collection day.



      (2)   All persons shall be responsible for their refuse
containers, refuse bags, garbage can liners, bulky waste, recycling
containers, and/or yard waste containers and shall have the obligation to
have the same secured. No person shall allow refuse containers, refuse bags,
garbage can liners, bulky waste, recycling containers, and/or yard waste
containers to be located at any time beyond the refuse collection site,
curbside or alley. Any refuse containers, refuse bags, garbage can liners,
bulky waste, recycling containers, and/or yard waste containers found in the
traveled portion of the public streets and/or public ways in the Town of
Chandler shall be subject to removal and disposal by the town.



      (3)   No person shall place, put or deposit any trash,
garbage, waste, refuse containers, refuse bags, garbage can liners, bulky
waste, recycling containers, and/or yard waste containers (excluding leaves
placed at the curb as part of the town's fall leaf collection), or any empty
trash container or bag in any tree row, street or on that person's property
or residence in such a manner that it is closer to a public street than the
rear line of the person's residence or the primary structure of
nonresidential property, except for the designated collection day as herein
above provided.



   (D)   Payment of penalties to Violations Bureau.



      (1)   All penalties shall be payable to the Town of Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of Chandler
Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of  penalties under this
section for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the violation.



      (2)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not
waive trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town
of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing
with the appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



   (E)   Effective date.  This section shall be effective upon its
passage and publication as is by law required.



(Ord. 2005-7, passed 7-18-2005)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.02  WATER UTILITY; EXPANDING REGULATED AREA.



   (A)   The Council, after investigation and consideration, has
determined that it is necessary to regulate the furnishing of water service
in the regulated territory.



   (B)   This Council finds that public convenience and necessity
requires the town's regulation of the furnishing of water service within the
regulated territory and that the public interest will be served by the town's
regulation of the furnishing of water service within the regulated territory.



   (C)   Upon the adoption of this section, the town shall hold an
exclusive license to furnish water service within the regulated territory,
and all other utilities are expressly prohibited from furnishing water
service within the regulated territory, except for those customers located in
the regulated territory that are connected to another water utility as of the
date this section is adopted.



   (D)   Attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated
herein is a map depicting the regulated territory and the Town's Director of
Public Service is directed to maintain the map for public inspection at the
offices of the town's water utility during regular business hours.



   (E)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit an individual
property owner from providing water service to the property owner's lot
through the drilling of a well on the property; provided, however, the water
from the well shall not be used to provide water service to owners or lessees
of other properties.



   (F)   The town's existing rules and regulations for water service,
as amended from time to time, shall apply to and within the regulated
territory.



   (G)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage by the Council.



(Ord. 2006-13, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 2006-17, passed 10-16-2006)



§ 50.03  WATER AND SEWER CHARGE TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Town of Chandler, Indiana by the Chandler Water and Sewer
Departments shall pay a $250 per month service charge to the town general
fund to help offset these expenses. The amount shall be divided between the 2
Departments.



   (B)   The service charge shall be paid after the first Board of
Trustees meeting of each month, beginning on the effective date of this
section.



(Ord. 9-1981, passed 12-7-1981; Am. Ord. 6-1986, passed 7-21-1986)



§ 50.04  SEWER UTILITY; EXPANDING REGULATED AREA.



   (A)   The Council, after investigation and consideration, has
determined that it is necessary to regulate the furnishing of sewer service
in areas withing 4 miles outside the corporate boundaries (the “regulated
territory”).



   (B)   This Council finds that public convenience and necessity
requires the town’s regulation of the furnishing of sewer service within
the regulated



territory, and that the public interest will be served by the town's
regulation of the furnishing of sewer service within the regulated territory.



   (C)   Upon the adoption of this section, the town shall hold an
exclusive license to furnish sewer service within the regulated territory,
and all other utilities are expressly prohibited from furnishing sewer
service within the regulated territory, except for those customers located in
the regulated territory that are connected to another sewer utility as of the
date this section is adopted.



   (D)   Attached to Ordinance 2014-30 and incorporated herein is a map
depicting the regulated territory. The town’s Director of Public Service is
directed to maintain this map for public inspection at the offices of the
town’s sewer utility during regular business hours.



   (E)    This section shall not be construed to prohibit an individual
property owner from providing septic service to the property owner’s lot
through the installation of approved facilities on that property so long as
private septic facilities are permissible under applicable laws and
regulations; provided, however, the approved facilities on that property
shall not be used to provide septic or sewer service to owners or lessees of
other properties.



   (F)   The town's existing rules and regulations for sewer service,
as amended from time to time, shall apply to and within the regulated
territory.



   (G)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage by the Council; is approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory
Commission; and is published as is by law required. It is the intention that
this section regulate the offering and provision of sewer service to the full
extent of the law. It is acknowledges that this section will be submitted to
the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission, which agency may require changes
to this section before approval.



(Ord. 2007-12, passed 6-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 6-16-2014)



§ 50.05  UTILITIES POLICIES.



   (A)   Utility meter reading.  Utility meters shall be read on the
twenty-second day of the month or, if not a work day, on Chandler’s first
working day following the twenty-second day of each calendar month.



   (B)   Utility service billing.  Utility service bills shall be
mailed to utility customers no later than the third day of the following
month.



   (C)   Utility service bill payment due date.  Payment for Chandler
utility services shall be due and paid, without penalty, on or before the
twentieth calendar day of the month following the billing thereof. Provided
however, should the twentieth calendar day fall on a Saturday, Sunday,
Chandler recognized holiday, or any other day when the Chandler utilities
billing office is closed, then the payment shall be due on Chandler’s first
working day thereafter.



   (D)   Utility service billing penalty.  Penalties applicable to
late payment of Chandler utilities billings shall be applied on the day
following the “utility service bill payment due date” as herein above
established.



   (E)   Utility service billing nonpayment cutoff date. The utility
services for Chandler utility customers whose utility service bill remains
unpaid, in an amount in excess of $20, on or after the last working day of
the Chandler utilities billing office of the month following the billing
thereof, shall be discontinued as promptly as Chandler utilities work
schedules shall allow.



   (F)   Utility security deposits.  Commencing with the effective
date hereof, new customers of Chandler utilities shall post security deposits
to ensure bill payment as follows:



      (1)   Water utility.



         (a)   Service to property owner-occupied customers: $40;



         (b)   Service to property nonowner-occupied customers:
$80.



      (2)   Wastewater utility.



         (a)   Service to property owner-occupied customers: $75;



         (b)   Service to property nonowner-occupied customers:
$100.



   (G)   Rental policy.  Customers who are requesting utility service
and are renting must provide a copy of the lease at time of connection.
Owners of rental property are responsible for any outstanding sewer and storm
water charges; service will not be connected for tenant until charges are
paid.



   (H)   Utility service vacation.  Customers of Chandler utilities
may arrange for service to be placed on “vacation status” for a period
not to exceed 6 continuous months. During this period, utility service shall
be turned off by Chandler utilities and  customers shall be billed the meter
turn-off charge and the service billing at the Chandler utilities minimum
billing rate. At the conclusion of the customer-selected vacation status, the
customer’s service shall be reactivated and the customer charged the meter
turn-on charge. If reactivation is after the 6-month period, in addition to
the normal turn-on charge, the customer shall be billed the actual cost of
reactivation in accordance with Chandler utilities’ customary service
billing rates.



   (I)   Irrigation meters utility service vacation.  Irrigation meter
customers of Chandler utilities may arrange for service to be placed on
“vacation status” for a period not to exceed 6 continuous months. During
this period, utility service shall be turned off by Chandler utilities and
customers shall be billed the meter turn-off charge, but shall not be billed
at the Chandler utilities minimum billing rate. At the conclusion of the
customer-selected vacation status, the customer’s service shall be
reactivated and the customer charged the meter turn-on charge. If
reactivation is after the 6-month period, in addition to the normal turn-on
charge, the customer shall be billed the actual cost of reactivation in
accordance with Chandler utilities’ customary service billing rates.



   (J)   Prepayment of utility bills.  Customers of Chandler utilities
may pre-pay utility bills as a matter of convenience if so desired.



   (K)   Abandonment of service. All utility services remaining
inactive for at least 12 months shall be considered abandoned.



   (L)   Storm water utility charges. Nothing in this section shall
affect the rate and due date of storm water utility charges, which shall
continue to be billed and retain the same rate notwithstanding any status of
meter service. Due dates for storm water utility charges shall be the same as
the due dates for utility services.



   (M)   Rules for obtaining a billing adjustment.



      (1)   Only sewer adjustments will be given. If the water
passes through the meter, it becomes the responsibility of the homeowner and
water bills will not be adjusted.



      (2)   Sewer adjustments are only given if the excess water
does not have to be treated.



      (3)   Pool and lawn watering adjustments will not be given
under any circumstances.



      (4)   Sewer adjustments will not be given below the average
usage.



      (5)   Application for adjustments must be received within 3
months of the occurrence.



      (6)   Evidence that a leak has occurred must be provided. This
can come in the form of a plumber’s bill or a receipt for the plumbing
supplies from the hardware store. This necessitates that requests are in
person or by mail with the accompanying evidence.



   (N)   Summer Sewer Program policy.  The Summer Sewer Program is a
courtesy program that may or may not be initiated by the Chandler Town
Council each year. This program is designed to give allowances to home owners
for car washing, gardening, lawn watering, pool filling, and the like. During
the program, the sewer portion of the bill will be based on a
computer-calculated 12-month average of the preceding year. This will be
based on the reading in September, billed July, August, September and October.



   (O)   Disconnect policy change.  A disconnect notice, including
information as to the procedure for requesting a public hearing before
disconnection, will be included on the monthly bill for all customers.
Disconnect avoidance payments must be made by the twenty-eighth day of the
month for which the bill is due. If disconnection occurs, a customer’s bill
must be brought completely current, including the $40 service charge, before
service will be reactivated.



   (P)   Utility access to meters and meter pits.



      (1)   Chandler utilities shall by its inspectors, agents, or
workmen, have the right of free access, at all reasonable hours, to utility
meters and meter pits for:



         (a)   Reading;



         (b)   Inspection;



         (c)   Removal for testing; or



         (d)   To turn the water on or off.



      (2)   If Chandler utilities shall be denied such free access
to the meters or meter pits, Chandler utilities may, after five days written
notice to the applicable customer of Chandler utilities, abate and remove any
obstruction nuisance and prepare a statement of costs incurred in such
abatement or removal thereof. Such notice period shall not apply in
situations of emergencies. Should the town abate or remove an obstruction
pursuant to this section, the town will issue a bill to the customer
outlining the administrative and removal costs of the abatement. In addition
to any other remedies, the costs described in this section shall be a debt
which may be collected by the town in an appropriate civil action.



(Res. 2011-3, passed 12-5-2011; Am. Res. 2012-9, passed 7-2-2012; Am. Res.
2014-38, passed 11-17-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 8-15-2016)



§ 50.06  ISSUANCE OF UTILITY AVAILABLE CONNECTIONS (TAPS) POLICIES.



   (A)   All terms and definitions as set forth in the Comprehensive
Zoning Ordinance for the town shall be applicable to terms therein defined
and used in this section.



   (B)   An improvement location permit will only be issued by the
Building Department after the required approved utility taps have been issued
including, but not necessarily limited to, water, sewer and stormwater.



   (C)   The following shall be utilized as the minimum number of water
and sewer taps by classification:



      (1)   Dwellings. One family or mobile (manufactured) home:



         (a)   One sewer tap;



         (b)   One water tap;



         (c)   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



         (d)   Indiana Department of Environmental Management
Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



         (e)   Electric service availability proof from provider.



      (2)   Two family or duplex, each building.



         (a)   If common ownership and owner to pay utility
charges;



            1.   One sewer tap;



            2.   One water tap;



            3.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



            4.   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



            5.   Electric service availability proof from
provider.



         (b)   Divided ownership or rental agreement requiring
individual occupant to pay utility charges, each building:



            1.   Two sewer taps;



            2.   Two water taps;



            3.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



            4.   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



            5.   Electric service availability proof from
provider.



         (c)   If divided ownership (i.e. condominium), each unit:



            1.   One sewer tap;



            2.   One water tap;



            3.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



            4.   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



            5.   Electric service availability proof from
provider.



      (3)   Multiple family dwelling or dwelling row house.



         (a)   If common ownership and owner pays utility
charges, each building:



            1.   One sewer tap;



            2.   One water tap;



            3.   One stormwater permit, if applicable Indiana
Department of Environmental Management Rule 5 Permit;  and



            4.   If applicable electric service availability
proof from provider.



         (b)   If divided ownership or rental agreement requires
individual occupant to pay utility charges, each unit:



            1.   One sewer tap;



            2.   One water tap;



            3.   One storm water permit, if applicable;



            4.   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



            5.   Electric service availability proof from
provider.



         (c)   If divided ownership (i.e. condominium), each unit:



            1.   One sewer tap;



            2.   One water tap;



            3.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



            4.   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



            5.   Electric service availability proof from
provider.



      (4)   Commercial and industrial buildings.



         (a)   Each building:



            1.   One sewer tap;



            2.   One water tap;



            3.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



            4.   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



            5.   Electric service availability proof from
provider.



         (b)   Building with divided utilities:



            1.   If common ownership owner paying all
utilities:



               A.   One sewer tap;



               B.   One water tap;



               C.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



               D.    Indiana  Department  of
Environmental Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



               E.    Electric service  availability 
proof from provider;



            2.   If divided ownership (i.e. condominium), each
unit:



               A.   One sewer tap;



               B.   One water tap;



               C.   One stormwater permit, if applicable;



               D.    Indiana Department of Environmental
Management Rule 5 Permit, if applicable; and



               E.    Electric service  availability 
proof from provider.



      (5)   Any other building, not covered by the above, shall have
at least 1 water and 1 sewer tap for each building if common ownership. In
the event ownership is multiple or there is an allocation of utility charge
responsibility for individual payment to the town, then the number of taps
for sewer and water as set forth for the above residential type structures
shall be utilized



         (6)   In all other instances that would be addressed by
other ordinances or regulations by the town and not addressed herein, said
other ordinance or regulations would be applied.



(Res. 2015-2, passed 3-2-2015)




DRAINAGE




§ 50.15  OBSTRUCTIONS IN WATERCOURSE.



   No person shall allow or cause any fill, trash, obstruction, or any
other material to be placed, deposited, or accumulate in or upon any stream,
ditch, watercourse, or drainage pipe in any town right-of-way or drainage
easement that results in environmental contamination and/or restricts the
natural drainage of storm water runoff.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.16  ALTERING WATERCOURSE.



   No person shall dam, divert, or otherwise change or alter the natural
or artificial flow of waters or drainage in or upon any town right-of-way or
drainage easement except by permit issued by the Town of Chandler.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  MAINTENANCE BY PROPERTY OWNER.



   Each property owner has a responsibility to regularly perform general
maintenance activities regarding ditch and/or culvert/inlet clean out in
order to insure proper storm water drainage across his or her property.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.18  UTILITY DEPARTMENT.



   The Town of Chandler's Utility Department may perform ditch clean out
work in areas of significant drainage impediments. When performing ditch
maintenance which requires the removal of a driveway culvert, the town's
Utility Department will remove existing driveway culverts and install owner
provided driveway culverts only and replace removed fill at no charge to the
property owner. If the owner fails to timely provide the replacement culvert,
the ditch will be left open. Replacement and/or new installation of drainage
pipe across the width of the property shall be the responsibility of, and at
the expense of the property owner.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.19  STORM MANAGEMENT UTILITY; AUTHORITY.



   The Storm Water Management Utility shall have the authority to:



   (A)   Accept applications and issue permits to install or replace
driveway culverts and/or drainage pipes across the width of the property;



   (B)   Establish size, length, and other specification requirements
for culverts; (applies to both new installations and replacements), the
specifications, at a minimum, shall comply with the Town of Chandler Public
Works Design Standards;



   (C)   Require drain basin inlets where pipe extends across the width
of the property (minimum of two per lot);



   (D)   Condemn an existing driveway culvert and/or drainage pipe,
that is damaged, clogged, improper size or made of non-compliant material,
and require the property owner to either make acceptable repairs or replace
same within the time frame as established below;



   (E)   Whenever possible, the Town of Chandler Utilities Department
shall assist in the disposal of old culvert/drainage pipes;



   (F)   Perform inspections and enforcement activities as required to
insure compliance with this subchapter and any related Departmental policies;



   (G)   Require installation of driveway culverts and/or other
drainage pipes for properties where none currently exist; and



   (H)   Establish Departmental rules, policies, and regulations
subject to the approval of the Town Council.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.20  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit application fee. Each application for a permit as
required by this subchapter shall be accompanied by a fee made payable to the
Town of Chandler as provided below. No part of any permit application filing
fee shall be returnable to the applicant.



   (B)   Pipe installation and permit. No culvert or drainage pipe
installation shall occur, whether or not at the initiative of the property
owner or by the requirement of the Department of Storm Water Management,
unless a permit is issued. No required permit shall be issued without the
review and approval of the Town of Chandler.



   (C)   Activities and permit. No person shall undertake any activity
required by this subchapter except in strict compliance with the approved
application and permit process of the Town of Chandler.



   (D)   Permit fees.



      (1)   Permit to install a new driveway culvert: $40;



      (2)   Permit to install drainage pipe across property: $100;
and



      (3)   Replace old driveway culvert: no fee.



   (E)   Expiration and invalidity; 90 days. If the work described in a
permit(s) issued under this subchapter has not been started within 90 days
from the date of issuance, the permit(s) shall expire and be invalid.



   (F)   Expiration and invalidity; 180 days. If the work described in
the permit(s) is not completed within 180 days from the date of issuance, the
permit(s) shall expire and be invalid.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004; Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 50.21  PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person who desires or is required to undertake any
activity in compliance with this subchapter shall complete a written
application with the Town of Chandler's Storm Water Management Department.



   (B)   The application shall describe in detail the action the
applicant desires or is required to undertake and have attached thereto a
drawing showing in detail the action to be undertaken.



   (C)   At the discretion of the Department of Storm Water Management,
the applicant may be required to submit a drawing prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such by the State of Indiana. The licensed professional
engineer shall, in writing, certify to the following: “I hereby certify
that the actions proposed by the applicant are in complete compliance with
the Town of Chandler's ordinance regulating drainage within the Town of
Chandler: the Town of Chandler public works design standards; and the laws
and ordinances of Warrick County and the State of Indiana”.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.22  GENERAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   All action undertaken hereunder must be in compliance with
drainage standards approved by the Department of Storm Water Management;
assure proper drainage of the area in question; not present a public safety
hazard to upstream or downstream property or public right-of-way; and be in
compliance with all other provisions of the ordinances of the Town of
Chandler and state law.



   (B)   The Department of Storm Water Management is authorized to
place conditions on the approval of permits in order to facilitate drainage
and promote public health, safety and welfare.



   (C)   The Department of Storm Water Management shall report on
applications, permits, and other departmental activities in the public
meetings of the Town Council.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.23  DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The Department of Storm Water Management of the Town of Chandler is
designated as the Department of the Town of Chandler responsible for the
administration of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.24  APPEAL OF NOTICE TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS; CORRECT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upon giving of notice herein, an owner who desires to appeal
the notice shall file a written appeal to the Department of Storm Water
Management. The appeal shall be filed in person or by certified mail with the
Department of Storm Water Management.



   (B)   The appeal must be received by the Department of Storm Water
Management on or before the seventh calendar day after which the notice to
remove obstructions or correct other violations is given, as herein above
provided.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Department of Storm
Water Management shall immediately investigate the appeal, giving due notice
to the owner to present the appeal to the Department of Storm Water
Management and the Environmental Manager of the Department of Storm Water
Management shall, forthwith, rule upon the appeal.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.25  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS; CORRECT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Department of Storm Water Management of the Town of
Chandler shall inspect each property for which a notice to remove
obstructions or correct other violations under this subchapter has been
issued at least 30 calendar days from the giving of the notice, as aforesaid.



   (B)   If the obstructions have not been removed or correction of
other violations have not been made by the owner at the time of this
inspection, the Department of Storm Water Management may have the
obstructions removed or corrections made by the employees of the Town of
Chandler or by a contractor engaged by the Town of Chandler for that purpose.



   (C)   In the event that the obstructions or areas of other necessary
corrections of violations are located in an enclosed area, the entry of which
is limited by locked gate, the Department of Storm Water Management shall
direct the town employees or the town's contractor to remove the lock and
enter onto the property for the purpose of removing the obstructions or
making the corrections that are in violation of this subchapter.



   (D)   Prior to the removal of a lock, the Department of Storm Water
Management shall have given notice of the intended removal to the owner as a
part of the notice to remove obstructions as herein above provided.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.26  LIABILITY OF COSTS OF REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS; MAKING CORRECTIONS.



   When obstructions are removed or other corrections undertaken by action
of the Department of Storm Water Management, town employees or contractors,
as herein above provided, the owner shall be liable, jointly and severally,
for the following costs:



   (A)   The actual costs of the work performed by the Town of Chandler
or work performed by a contractor;



   (B)   The reasonable charges for work done by town employees and
utilization of town equipment for the work performed;



   (C)   An amount that represents a reasonable charge for the
processing expenses that have been incurred by the Department of Storm Water
Management in taking the technical, research, administrative and legal
actions concerning typical obstruction or other violations that are necessary
to obstructions or other violations which the cost shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The cost of obtaining reliable information concerning
the identity and address of the owner;



      (2)   The cost of preparing and mailing notices;



      (3)   The salaries and fringe benefits of employees;



      (4)   The reasonable cost of motor vehicle use necessitated in
the enforcement of the ordinance for the particular property; and



      (5)   The cost of supplies, equipment and office space.



   (D)   The Town of Chandler shall determine and establish the amount
of the average processing expenses at a public meeting.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.27  NOTICE OF COSTS INCURRED IN REMOVAL.



   (A)   (1)   The Department shall send, by first class United
States mail, a notice of cost of removal of obstructions or making other
necessary corrections to the owner after completion of the removal or
correction and determination by the Department of Storm Water Management of
the costs incurred in removing the obstructions or making other necessary
corrections or upon receipt by the Department of Storm Water Management of an
invoice from the contractor which removed the obstructions or made other
necessary corrections.



      (2)   The notice shall include the property address and the
short form legal description of the property or the real property parcel
number as shown on the records of the Assessor of Warrick County, from which
the obstructions were removed or corrections made, the date or dates on which
the obstructions were removed or corrections made, the cost of the actual
removal of the obstructions or making other necessary corrections and the
administrative costs as provided herein above.



      (3)   The notice shall inform the owner that unless the
Chandler Town Clerk-Treasurer receives payment in full within 15 calendar
days of the mailing of the notice, that the Town of Chandler will file a copy
of the notice with the Auditor of Warrick County.



      (4)   Any costs incurred in the filing of the notice with the
Auditor of Warrick County shall be added to the amount owed by the property
owner.



      (5)   The Auditor shall, pursuant to Indiana law, place the
amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the property effected by the work.



      (6)   The amount collected shall accrue interest at the rate
of 8% per annum from the date of the lien. The amount, including accrued
interest, shall be collected as taxes, are collected and shall be disbursed
to the general fund of the town.



   (B)   An owner desiring to appeal the costs of removal of
obstructions or making other necessary corrections, shall petition the Town
Council in writing within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice of
costs incurred, as aforesaid. The basis for appeal which the Town Council may
consider are as follows:



      (1)   The obstructions for which the notice was issued were
not removed by the Department of Storm Water Management, town employees or
contractors;



      (2)   The corrective measures for which the notice was issued
were not performed by the Department of Storm Water Management, town
employees or contractors;



      (3)   The obstructions for which the notice was issued were
removed by the Department of Storm Water Management, town employees or
contractors before the 30-notice required by this subchapter;



      (4)   The corrective measures for which the notice was issued
were performed by the Department of Storm Water Management, town employees or
contractors before the 30-day notice required by this subchapter and no
emergency was declared under § 50.99(C)(3)(b);



      (5)   The amount of charges is incorrect; and



      (6)   The owner was not given notice.



   (C)   The Town Council shall consider the appeals and shall take the
action as the Council deems just and appropriate with regard to the
circumstances as warranted by the evidence.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 50.28  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage by the Town Council of the Town of Chandler, County of Warrick, State
of Indiana, together with the signature of the presiding officer thereof, and
its publication in the manner provided by law.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



MANAGEMENT OF TOWN UTILITIES



§ 50.40  MANAGEMENT OF TOWN UTILITIES.



   The Town Council confirms its position and management of the town water
utility and the town sewer utility and does hereby confirm the management and
control of the town water utility and the town sewer utility in the Town
Council as the Board responsible therefor as the same has been the case since
the creation of the utilities.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 50.41  UTILITY CLERK CREATED.



   There is hereby created effective with this subchapter a position
bearing the tile of “Utility Clerk of the Town of Chandler.”



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 50.42  DUTIES OF THE UTILITY CLERK.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Utility Clerk shall be as
follows:



   (A)   The billing and collection of utility charges and fees for the
water utility and the sewer utility.  Additionally, the Utility Clerk shall
have the responsibility for the billing and collection of the storm water
utility fees charged by the town and the fire protection charges as the same
are charged through the utility billing process of the town.  The Utility
Clerk shall be responsible for all necessary and related functions to fulfill
these duties and responsibilities.  The Town Council shall establish a
specific list of the duties and responsibilities of the Utility Clerk.



   (B)   The oversight and approval of all claims to be charged against
the utility revenues of the town to be submitted to the Town Council for
approval and direction of the payment of the same by the Clerk-Treasurer of
the town.



   (C)   The Utility Clerk shall be appointed by the Town Council and
under the direct supervision of the Town Council to which Council the Clerk
shall report.



   (D)   The salary ordinance of the town shall delineate the position
of Utility Clerk and shall establish the salary therefor.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 50.43  DUTIES OF THE CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   As of the effective date of this subchapter, the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall no longer have any duties or
responsibilities for the billing and collection of the rates and charges for
the town water utility, sewer utility, the storm water utilities, and the
fire protection charges that are billed through the utility billing system of
the town utilities.



   (B)   This subchapter shall have no effect or change to any of the
statutory duties or responsibilities imposed upon the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town under I.C. 36-5-6 except that the Clerk-Treasurer will not have
responsibility for the collection of the utility rates and charges as set
forth under I.C. 36-5-6-7(b).



   (C)   The Town Council shall establish accounting and reporting
procedures for the Utility Clerk necessary to allow the Clerk-Treasurer of
the town to perform the Clerk-Treasurer statutory duties under I.C. 36-5-6,
excluding I.C. 36-5-6-7(b).



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 50.44  UTILITY CLERK DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES.



   The Town Council may hire and appoint employees and deputies to serve
the Utility Clerk to assist the Utility Clerk in the performance of the
Utility Clerk’s duties and responsibilities.  The position(s) shall be
established in accordance with the normal and customary procedure of the
town, and the Town Council shall establish the necessary salaries of the
employees and deputies of the Utility Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 50.45  BONDING.



   The Town Council does hereby specifically reserve unto itself the
authority to establish bonding requirements for the Utility Clerk and
employees and deputies working under the direction of the Utility Clerk.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Penalties to § 50.01.  Any person who violates any
section of § 50.01 shall be penalized as follows:



         (a)   First offense: $20;



         (b)   Second offense of violating any section of §
50.01 occurring within a 12-month period: $50;



         (c)   Third offense of violating § 50.01 (C) within a
12-month period: $100; and



         (d)   Fourth or subsequent offense of violating any
section of § 50.01 occurring within a 12-month period: $250.



      (2)   Additions to penalties.  In addition to the penalties
set forth above in division (B)(1), a person violating § 50.01(C)(2), shall
forfeit all refuse containers, recycling containers, and/or yard waste
containers removed and disposed of by the town, whether an ordinance
violation charge is issued or not.



      (3)   Court costs.  In addition to the penalties set forth
above, any person found to have violated any provision of § 50.01 shall be
liable for payment of court costs.



      (4)   Injunctive relief.  Nothing herein shall be construed
as limiting the right of the Town of Chandler to seek injunctive relief to
prohibit continuing violations.



(Ord. 2005-7, passed 7-18-2005)



   (C)   (1)   Violation penalties.



         (a)   A person who violates §§ 50.15et seq. shall be
subject to the following penalties:



            1.   First offense: $100;



            2.   Second offense: $200; and



            3.   Third or any subsequent offense: $500.



         (b)   Each day that a violation exist beyond the time
frame established for correction shall constitute a separate violation.



         (c)   In addition to the monetary penalties provided in
division (C)(1)(a) above, a court, upon application of the Town of Chandler,
may enter injunctive relief to prevent further violations of §§ 50.15et seq.



      (2)   Violation abatement time frame.



         (a)   A first offense violation issued under the
provisions of §§ 50.15et seq.  shall be abated within 30 days from the
date of notice as provided in §§ 50.15et seq. unless the Department of
Storm Water Management approves an extension of compliance not to exceed an
additional 30 days. The extensions for abatement shall be requested in
writing by the property owner, stating among other things, the reason(s) the
extension should be granted. Extensions for abatement shall be at the sole
discretion of the Department of Storm Water Management.



         (b)   First offense violations not abated within the
time frame established by the Department of Storm Water Management shall
constitute a second violation and therefore be subject to the second offense
penalty. An additional 30 days of abatement shall be granted for a second
offense violation with no opportunity to request an extension.



         (c)   Second offense violations not abated within the
time frame established by the Department of Storm Water Management shall
constitute a third violation and therefore be subject to the third offense
penalty. An additional 30 days of abatement shall be granted for a third
offense violation, with no opportunity to request an extension.



         (d)   Violations that continue beyond the third offense
abatement time frame shall be subject to the terms of division (C)(1)(c)
above.



      (3)   Enforcement.



         (a)   Whenever the Department of Storm Water Management
learns that a possible violation of §§ 50.15et seq. has occurred, a
preliminary determination of probable cause to believe a violation has
occurred shall be made by the Department. After the determination, a written
notice of the violation shall be served upon the owner of the property upon
which the violation exists. The notice shall state the time frame for
compliance and penalty assessment as per division (C) above. The notice shall
also state that if the property is not brought into compliance within the
time frame for compliance, another offense and penalty shall be assessed as
per division (C) above. The notice shall also state that if the bringing of
the property into compliance is required to be undertaken by the Department
of Storm Water Management or its agents or contractors, the owner of the
property shall be liable for the costs incurred by the Town of Chandler in
taking corrective action as well as the estimated costs in research of
ownership, processing costs and other administrative expenses incurred by the
Town of Chandler and the Department of Storm Water Management in processing
the matter. The notice must also state that if the premises are enclosed by a
locked gate or other barricade, the lock shall be removed in order to gain
access to the property for taking the corrective action(s) required.



         (b)   No notice shall be required prior to undertaking
corrective action by the town through a contractor or through the town's own
work force if the action constituting a violation poses a substantial risk of
injury or death to any person, damage to upstream or downstream property,
damage to the right-of-way, or threatens the use of the public right-of-way
or drainage easement. In the event, anyone authorized to issue citations may
issue the citation and the Department of Storm Water Management may take the
corrective action necessary to alleviate the violation all at the cost of the
person responsible for the violation. To this end, this procedure shall be
treated as an emergency procedure.



         (c)   Any of the following shall constitute sufficient
notice:



            1.   Sending a copy of the notice by certified
mail to the owner at the owner's address;



            2.   Delivering copy of the notice to the owner or
either of the owners if there be multiple owners, personally; and



            3.   By leaving a copy of the notice at the
dwelling or usual place of abode of the owner and by mailing a copy by first
class mail to the address of the owner.



         (d)   The notice shall be deemed to have been given upon
any of the following:



            1.   The date of personal service to 1 or more of
the owners;



            2.   The date of mailing of notice by ordinary to
the mail when a copy has been left at the owner's address; and



            3.   The date of deposit in the United States of
mail of notice by certified mail.



(Ord. 2004-11, passed 11-15-2004)



CHAPTER 51: SEWERS



Section




Costs and Fees




   51.01   Operating costs; review



   51.02   Rates and charges; adopted by reference



   51.03   Sewer deposits




Connection to Town Sewer




   51.20   Connection to sanitary sewer system




Connection to Public and Private Sewer




   51.35   Definitions



   51.36   Unlawful acts



   51.37   Permits



   51.38   Storm runoff



   51.39   Damage to sewer works



   51.40   Maintain structures



   51.41   Issuance of permit



   51.42   Effective date




Private Wastewater Haulers




   51.70   Licensing of private wastewater haulers



   51.71   Licensed wastewater hauler



   51.72   Fees



   51.73   Effective date



 



   51.99   Penalty




COSTS AND FEES




§ 51.01  OPERATING COSTS; REVIEW.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Chandler shall on, or
before the first day of March of each year after the enactment of this
section, prepare and submit to the Town Council a comprehensive report of the
costs of operation of the Town of Chandler Municipal Sewage Works,
categorized to allow the review of the costs of each facet of the operation
thereof.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Chandler shall on, or
before March 1 of each year after the enactment of this section, prepare and
submit to the Town Council a comprehensive report of the income from the
operation of the Town of Chandler Municipal Sewage Works, categorized to
allow the review of the income from of each facet of the operation.



   (C)   (1)   The Town Council, in March of each year after the
adoption of this section, shall commence and complete as timely as possible a
review of the costs of operation of the Chandler Municipal Sewage Works and
the income received therefrom.



      (2)   In performing its review hereunder, the Town Council
shall utilize the services of the consultants and experts as it deems
necessary to adequately discharge its duties hereunder.



      (3)   The Town Council shall make an affirmative determination
annually, at the conclusion of the review herein directed, as to the need for
any rate adjustment for the continued sound operation of the Municipal Sewage
Works for the ensuing year.



   (D)   The Town Council after making the affirmative rate adjustment
determination provided for in division (C) hereof, shall notify the billed
customers of the determination on the billing statement following the making
of its decision.



   (E)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after
the date of its passage.



(Ord. 2006-11, passed 6-5-2006)



§ 51.02  RATES AND CHARGES; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Town of Chandler Indiana’s rates and charges for the sewage works
of the town are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set
out in full.



(Ord. 1998-20, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2005-12, passed 12-5-2005; Am. Ord.
2009-7, passed 8-3-2009; Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 1-21-2014)



§ 51.03  SEWER DEPOSITS.



   All future new customers of the Chandler Sewer Department shall be
required to place a $75 deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 1997-2, passed 4-2-1997)




CONNECTION TO TOWN SEWER




§ 51.20  CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Title.  This subchapter shall be referred to as The Chandler
Force Main Connection Ordinance.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONNECTION or TAP.  A direct tie-in to a sewer line owned and
operated by the Town of Chandler.



      FORCE MAIN.  A sewer line, which utilizes pressure for flow
rather than gravity flow.



      PERSON.  Any natural legal person and/or corporation or other
entity however constituted.



      PROPERTY OWNER.  Any owner of real property whose property is
capable of being served by the Town of Chandler's sewer system.



      SEWER SYSTEM.  The entire sewer system owned and operated by the
Town of Chandler.



   (C)   Regulated and prohibited acts.  Connection to a force main
shall be prohibited.



   (D)   Exceptions.  The only exceptions to division (C) above, shall
be those properties presently connected to force main; however, the property
owners connected to a force main shall be required to connect to an
accessible gravity flow line within 180 days of the gravity flow line being
accessible to the property line of the property owner.



   (E)   Effective date.  This subchapter shall be in full force and
effect after its adoption and acceptance by the Chandler Town Council and its
publication as required by law, which the publication is now ordered.



(Ord. 1998-17, passed 8-26-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99




CONNECTION TO PUBLIC





AND PRIVATE SEWER




§ 51.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   B.O.D. or BIOLOGICAL CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biological chemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in 5 days as 20°C. expressed in parts per
million by weight.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest, horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning 5 feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CLEAN OUT.  The extension of the house or building lateral sewer to
ground level for the purpose of cleaning or monitoring purposes.



   COMBINED SEWER.  Only a sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage, which sewage is later diverted to the municipal sewage treatment
plant for treatment.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinguished from sanitary sewage.



   INSPECTOR.  The person or persons duly authorized by the Chandler Town
Council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their
connections to the public sewer system.



   MAY.  Permissive.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.   The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/12 inch in any
dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.



   SHALL.  Mandatory.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage only, and excludes sewage and polluted industrial waste.



   SUMP PUMP.  A machine or device for transferring liquid from any low
area that receives drainage, or from a hole at the lowest point of a shaft
into which water or other liquid is drained in order to be pumped out.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of Public Works for the Town of
Chandler, Indiana, and/or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   WASTEWATER.  A combination of the water carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with the ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously, or intermittently.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)



§ 51.36  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner, upon public or private
property within the Town of Chandler, Indiana or in any area serviced by the
Chandler Wastewater Facility under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or
animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the Town of Chandler, Indiana, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
town, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct
or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facilities intended or used for the holding or disposal of sewage, with the
exception of temporary facilities with the prior approval of the Sewer
Inspector. There shall be no additional charge for this temporary sewer
facility approval.



   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the Town of Chandler, Indiana, and abutting any street, alley, or
right-of-way, in which there is now located or may in the future be located a
public sewer or combined sewer, is hereby required, at his or her total
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter, within 90 days after date of official written
notice to do so, or within 90 days after the publication of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.37  PERMITS.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   (1)   There shall be 3 classes of building sewer permits:



         (a)   Residential;



         (b)   Commercial; and



         (c)   Industrial.



      (2)   In no case, for sewer connection applications for
property located outside the town limits of the Town of Chandler, shall sewer
connection be made to any building located on a lot, the size of which the
lot shall be less than the lot size limitations for that zoning
classification as provided in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the Town
of Chandler.



      (3)   In all cases, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form provided by the town for the appropriate class
of sewer permit. The permit applications shall be supplemented by plans and
specifications pertaining to the sewer service connection and may require
further information considered pertinent in the judgement of the
Superintendent or Sewer Inspector. The owner or agent shall not start the
sewer service connection or any construction thereof without written approval
from the Sewer Inspector.



   (C)   (1)    A permit inspection fee and sewer impact fee shall
be paid to the Chandler Clerk-Treasurer at the time the application is filed,
along with the appropriate sewer availability fee. Fees shall be as follows:



 


Type of Sewer Permit

 

Inspection Fee

 

Impact Fee




Residential in town

 

$50

 

$50




Residential



out of town

 

$75

 

$100




Commercial in town

 

$100

 

$150




Commercial



out of town

 

$150

 

$150




Industrial in town

 

$250

 

$500




Industrial out of town

 

$500

 

$750




 



      (2)   A 2% annual increase shall be calculated and placed on
all inspection fees and impact fees which shall become effective on January
15 of each year. Sewer availability fees shall be governed by Ord. 1992-3.



   (D)   (1)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.



      (2)   The Chandler Sewer Department and the Town of Chandler,
Indiana shall not be responsible for any sewer backup problems resulting from
a problem in the service main. It shall be the owners responsibility to
connect appropriate devices to prevent the backup of sewer waters into their
building.



      (3)   The owner or the person installing the building sewer
for the owner, shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation.



   (E)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building.



   (F)   Old building sewers cannot be used in connection with new
buildings.



   (G)   (1)   The building sewer shall be P.V.C., sewer pipe as
approved by the Sewer Inspector equal to or greater than SDR 35. Joints shall
be tight and waterproof.



      (2)   Any part of the building sewer that is located within 10
feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of material as approved by
the Sewer Inspector. Cast iron joints may be required by the Sewer Inspector
where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots.



      (3)   If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building
sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may
be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the
Sewer Inspector.



   (H)   (1)   The size and slope of the building sewers shall be
subject to the approval of the Sewer Inspector, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than 6 inches.



      (2)   The slope of the 6-inch pipe shall not be less than 1/8
inch per foot.



   (I)   (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building
sewer shall be laid parallel to or within 3 feet of any bearing wall. The
depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer
shall be laid at a uniform grade and in a straight alignment.



      (2)   Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipes and fittings and only on prior approval from the Sewer Inspector.



   (J)   (1)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by
the drains shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.



      (2)   No water operated ejector shall be used.



   (K)   (1)   All excavations required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
Sewer Inspector.



      (2)   Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with ASTII specifications except that no backfill shall be placed
until the work has been inspected and approved by the Sewer Inspector.



   (L)   All joints and connections shall be made gas tight and water
tight.



   (M)   (1)   The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall be made at the “Y” branch.



      (2)   If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and
no properly located “Y” is available, the owner at his or her sole
expense install a “Y” branch in the public sewer at a location specified
and approved by the Sewer Inspector.



   (N)   (1)   The applicant for the building sewer, all classes,
shall notify the Sewer Inspector when the building will be ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer.



      (2)   The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the Sewer Inspector or his or her representative.



      (3)   All inspections shall be made during normal business
hours. Should a sewer inspection be required after normal business hours, an
additional fee of one-half of the original sewer inspection fee shall be
charged and collected by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (O)   Should the owner call for an inspection, and then due to the
inspection by the Sewer Inspector, additional inspections are required for
additional work that had to be completed, the Sewer Inspector shall have the
power to assess a reinspection fee equal to the original inspection fee as
charged.



   (P)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, right-of-ways, and other public
property shall not be disturbed unless a road cut permit has been issued in
accordance with Ord. 1989-7, and if so disturbed, shall be restored in a
manner in compliance of Ord. 1989-7.



   (Q)   Whenever any work has been done contrary to the provisions in
this subchapter, the Sewer Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be
done, and any persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the
Sewer Inspector to proceed with the work.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995; Am. Ord. 2004-5, passed 3-1-2004)  Penalty,
see § 51.99



§ 51.38  STORM RUNOFF.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface runoff, roof run- off, sub-surface drain, cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to the sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet as approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works for the Town of Chandler, Indiana. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged into a storm sewer, a combined
sewer, or a natural outlet, but required the prior approval of both the Sewer
Inspector and the Superintendent of Public Works.



   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or waste to any
public sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F;



      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts
per million by weight of fat, oil or grease;



      (3)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 25 parts
per million by weight of soluble oils;



      (4)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (5)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



      (6)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid
or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the Municipal Sewage Works
System;



      (7)   Any waters having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than
9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing or damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the Municipal Sewage Works;



      (8)   Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment facility;



      (9)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
a character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials at the Sewage Disposal Facility or in any of the lift
stations within the system; and



      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance.



   (D)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Sewer Inspector, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that the
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Sewer
Inspector and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water tight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be
gas tight and water tight.



   (E)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.



   (F)   The admission into the public sewers of any water and wastes:



      (1)   Having a 5-day Biological Chemical Oxygen Demand greater
than 400 parts per million;



      (2)   Containing more than 450 parts per million by weight of
suspendable solids; or



      (3)   Containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in divisions (F)(1) and (2) above, having an
average daily sewage flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of
the Chandler Wastewater Facility, and shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Sewer Inspector. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Sewer
Inspector, the owner shall provide at his or her expense, the preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce the Biological Chemical Oxygen Demand to
400 parts per million and the suspended solids to 450 parts per million by
weight; or



         (b)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in divisions (F)(1)
and (2) above, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of the waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Sewer Inspector and the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management, and no construction of the facilities shall be commenced until
the approval is obtained in writing from both parties.



   (G)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



   (H)   (1)   It shall be required that the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes, and shall be accessible and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Sewer Inspector.



      (2)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his or
her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



   (I)   All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics
of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Sewage, and shall be determined at the
control manhole, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected.



   (J)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
as preventing any special agreement between the Town of Chandler, Indiana,
and any commercial or industrial or other concern whereby waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the Town of Chandler, Indiana, for
treatment, subject to payment thereof and the terms of the agreement being
reduced to written form.



   (K)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, by any
means of a sump pump, or any other device, any storm water, surface water,
area way drains, driveway drains, parking lot drains, ground water, roof
runoff water, sub-surface drainage, foundation drains, down spouts, footing
drains, or any other non polluted waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (L)   No person shall hereafter connect or reconnect any drains or
items as listed in division (K) above, which is in turn connected directly or
indirectly to the Chandler Sewer System.



   (M)   Each person shall install a clean out within 5 feet of the
building foundation. The clean out shall be constructed with at least 6 inch
sewer pipe, equal to or greater than SDR 35, which shall be capped, and will
be installed at ground level. Costs associated with the installation of the
clean out will be at the responsibility of the owner. Clean out installation
shall be inspected by the Sewer Inspector.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.39  DAMAGE TO SEWER WORKS.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the Municipal Sewage Works.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.40  MAINTAIN STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any structure within
the corporate limit of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, or under the
jurisdiction of the Chandler Sewer Department contrary to or in violation of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.41  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   All applicants, at the time that any sewer permit shall be issued,
shall receive and sign for a copy of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)



§ 51.42  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval and publication as provided for by law.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995)




PRIVATE WASTEWATER HAULERS




§ 51.70  LICENSING OF PRIVATE WASTEWATER HAULERS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, engaged in the business of
hauling wastewater, to discharge wastewater into the town wastewater
treatment system without first having procured a license therefor and only
then at locations designated by the town.



   (B)   The application for a private wastewater hauler’s license
shall be submitted to the Town Wastewater Utility Office, and subject to the
approval of the Chandler Director of Public Services, shall state number and
kind of vehicles used, state license plate number of each and other
identification as required by the Director.



   (C)   The annual fee for a private wastewater hauler’s license,
January 1st through December 31st or any part thereof, shall be $50 per
vehicle.



   (D)   It shall be required that certification of liability insurance
in the minimum amount of $50,000 to $100,000, and $25,000 property damage, be
filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer prior to the issuance of the required
license.



   (E)   It shall be required that the vehicles utilized by a private
wastewater hauler shall be adequate to safely transport such wastewater and
shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining
thereto. Such vehicles shall be subject to public works and safety
inspection, if required by the Director prior to the approval of the
application for license.



(Ord. 2011-3, passed 6-20-2011)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.71  LICENSED WASTEWATER HAULER.



   An entity licensed as a wastewater hauler by the town may discharge
compatible pollutants and those incompatible pollutants within the limits of
admissibility set out within the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
town, to the wastewater treatment plant at a time and place and in such
amounts as permitted by the town. Rates and charges for such discharges are
set out in § 51.72.



   (A)   The town shall require septic tank waste haulers to be
licensed as private wastewater haulers.



   (B)   Licensed private wastewater haulers may discharge loads only
at locations designated by the town. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the town.



   (C)   All wastewater haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the wastewater hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.



(Ord. 2011-3, passed 6-20-2011)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.72  FEES.



   Fees for discharge of wastewater by licensed private wastewater haulers
shall be as follows:



   (A)   $.03 per gallon discharged, based solely on the licensed
tank/truck maximum capacity, with a minimum discharge fee of $30.



   (B)   An additional fee of $50 for any discharge outside of Town
Wastewater Utility Office normal working hours, weekend and holidays.



   (C)   An additional minimum fee of $100 if the discharge site is
left in an unacceptable manner.



   (D)   Licensee shall be billed for any testing of questionable
discharge and for any remediation and repair and/or replacement of any
property damage, destruction or diminution caused by the discharge.



(Ord. 2011-3, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 51.73  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall become effective upon passage by the Town
Council, attested by the Clerk/Treasurer, and published as required by I.C.
§ 5-3-1-2.



(Ord. 2011-3, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person found to be in violation of §§ 51.35et seq. shall
be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a 30-day time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof,
with the exception of § 51.40. Any person found to be in violation of §
51.40 shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly
conduct and processed accordingly. Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for, including § 51.40, shall be
fined in an amount not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 plus actual
damages for each violation. Actual damages are to include any and all
engineering fees and any other associated costs incurred by the town to
remedy the violation. Each day in which any violation shall be continued
after the 30-day time period specified shall be continued to be a separate
offense.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 51.70et seq.
for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than
$1,000. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   In addition to any monetary penalty, the license of the
private wastewater hauler may be subject to suspension or termination for
violations of this code or other applicable law, rule, or regulations.



      (3)   All fines and penalties shall be payable to the Town
Clerk-Treasurer. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the Town “Violations Clerk”
and shall receive all payment of penalties under §§ 51.70et seq. for which
the violator desires to waive trial and admit the violation. The
Clerk/Treasurer of the town is hereby authorized to accept the payment of the
monetary penalties into the general fund of the town.



      (4)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not
waive trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town
Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing with the
appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 1995-5, passed 10-2-1995; Am. Ord. 2011-3, passed 6-20-2011)



CHAPTER 52: INDUSTRIAL USERS; PRETREATMENT PROGRAM



Section




Pretreatment Program




   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Prohibitions, conditions, and requirements



   52.03   Council authority




Storm Water System




   52.20   Title



   52.21   Definitions



   52.22   General provisions



   52.23   Prohibitions



   52.24   Suspension of MS4 access



   52.25   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   52.26   Monitoring of discharges



   52.27   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   52.28   Watercourse protection



   52.29   Notification of accidental discharges and spills



   52.30   Effective date



   52.31   Storm water user fees



 



   52.99   Penalty




PRETREATMENT PROGRAM




§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY (CA).  The Commissioner of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM).



   INDIRECT DISCHARGER.  A non domestic discharger introducing pollutants
into a POTW, regardless of whether the discharger is within the governmental
jurisdiction of the permittee.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  An indirect discharger.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, does ones of the following:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge use or disposal
methods;



      (2)   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation; or



      (3)   Prevents the use of the POTW's sewage sludge or its
sludge disposal method selected in compliance with the following statutory
provisions, regulations or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state
or local regulations:



         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §
1345);



         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C.
§§ 6901 et seq.) including:



            1.   Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and



            2.   The rules contained in any State Sludge
Management Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. §§
6941 et seq.).



         (c)   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.);
and



         (d)   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§
2601 et seq.).



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge proceeding through a POTW into waters of
the state in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an
industrial user, including applicable local limits.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   State pretreatment standards as established in 327
I.A.C. 5-18-8;



      (2)   Pretreatment standards for prohibited discharges, as
established in 327 I.A.C. 5-18-2; and



      (3)   National categorical pretreatment standards incorporated
by reference in 327 I.A.C. 5-18-10.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).  A treatment works owned by the
state or a municipality, except that it does not include pipes, sewers or
other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term
includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or compatible industrial wastes. The term
also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. POTW also means the municipality that
has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from the
treatment works.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SILL).



      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 327 I.A.C. 5-18-1;



      (2)   An industrial user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, non contact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater) to the POTW;



         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream that makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as a significant industrial user by
the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential to:



            1.   Adversely affect the POTW's operation;



            2.   Violate a pretreatment standard; or



            3.   Violate a requirement of 327 I.A.C. 5-19-3.



      (3)   The control authority may, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user or a POTW and in
accordance with 327 I.A.C. 5-19-3(6), determine that an industrial user is
not a significant industrial user if it does not meet division (2)(c) above.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 52.02  PROHIBITIONS, CONDITIONS, AND REQUIREMENTS.



   In accordance with 327 I.A.C. 5-19-7, the following prohibitions,
conditions, and requirements shall pertain to all users:



   (A)   A user of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to
national categorical standards or state, local, or any other national
pretreatment standard or requirement, shall not introduce any of the
following in the POTW:



      (1)   A pollutant from any source of non domestic wastewaters
that could pass through or cause interference with the operation or
performance of the POTW;



      (2)   A pollutant that could create a fire or explosion hazard
in the POTW, including waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than 140°F (60° C) using the test methods in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.21;



      (3)   A pollutant that could cause corrosive structural damage
to the POTW, including a discharge with pH lower than 5.0;



      (4)   A solid or viscous pollutant in an amount that could
cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the
operation of the POTW;



      (5)   A pollutant, including an oxygen demanding pollutant
(such as Biochemical Oxygen Demand) released in a discharge at a flow rate or
pollutant concentration that could cause interference in the POTW;



      (6)   Heat in an amount that could:



         (a)   Inhibit biological activity in the POTW and result
in interference or damage to the POTW; or



         (b)   Exceed 40°C or 104°F at the POTW treatment plant
unless the POTW approves alternate temperature limits.



      (7)   Petroleum, oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in an amount that could cause interference or
pass through;



      (8)   A pollutant that could result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



      (9)   A trucked or hauled pollutant, except:



         (a)   With the permission of the POTW; and



         (b)   When introduced to the POTW at a discharge
designated by the POTW.



      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing acid metallic pickling
wastes or concentrated plating solutions.



   (B)   A user of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to
national categorical standards or state, local, or any other national
pretreatment standard or requirement, shall not discharge in the POTW
substances exceeding the following limitations:



      (1)   Wastes having identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons;



      (2)   Wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 11.0 or
having any other property capable of causing damage or posing hazards to the
structures, equipment or personnel of the Sewage Works. If at any time the
above limits are found to have an adverse effect upon the wastewater
treatment plant of the collection system, the limits will be changed to come
more stringent and/or corrective action will be taken;



      (3)   Copper (Cu) in excess of 2.7 milligrams per liter;



      (4)   Zinc (Zn) in excess of 2.6 milligrams per liter;



      (5)   Chromium (Cr) (hexavalent) in excess of 2.0 milligrams
per liter;



      (6)   Chromium (Cr) (trivalent) in excess of 2.0 milligrams
per liter;



      (7)   Total chromium (Cr) shall not be in excess of 4.0
milligrams per liter;



      (8)   Nickel (Ni) in excess of 2.6 milligrams per liter;



      (9)   Lead (Pb) in excess of 0.4 milligrams per liter;



      (10)   Cadmium (Cd) in excess of 0.7 milligrams per liter;



      (11)   Silver (Ag) in excess of 0.01 milligrams per liter;



      (12)   Any cyanides, as total CN ion, in excess of 2.7
milligrams per liter;



      (13)   Tin (Sn) in excess of 1.0 milligram per liter;



      (14)   Any phenolic compound in excess of 1.0 milligram per
liter; and



      (15)   Limitations for the following substances shall be set
per EPA and IDEM requirements:



         (a)   Arsenic;



         (b)   Selenium; and



         (c)   Molybdenum.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-15-2004)



§ 52.03  COUNCIL AUTHORITY.



   The Council shall have the legal authority to:



   (A)   Exclude certain industrial wastes when conditions are such
that NPDES permit restrictions cannot be met;



   (B)   Impose surcharges for any compatible pollutant discharged in
excess of the limits set forth herein;



   (C)   Impose penalties for incompatible pollutants for any
incompatible pollutant discharged in excess of the limits set forth herein;



   (D)   Impose fees, if necessary, to offset the cost incurred to
administer the non-delegated pre-treatment program as established in the
NPDES permit;



   (E)   Impose fines in a range from $0 to $1,000 per day, per
violation in accordance with 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.8(f)(1)(v)(A);



   (F)   Enter the premises of any industrial user to conduct
inspections, surveillance, record review, and/or monitoring, as necessary to
determine compliance with this subchapter and, if applicable, any effective
industrial wastewater pretreatment permit;



   (G)   Accept or deny any new in increased discharges from any
indirect discharger;



   (H)   Immediately halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the
POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the
health or welfare of the public, the environment, and/or which threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW; and



   (I)   Require compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements by indirect dischargers.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-15-2004)




STORM WATER SYSTEM




§ 52.20  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as The Storm Water Illicit Discharge
Detection and Elimination Ordinance of the Town of Chandler, Indiana and be
referenced as indicated.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.21  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of clarification, the following definitions
are provided and become a part of and applicable to the purposes, policies,
regulations, provisions, specifications, and applications of this subchapter.
Terminology not specifically defined in this section will have the meaning as
otherwise defined in this title or the meaning commonly understood in the
technology or industry relevant to the use of the terminology, or will have
the most relevant meaning given in Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.  A discharge prohibited by this subchapter
which occurs by chance and without planning, or consideration prior to
occurrence.



      BOARD.  The Town of Chandler, Storm Water Management Board.



      CLEAN WATER ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.



      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to Indiana Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. The activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.



      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



      ILLEGAL CONNECTION.  Either of the following:



         (a)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to
enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether the drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or



         (b)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



      ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-storm water
discharge to the Town of Chandler separate storm sewer system, except as
exempted in § 52.23 of this subchapter.



      INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES Industrial
Permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. pt. 122.26 (b)(14).



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM
WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



      NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of storm water.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint
venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other
political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal
entity.



      POLLUTANT.  Anything that causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes: wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure: and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   POLLUTION.  The contamination or other alternation of any water's
physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature,
taste, color, turbidity, or odor of the waters or the discharge of any
liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any waters as
will or is likely to create a nuisance or render the waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or
other aquatic life.



      PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



      STATE WATERS.  Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies
of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or
forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined
and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership
or corporation.



      STORM WATER RUNOFF or STORM WATER.  Any surface flow, runoff,
and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from the precipitation.



      STRUCTURAL STORM WATER CONTROL.  A structural storm water
management facility or device that controls storm water runoff and changes
the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the
quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.



      TOWN OF CHANDLER SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.  Any facility
designed or used for collecting and/or conveying storm water, including but
not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, Town of Chandler
streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, structural storm water controls, ditches, swales, natural and
manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures which are:



         (a)   Owned or maintained by the Town of Chandler;



         (b)   Not a combined sewer; and



         (c)   Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.



      TOWN ENGINEER.  The Engineer of the Town of Chandler or an
outside Engineering Consultant.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.22  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose of this subchapter is to
provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Chandler through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the Town of
Chandler separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as
required by federal law. This subchapter establishes methods for controlling
the introduction of pollutants into the Town of Chandler separate storm sewer
system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this
subchapter are:



      (1)   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Town of
Chandler separate storm sewer system by any user;



      (2)   Prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to
the Town of Chandler separate storm sewer system;



      (3)   Control discharges to the Town of Chandler separate
storm sewer system of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than
storm water; and



      (4)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Applicability.  This subchapter shall apply to all water
entering the Town of Chandler separate storm sewer system generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the Town
Council or its designee.



   (C)   Compatibility with other regulations.  This subchapter is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this
subchapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision
of this subchapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other ordinances, rules or regulations, or other provisions of law, whichever
provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for
human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.



   (D)   Responsibility for administration.  The Town Council of
Chandler and/or the Environmental Department Manager shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.23  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.  No person shall throw,
drain, or otherwise discharge or cause to throw, drain, run, or allow to seep
or otherwise be discharged into the Town of Chandler MS4 any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
illicit discharge to the Town of Chandler MS4 is prohibited. The following
are exempt from the prohibition provision above:



      (1)   Water line flushing performed by a government agency,
other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater de-watering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not
containing pollutants;



      (2)   Dye testing, only when written notification is given to
the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager prior to the time of the
test;



      (3)   Discharges or flows from fire fighting;



      (4)   Other discharges as specified in writing by the Storm
Water Board or its designee as being necessary to protect public health and
safety; provided, however, if the SW Board or its designee finds that any
exemptions previously granted are causing adverse impacts to water quality,
then the Storm Water Board or its designee shall have the authority to
rescind the exemption on a case-by-case basis and regulate the discharge
under the provisions of this subchapter; and



      (5)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state
and federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is
in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted by the Town of Chandler for any discharge to the Town of
Chandler MS4.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.  The construction,
connection, use maintenance or continued existence of any illicit connection
to the Town of Chandler MS4 is prohibited.



      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (2)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
subchapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the Town of
Chandler MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.



      (3)   Improper connections in violation of this division must
be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the sanitary sewer system
upon directive of the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager or the
Town of Chandler Wastewater Department.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.24  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.



      (1)   The Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager may,
without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when the
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment,
or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or state waters or
waters of the United States.



      (2)   If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager
may take the steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or state waters or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to
persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to detection of illicit discharge.



      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
subchapter may have his or her MS4 access terminated if the termination would
abate or reduce an illicit discharge.



      (2)   The Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager will
notify a violator of the proposed termination of it MS4 access.



      (3)   The violator may petition the Storm Water Board for
reconsideration and a hearing.



      (4)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the Board or designee.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.25  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity
NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of the
permit.



   (B)   Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Board or its designee prior to the allowing of discharges
to the Town of Chandler MS4.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.26  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to all facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.  The Town of Chandler Storm Water
Department Manager shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this section as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this subchapter.



      (1)   If a discharger has, security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the
Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the Town of Chandler
Storm Water Department Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that
must be kept under conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water,
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal
law.



      (3)   The Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager
shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility the devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department
Manager or its designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge.



      (4)   The Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager has
the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow
and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the owner at the written or oral request of the Town of Chandler
Storm Water Department Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing the access shall be borne by the owner.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town of Chandler
Storm Water Department Manager access to a permitted facility is a violation
of a storm water discharge permit and of this subchapter. A person who is the
operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies
the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility
for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
subchapter.



      (7)   If the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager
has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is
discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the Storm Water Department Manager may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.27  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   (A)   The Storm Water Board or its designee will adopt requirements
identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm
water, the storm drain system or waters of the United States.



   (B)   The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and non-structural BMP's. Further, any person responsible for a
property premise, which is, or may be, the source of illicit discharge, may
be required to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System.



   (C)   Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMP's shall be part of a storm water
pollution prevention plan (SWP3) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.28  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or the
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that the structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.29  NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES AND SPILLS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
private citizen or any person responsible for a facility or operation, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into
storm water, the Town of Chandler MS4, state waters, or waters of the United
States, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of
hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later
than the next business day of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of
the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the Town of Chandler Storm Water
Department Manager within 3 business days of the phone or in person notice.
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of the establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. The records shall be retained for at least 3 years.



   (B)   In either case, the person shall also take immediate steps to
ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.30  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage by the Town Council of the Town of Chandler, and completion of any
other legal requirements, all in the manner as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



§ 52.31  STORM WATER USER FEES.



   (A)   Setting of Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU). The Equivalent
Residential Unit (ERU) for the Town of Chandler is hereby determined to be
and established as 3,500 square feet.



   (B)   Establishment of base rate.  The storm water utility base
rate shall be and the same is hereby established as $4 each calendar month
for each ERU.



   (C)   Late fee penalty.  All storm water user’s fees not paid
when due shall be assessed a late payment penalty of 10% of the fee then due.



   (D)   Collection of storm water user’s fee.  Storm water user’s
fees shall be billed with the Town of Chandler Water and Wastewater Utility
billings.



   (E)   Due date of storm water user’s fees.  Storm water user’s
fees shall be due at the same time as Town of Chandler water and wastewater
fees.



   (F)   Prioritization of partial utility payments.  Whenever the
Town of Chandler receives a payment totaling less than the total bill for the
Town of Chandler Utility Services, the Clerk-Treasurer shall allocate the
payment to the discharge of the bill in the following order of priority:



      (1)   First to delinquent storm water user’s fees and
penalties;



      (2)   Next to current storm water user’s fees;



      (3)   Next to delinquent water user’s fees and penalties;



      (4)   Next to delinquent waste water user’s fees and
penalties; and



      (5)   Last to current waste water user’s fees.



   (G)   Storm water user’s fee lien.  The storm water user’s fees
established hereunder shall constitute a lien upon the real property within
the Town of Chandler to which the fees are applied. The Town of Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer is hereby directed to certify Warrick County Auditor,
annually, the delinquent storm water user’s fees and penalties for each
parcel of property for which a delinquent storm water user’s fee exists.
The Warrick County Auditor shall include the delinquent fees and penalties
with the next property tax billing by the County of Warrick and shall
disburse fees and penalties so collected to the Town of Chandler.



   (H)   Effective date.  This section shall be effective January 1,
2005.



(Ord. 2004-9, passed 11-15-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Violations.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate
any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of §§ 52.20et
seq. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
§§ 52.20et seq., may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this
division or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.



   (C)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the Town of Chandler Storm
Water Department Manager finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of §§ 52.20et seq., the Town of Chandler Storm
Water Department Manager shall order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. However, in the event that an emergency
exists and immediate action is required, the Town of Chandler may abate or
remedy the emergency and the notice may be given after the remediation has
already occurred. In the event of such an emergency, the Town of Chandler
Storm Water Department Manager shall enter upon the subject property and is
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above. The notice of violation shall contain:



      (1)   The name and addresses of the owner and violator;



      (2)   The address when available or a description of the
building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring/has
occurred;



      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to
bring the illegal activity into compliance with §§ 52.20et seq. and a time
schedule for the completion of the remedial action, which may include
designating that the violation requires immediate action, i.e. 24 hours or
less and/or a description of the remedial measures that were necessary to
bring the illegal activity into compliance with §§ 52.20et seq. that were
already taken by the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager; and



      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or
may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed. The notice may require without limitation:



         (a)   The performance of monitoring analyses, and
reporting;



         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;



         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;



         (d)   The abatement or remediation of storm water
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



         (f)   The implementation of pollution prevention
practices.



   (D)   Appeal of notice of violation.  Any person receiving a notice
of violation may appeal the determination of the Town of Chandler Storm Water
Department Manager to the Storm Water Board. The notice of appeal must be
received by the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager 15 days from
the date of the notice of violation. The hearing on the appeal before the
Storm Water Board shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of
the notice of appeal. The decision of the Storm Water Board shall be final.



   (E)   Enforcement measures after appeal.  If the violation has not
been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of
violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the Board's
ruling upholding the decision of the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department
Manager, then the Town of Chandler Storm Water Department Manager shall enter
upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.



   (F)   Cost of abatement of the violation.  Within 30 days after the
abatement of the violation, the owner of the property and violator will be
billed for the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
notification will include copies of all invoices paid by the Town of
Chandler, and a log of all hours spent by Town of Chandler personnel. If the
amount due is not paid within 30 days of receipt of the bill, the Town of
Chandler may certify to the County Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any
additional administrative costs incurred in the certification and the amounts
shall be collected as delinquent taxes are collected pursuant to I.C.
36-1-6-2.



   (G)   Violations deemed a public nuisance.  In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided in this division of this
chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of
the provisions of §§ 52.20et seq. is deemed a threat to public health,
safety, and welfare, and is declared a nuisance, and may be summarily abated
or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance may be taken.



   (H)   Prosecution in court.  Any person that has violated or
continues to violate §§ 52.20et seq. and has received notice of the
violation shall be subject to a fine of up to $2,500 per violation per day,
at the discretion of the Town of Chandler Storm Water Board. In the event the
fine is not paid forthwith, the ordinance violation may be filed in court of
proper proof, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be
responsible for the fine imposed by the Town of Chandler Storm Water
Management Board, court costs, attorney's fees, and other expenses associated
with enforcement of §§ 52.20et seq., including, but not limited to, all
sampling and monitoring expenses. Each day a violation continues after the
original notification thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense under this
division. All fines collected by the Town of Chandler under this division
shall be deposited in the Storm Water Management Fund.



   (I)   Remedies not exclusive.  The remedies listed in §§ 52.20et
seq. are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Storm
Water Board or its designee to seek cumulative remedies.



(Ord. 2006-5, passed 3-6-2005)



CHAPTER 53:  STORM WATER RUNOFF; CONSTRUCTION SITES



Section




General Provisions




   53.001   Legislative findings and policy purpose



   53.002   Definitions



   53.003   Construction plan requirements



   53.004   Applicability



   53.005   Requirements for owners



   53.006   Effective date



   53.007   Gasoline outlets and refueling areas




Planning Requirements




   53.020   Land disturbance criteria; regulation



   53.021   Construction plan submittal, review, and approval



   53.022   Notice of intent (NOI) letter requirements



   53.023   Requirements for a major project site



   53.024   Major project site; construction plan



   53.025   Major project site; planning and application



   53.026   Residential project site; planning and application



   53.027   Minor project site; planning and application



   53.028   Individual lots; planning and application requirements



   53.029   Post-construction storm water pollution prevention plan
requirements



   53.030   Buffer requirements



   53.031   Approved stormwater best management practices



   53.032   BMP design requirements and criteria



   53.033   Coordination with regional BMPs



   53.034   Coordination with master plans and watershed studies



   53.035   Storm water quality management plan permit closure



   53.036   As-built requirements



   53.037   Long-term operation and maintenance




Administration and Enforcement




   53.045   Standard reference manuals and guidance documents



   53.046   Permit fees



   53.047   Powers of inspection and enforcement



   53.048   MS4 personnel qualifications, certifications, and education



   53.049   Public input



   53.050   Measurable program goals



   53.051   Project termination



   53.052   Compliance with all pertinent ordinances



   53.053   Storm Water Management Board; powers



   53.054   Inter-department and co-regulatory agreements




Department of Storm Water Management




   53.070   Legislative findings and utility



   53.071   Creation of Storm Water Utility



   53.072   Definitions



   53.073   Funding



   53.074   Storm Water Fund



   53.075   Operating budget



   53.076   Fee established



   53.077   Equivalent residential unit



   53.078   Property classification for user’s fee



   53.079   Base rate



   53.080   Adjustments to user’s fee



   53.081   Property owner to pay charges



   53.082   Billing procedures; penalties for late payment



   53.083   Appeals of fees



   53.084   Creation of special taxing district



   53.085   Payment of penalties



 



   53.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 53.001  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND POLICY PURPOSE.



   (A)   Legislative findings and policy.



      (1)   The Town Council of the Town of Chandler, Indiana,
hereinafter referred to as the Town Council, finds, determines, and declares
that the network of natural surface watercourses, natural streams, and
constructed drains in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, provides for the
collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, discharge, and disposal of storm
water, and thereby benefits and serves all property within the various
watersheds contributing storm water to the storm water drainage network.



      (2)   The benefits include, but are not limited to, the
provision of adequate collection, conveyance, detention, retention,
treatment, and release of storm water, the reduction of hazards to life and
property resulting from storm water runoff, the improvements in general
health, safety, and welfare through reduction of undesirable storm water
condition, and the improvements to the quality of storm water arriving
through the storm water drainage network to the receiving waters of the state
and navigable water of the United States.



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of this subchapter is:



      (1)   To enable the Town of Chandler, Indiana, to comply with
federal and state laws and regulations applicable to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting requirements for storm water
discharges from constructions sites;



      (2)   To prevent or eliminate the discharge of contaminated
storm water runoff from construction sites into storm water conveyances owned
or operated by the Town of Chandler, or into waters of the state, and waters
of the United States;



      (3)   To establish a procedure that requires submittal,
review, and approval of construction plans in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 15-5
before the commencement of construction activities at project sites where
land disturbance will be to equal or greater than 1 acre;



      (4)   To establish a procedure that offers the Warrick County
Soil and Water Conservation District an opportunity to make technical
comments and recommendations on individual plans for project sites regulated
by this subchapter;



      (5)   To establish a process that ensures the implementation
of appropriate control measures and management practices at construction
sites through guidance, assistance, inspection, evaluation, plan
modification, enforcement, and penalty when necessary to ensure compliance
with regulations under this subchapter;



      (6)   To require regular and appropriate training and
certification for persons involved in reviewing plans, inspecting project
sites, evaluating control measures, making corrective recommendations,
directing work, supervising personnel, or otherwise assuming a technical,
professional, managerial, or administrative role in the Town of Chandler's
construction site runoff control program;



      (7)   To establish procedures and a tracking system for the
receipt, consideration, documentation, and response by appropriate staff to
information, comments, and inquires from the public regarding construction
sites and storm water quantity and quality issues; and



      (8)   To establish measurable goals for attainment of
applicable code requirements.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.002  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   For the purposes of clarification, the following
definitions are provided and become a part of and applicable to the purposes,
policies, regulations, requirements, provisions, specifications, and
applications of §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et
seq. of this chapter.



      (2)   In some instances, a definition incorporated herein
establishes policy within the definition; as the establishment of policy
shall have the same effect as if the policy were established in another
section of  §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq.
of this chapter.



      (3)   The definitions established in this section shall be the
effective definitions for certain terminology used within this chapter, and
within documents, activities, and exchanges of dialogue appended to or
associated with §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et
seq. of this chapter.



      (4)   When a definition given in this section or §§ 53.001et
seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter conflicts or
varies with a definition given in a document other than this section or §§
53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter,
the definition given in this section or chapter will prevail as the operative
definition relative to the requirements of and regulation under §§ 53.001et
seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter.



      (5)   Terminology not specifically defined in this section or
§§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this
chapter will have the meaning as otherwise defined in this title or the
meaning commonly understood in the technology or industry relevant to the use
of the terminology, or will have the most relevant meaning given in Webster's
Collegiate Dictionary.



   (B)   For the purpose of §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and
§§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      AGRICULTURAL LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Tillage, planting,
cultivation, or harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or
nursery vegetative crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and
establishment, and the construction of agricultural conservation practices,
and the installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tiles. For the
purposes of §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of
this chapter, the term does not include land disturbing activities for the
construction of agricultural-related facilities such as barns, buildings to
house livestock, roads associated with infrastructure, other infrastructure,
agricultural waste lagoons and facilities that process residential, workshop,
or human wastes, and lakes, ponds, wetlands, and other infrastructure.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



      BOARD.  The Town of Chandler Storm Water Management Board.



      CERTIFIED TECHNICIAN.  A qualified professional or trained
individual who has achieved state accreditation through course work and
continuing education specifically prescribed, provided, or approved by IDEM
or IDNR/DSC for the purpose of achieving state certification as a technician
qualified to select or supervise the selection of, install or supervise the
installation of, manage, inspect, evaluate, and report on ECMs and BMPs
related to storm water quantity, quality, and pollution fate.



      COMMISSIONER.  The Chief Executive Officer of IDEM.



      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to Indiana Rule 5,
327 I.A.C. 15-5, or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance. The activities include
but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and
demolition. The term CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY does not include routine ditch or
road maintenance or minor landscaping projects.



      CONSTRUCTION PLAN.  An ordered collection of drawings,
narratives, data, and documents assembled for review, approval,
authorization, and establishment of guidelines for the initiation,
management, and completion of construction activities at a project site
regulated by §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq.
of this chapter. A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) is a part of
the CONSTRUCTION PLAN.



      CONSTRUCTION PROJECT or PROJECT. An organized effort to start,
conduct, manage, and complete a single construction activity, or a series of
construction activities.



      CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SITE.  The physical location or locations
where a construction project is being accomplished, or the physical or legal
boundaries within which a construction activity or a series of construction
activities is planned to be or is being accomplished.



      CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS.  A stabilized stone surface at all
points of construction related ingress to and egress from an approved
reference manual, and maintained throughout the period of land disturbing
activities for the purpose of capturing and detaining sediment carried by
tires, tracks, or other surface contact components of vehicles, earthmoving
equipment, or material and personnel transport conveyances.



      CONSTRUCTION SITE OPERATOR.  The same meaning as PROJECT SITE
OPERATOR.



      CONTRACTOR or SUBCONTRACTOR.  An individual or company hired by
the project site owner or by an individual lot owner or individual lot
operator to perform services on or connected to the project site or
individual lot.



      DEPARTMENT or IDEM.  The Indiana Department of Environmental
Management.



      DEVELOPER.  A project site owner or person financially
responsible for construction activity; or an owner of property who sells,
leases, or offers for sale or lease, any lots in a subdivision or larger
common plan of development or sale.



      DNR-DSC.  The same as IDNR/DSC which means the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, Division of Soil Conservation.



      DRAIN.  An open channel or a pipe, or combination thereof,
implemented to gather, convey, store, treat, and release storm water runoff.



      ECM or EROSION CONTROL MEASURE. An activity, a material
application, or a structure that prevents, arrests, or lessens the wearing
away of soil, sediment, or rock by water, wind, or ice.



      EPA.  The federal Environmental Protection Administration.



      EROSION.  The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock
fragments by water, wind, or ice.



      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURE.  An appropriate component
or components of an erosion and sediment control plan or system.



      EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SYSTEM.  The use of appropriate
control measures to prevent or minimize the wearing away of soil, sediment,
and rock fragments by water, wind, or ice, and to intercept detached or
suspended particles to prevent their discharge from or within a project site.



      FINAL STABILIZATION.  The establishment of permanent vegetative
cover or the application of a permanent, non-erosive material to areas where
all land disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land
disturbing activities are planned under the current permit.



      GRADING.  The cutting and filling of the land surface to a
desired slope or elevation.



      IDEM.  The Indiana Department of Environmental Management, the
NPDES permitting authority for the State of Indiana.



      IDNR.  The Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



      IDNR/DSC.  The Division of Soil Conservation of IDNR, which
through a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with IDEM, reviews plans, makes site
inspections, evaluates ECMs and BMPs, and determines compliance with 327
I.A.C. 15-5 (Rule 5).



      IMPERVIOUS AREA.  The number of square feet of hard surfaced
areas, including compressed rock or gravel, which either prevent or retard
the entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions
as undisturbed property, and/or causes water to run off the surface in
greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under
natural conditions as undisturbed property, including, but not limited to,
roofs, roof extensions, driveways, pavement, parking lots and athletic courts.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE or IMPERVIOUS LAND SURFACE.  A surface layer
of application, like pavement or rooftops that prevents the infiltration of
storm water into the soil.



      INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT.  A single parcel of land within a
multi-parcel development.



      INDIVIDUAL LOT OPERATOR.  A contractor or subcontractor working
on an individual building lot.



      INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER.  A person who has financial control of
construction activities for an individual lot.



      LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.  Any manmade change of the land
surface, including removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying
soil, excavating, filling, transporting, and grading.



      LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE.  A plan undertaken by
a developer, project site owner, or group of developers or project site
owners, to offer lots for sale or lease where land is contiguous or the land
development is known, planned, designated, purchased, or advertised as a
common unit or by a common name and is presumed to be offered for sale or
lease as part of a larger common plan. The term includes phased or other
construction activity by a single unit for the unit's own use.



      LEGALLY BINDING AGREEMENT.  A written, enforceable legal
document used to describe responsibilities between joint municipal
executives, MS4 entities, Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager, or other entities providing, receiving, or sharing services with
regard to this chapter.



      MEASURABLE STORM EVENT.  A precipitation event that results in a
total measured accumulation of precipitation equal to or greater than ½ inch
of rainfall.



      MEP or MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE.  The greatest degree of fair,
economic, practical, successful, and appropriate control and treatment that
reasonably can be expected to result from the diligent application of control
measures, management practices, requirements, and regulations implemented to
cause the adequate effects intended by the control measures, management
practices, requirements, and regulations.



      MS4 or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.  A system of storm
water conveyances either owned or operated by a governmental agency, Town of
Chandler MS4, that EPA or IDEM has designated as responsible to eliminate or
minimize pollutant loadings of the storm water entering waters of the state,
and water of the United States.



      MS4 AREA.  A land area comprising 1 or more places that receives
coverage under 1 NPDES storm water permit regulated by 327 I.A.C. 15-13 or
327 I.A.C. 5-4-6(a)(4) and 327 I.A.C. 5-4-6(a)(5).



      MS4 CONVEYANCE.  A waterway or drain owned or operated by an MS4
entity.



      MS4 OPERATOR.  The person responsible for development,
implementation, or enforcement of the Minimum Control Measures (MCMs) for a
designated MS4 area regulated under 327 I.A.C. 15-13.



      MUTUAL DRAIN.  A channel, pipe, or other storm water conveyance
that exists on 2 or more properties owned by 2 or more entities and
constructed or otherwise placed with the consent of the owning entities.



      NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY LETTER or NOD LETTER.  A written
notification from the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager indicating to the project site owner that the construction plan for a
project site has been reviewed and has been found to have deficiencies by the
Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Management Board or Storm Water
Department Manager.



      NOTICE OF INTENT LETTER or NOI LETTER.  A written notification
from the project site owner sent to the Director of IDEM and to the Town of
Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager at least 48 hours prior
to initiating construction activities at the project site.



      NOTICE OF PLAN APPROVAL or NPA. A notification from the Town of
Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager to the project site owner
that the construction plan for a project site has been reviewed and approved
by the Board. The project site owner must insert the NPA with the NOI sent to
the Director of IDEM at least 48 hours prior to initiating construction
activities at the project site.



      NOTICE OF TERMINATION LETTER or NOT LETTER.  A written
notification from the project site owner to the Director of IDEM and to the
Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager that the
construction activities for a project site has been terminated and has met
the conditions of this chapter.



      NPDES or THE NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE AND ELIMINATION
SYSTEM.  A program administered by the EPA to reduce or eliminate the
pollutant loadings into public waters.



      NRCS.  The Natural Resource Conservation Service of United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA).



      PEAK DISCHARGE.  The maximum rate of flow from a point of storm
water discharge during or immediately following a storm event, usually in
reference to a specific return period storm or design storm.



      PERMANENT STABILIZATION.  The establishment, at a uniform
minimum of 70% across the disturbed areas, of vegetative cover or permanent
non-erosive material that ensures the resistance of the underlying soil to
erosion, sliding, or other movement.



      PHASING OF CONSTRUCTION.  Sequential development of smaller
portions of a large project site, stabilizing each portion before initiating
land disturbing activities on the next portion, to minimize exposure of land
to erosion.



      PROJECT SITE.  The entire area on which construction activity
will be performed.



      PROJECT SITE OWNER.  The person or entity required to submit an
NOI under 327 I.A.C. 15-5 (Rule 5), and includes the following entities: A
developer, or a person who has financial and operational control of
construction activities, project plans and specifications, and the ability to
modify or cause modification of project plans and specifications, and the
ability to modify or cause modification of project plans and specifications
for a project site.



      RULE 5.  327 I.A.C. 15-5, the Indiana Administrative Rule, as
adopted in 2003, requiring NPDES permits for construction activities
disturbing 1 acre or greater of land, and to follow specific planning and
management requirements regarding storm water quality and quantity.



      RULE 13.  327 I.A.C. 15-13, the Indiana Administrative Rule
implementing the NPDES Phase II unfounded federal mandates requiring
municipalities to implement specific minimum control measures (MCMs)
regarding storm water runoff from land use activities in urbanized areas.



      RUNOFF.  An accumulation of storm water flow that is moving
across the surface of the earth as sheet flow or concentrated flow in natural
surface watercourses, drains, or waterways.



      SEDIMENT.  Solid material, both organic and mineral, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.



      SEDIMENTATION.  The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated
sediment carried by storm water runoff.



      SOIL.  The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the
surface of the earth that serves as the natural medium of vegetative growth.



      SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT or SWCD.  A political
subdivision established under I.C. 14-32.



      STATE WATERS.  Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies
of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or
forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined
and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership
or corporation.



      STORM WATER DEPARTMENT MANAGER.  The Storm Water Department
responsible person of the Town of Chandler or his or her designee.



      STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN or SWP3.  A document which
describes the Best Management Practices (BMPs) and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to the MS4 or state waters or waters of the United States to the
maximum extent practicable.



      STORM WATER QUALITY MEASURE.  A practice or combination of
practices to control or minimize pollutants associated with storm water
runoff.



      STORM WATER RUNOFF or STORM WATER.  Any surface flow, runoff,
and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from the precipitation.



      STRIP DEVELOPMENT.  A multi-lot project where building lots
front on an existing road.



      STRUCTURAL STORM WATER CONTROL.  A structural storm water
management facility or device that controls storm water runoff and changes
the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the
quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.



      TEMPORARY STABILIZATION.  The covering of soil to ensure its
resistance to erosion, sliding, or other movement. The term includes
vegetative cover, anchored mulch, or other non-erosive materials applied at a
uniform minimum density of 70% across the disturbed areas of a project site.



      TOWN OF CHANDLER ENGINEER.  The Engineer of the Town of
Chandler, or engineering contractor hired by the Town of Chandler or his or
her designee.



      TOWN OF CHANDLER MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4. 
Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying storm water,
including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, Town
of Chandler streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, structural storm water controls, ditches, swales,
natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures which is:



         (a)   Owned or maintained by the Town of Chandler;



         (b)   Not a combined sewer; and



         (c)   Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.



      TRACKING.  The movement and re-depositing of dirt, mud,
aggregate, sediment, or other storm water pollutants from a project site by
the actions of wheels, tires, skids, tracks, or other surface contact
components of cars, trucks, and heavy equipment, or material and personnel
transport conveyances.



      TRAINED INDIVIDUAL.  A person who in accordance with a
definition given by IDEM in 327 I.A.C. 15-5 (Rule 5) is sufficiently trained
and experienced in the principles of storm water quality, including erosion
and sediment control, as may be demonstrated by state registration,
professional certification, experience or completion of course work that
enable the individual to make judgments regarding storm water control or
treatment and monitoring.



      UNDISTURBED PROPERTY.  Real property, which has not been altered
from its natural state by dredging, filling, removal of trees and vegetation
or other activities, which have disturbed or altered the topography or soils
on the property.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.003  CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Construction plan.  A construction plan shall be submitted in
quadruplicate to the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager for any new construction activity that results in a land disturbance
equal to or greater than 1 acre located within the Town of Chandler MS4,
along with the permit fee required under § 53.076.



   (B)   Subject construction site defined as a major project site. 
Any new construction activity, which is not a large individual residential
site as defined in this section, which shall result in land disturbance equal
to or greater than 1 acre shall be defined as a major project site. A major
project site shall require an approved construction plan, and shall be
initiated, managed, and terminated in accordance with an approved
construction plan and with the requirements of and regulations under this
chapter.



   (C)   Route.  The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager will determine the appropriate route of review for a
construction plan.



   (D)   Approval required. Plan approval required before construction
activity initiated at a major project site. A construction plan for a major
project site shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved and that a notice of
intent (NOI) letter or application shall be sent to the Director of the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) before construction
activity commences at a major project site.



   (E)   Construction plan not required.



      (1)   Subject construction site defined as a large individual
residential project site.  Any new construction activity which establishes a
single-family, residential dwelling that is not a part of a larger common
plan of development or sale, and the land disturbance at the project site
will not equal or exceed 1 acre, shall be defined as a large individual
residential project site. Although a construction plan is not required, a
large individual residential project site shall be initiated, managed, and
terminated in accordance with specific requirements of and regulations under
this chapter.



      (2)   Subject construction site defined as a minor project
site.  Any new construction activity which shall result in land disturbance
of less than 1 acre, and the construction activity is a part of a larger
common plan of development or sale that will disturb land equal to or greater
than 1 acre shall be defined as a minor project site. Although a construction
plan is not required, a minor project site shall be initiated, managed, and
terminated in accordance with specific provisions of a construction plan
approved for the larger common development and with the requirements of and
regulations under this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.004  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Requirements apply.  The requirements under this chapter
apply to all persons who do not obtain an individual NPDES permit under 327
I.A.C. 15-2-6, meet the general permit rule applicability requirements under
327 I.A.C. 15-2-3, and are involved in construction activity, except
operations that result in the land disturbance of less than 1 acre of total
land area as determined under § 53.003 of this chapter, and are not part of
a larger common plan of development or sale.



   (B)   Requirements do not apply.  The requirements under this
chapter do not apply to persons who are involved in agricultural land
disturbing activities, or forest harvesting activities.



   (C)   Agricultural conservation practices. Practices that are
constructed on agricultural land for the purposes of controlling soil erosion
and sedimentation, including grass waterways, sediment basins, terraces, and
grade stabilization structures. ACPs must be planned, installed, and managed
in accordance with applicable guidance and specifications from the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS), Purdue University Agricultural Extension Program, or
comparable Indiana governmental sources.



   (D)   Requirements. The requirements under this chapter do not apply
to the following activities, provided other applicable permits contain
provisions requiring immediate implementation of soil erosion control
measures:



      (1)   329 I.A.C. 10, landfills issued a certificate of
closure, or municipal solid waste landfills accepting waste pursuant to a
permit issued by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management
containing equivalent storm water requirements, including the expansion of
landfill boundaries and construction of new cells either within or outside
the original solid waste permit boundary; and



      (2)   I.C. 14-34 permitted coal mining activities.



   (E)   General jurisdictional boundary.



      (1)   The regulations of this chapter apply to all
construction sites and construction activities on all lands within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the Town of Chandler MS4 District unless
exempted from this chapter.



      (2)   The regulations of this chapter may be expanded into
another municipal jurisdiction, or MS4 area, upon the execution of a legally
binding agreement between the Town of Chandler, Indiana, and another
municipal executive authority, legislative authority, or designated MS4
entity.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.005  REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERS.



   (A)   Major project site.



      (1)   Responsibilities.  For a major project site regulated
under this chapter, the project site owner has the following responsibilities:



         (a)   To complete a sufficient notice of intent letter
(NOI);



         (b)   To ensure that a sufficient construction plan is
completed and submitted in accordance with §§ 53.023 or 53.024 whichever is
applicable, of this chapter;



         (c)   To ensure compliance with this chapter during the
implementation of the approved construction plan for the project site, and
during subsequent construction activities at the project site;



         (d)   To ensure that all persons engaging in
construction activities on a permitted project site comply with the
applicable requirements of this chapter and the approved construction plan;
and



         (e)   To notify the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management and the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager with a sufficient notice of termination letter (NOT).



      (2)   Individual lot where disturbance is 1 acre or more. For
an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be 1 acre or more and
the lot lies within a major project site regulated under this chapter and
permitted in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 15-5, the individual lot owner must:



         (a)   Complete and submit his or her own NOI in
accordance with the applicable requirements of this chapter; and



         (b)   Ensure that a sufficient construction plan is
completed and submitted in accordance with § 53.023 of this chapter.



   (B)   Minor project site.  For an individual lot where the land
disturbance is less than 1 acre, and the lot lies within a major project site
regulated under this chapter and permitted in accordance with 327 I.A.C.
15-5, the individual lot owner must comply with the following:



      (1)   The provisions and requirements of the approved
construction plan developed by the project site owner; and



      (2)   Section 53.027 of this chapter.



   (C)   Large individual residential project.  For a large individual
residential project site, the project site owner must comply with §
53.025(C)(1) through (C)(5), § 53.025(C)(10) through (C)(17), and §
53.025(C)(19) and (C)(20) and with § 53.026 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.006  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage by the Chandler Town Council and completion of any other legal
requirements, all in the manner as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.007  GASOLINE OUTLETS AND REFUELING AREAS.



   Gasoline outlets and refueling areas must install appropriate practices
to reduce lead, copper, zinc, and hydrocarbons in storm water runoff. These
requirements will apply to all new facilities and existing facilities that
replace their tanks.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-18)




PLANNING REQUIREMENTS




§ 53.020  LAND DISTURBANCE CRITERIA; REGULATION.



   (A)   For off-site construction activities that provide services
such as road extensions, sewers, water, and other utilities to a permitted
site, the off-site activity areas must be considered a part of the permitted
project site when the activity is under the control of the project site owner.



   (B)   Project sites are regulated by §§ 53.001 et seq., §§
53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter in accordance with the
following criteria of land disturbance calculations:



      (1)   A determination of the area of land disturbance on
single-family residential project sites shall be calculated by adding the
total area of land disturbance for improvements, such as roads, utilities, or
common areas, and the expected total disturbance on each individual lot, as
determined by the following criteria:



         (a)   For a single-family project site where the lots
are ½ acre or more, a minimum of ½ acre of land disturbance or the actual
area to be disturbed, whichever is greater, must be used as the expected lot
disturbance.



         (b)   For a single-family, residential project site
where the lots are less than ½ acre in size, the total lot must be
calculated as being disturbed.



      (2)   Determination of the area of land disturbance on all
other types of project sites, such as multi-family residential, industrial,
and commercial project sites, shall be calculated by adding the total area of
land disturbance for improvements, such as roads, utilities, or common areas,
and the expected total disturbance on each individual lot, as determined by
the following criteria:



         (a)   Where lots are 1 acre or greater in size, a
minimum of 1 acre of land disturbance or the actual area to be disturbed,
whichever is greater must be calculated as the expected lot disturbance; and



         (b)   Where lots are less than 1 acre in size, the total
lot must be calculated as being disturbed.



      (3)   For purposes of this subchapter, strip developments:



         (a)   Are considered as 1 project site; and



         (b)   Must comply with this subchapter, unless the total
combined disturbance on all individual lots is less than 1 acre and is not of
a larger common plan of development or sale.



   (C)   Large individual residential project sites are regulated by
this subchapter in accordance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Submittal of a notice of intent, or submittal of a
construction plan, is not required for construction activities associated
with a single-family residential dwelling disturbing less than 5 acres, when
the dwelling and the project site are not a part of a larger common plan of
development or sale; and providing the project site owner complies with the
provisions in divisions § 53.025(C)(1) through (C)(5), § 53.025(C)(10)
through (C)(17), § 53.025(C)(19) and (C)(20) and with § 53.026 of this
subchapter throughout construction activities and until the areas of activity
are finally or permanently stabilized in accordance with this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.021  CONSTRUCTION PLAN SUBMITTAL, REVIEW, AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Requirement for the submittal of a compliant construction
plan.  The owner of a major project site must submit, or cause to be
submitted, a construction plan for a major project subject to regulation by
this subchapter.



   (B)   Submittal in quadruplicate.  The construction plan must
contain the elements, requirements, provisions, and other content as
enumerated for the project site in accordance with this subchapter, and must
be submitted in quadruplicate, 4 separate and identical copies, to the Town
of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager.



   (C)   Records.  The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department will record the time and date of each construction plan submittal
on each copy; and will manage the 4 copies of each project's construction
plan in accordance with the following procedure:



      (1)   One copy will be forwarded to the Storm Water Management
Board as directed by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager.



      (2)   One copy will be held in a separate file for field use
by the Town of Chandler MS4 Department Manager and any other representatives
of the Town of Chandler Storm Water Management Board, Engineer or other
elected or appointed personnel of the Town of Chandler.



      (3)   One copy will be returned to the project site owner with
the recorded time and date of submittal.



      (4)   One copy will be held in a separate file to facilitate
an opportunity for the Warrick County SWCD to make technical comments and
recommendations regarding the construction plan.



      (5)   Upon the request of an authorized SWCD representative,
the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager must make 1
copy of a construction plan available to SWCD staff at any time during normal
county business hours. SWCD may transport the copy of the construction plan
designated for SWCD comment and recommendation to any location of SWCD's
choosing for appropriated viewing, comment, recommendation, and repository.



   (D)   Route of review.  The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm
Water Department Manager will determine the appropriate route of review and
approval a construction plan takes in accordance with this subchapter and
subject to the direction, approval, or action of the Town of Chandler.



   (E)   Plan approval before initiation of construction.  Plan
approval is required before the initiation of construction activity at a
project site for which a construction plan is required. The initiation of
construction activity prior to the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department's Manager notification of plan approval constitutes a violation of
this subchapter subject to an enforcement action, penalty or fine. If no land
disturbing activities occur, then initial mobilization of equipment,
machinery, and tools to the site is permitted. At the project site owner's
risk for subsequent modification, installation of anticipated ECMs may begin.



   (F)   Plan review period.



      (1)   Individual single-family and 2-family residential major
project sites.  If the project site owner of an individual single-family or
2-family residential lot which is classified as a major project site under
this subchapter does not receive notification from the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager within 14 days after the
construction plan is received by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager, stating that the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager finds the construction plan is deficient, the project site
owner may submit the required NOI letter of information to the Director of
IDEM and to the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager,
and after 48 hours, proceed with construction activity.



      (2)   All other major project sites.  If the project site
owner of any major project site, except those sited above in division (F)(1),
does not receive notification from the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm
Water Department Manager within 30 days after the construction plan is
received by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager,
stating that the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager
finds the construction plan is deficient, the project site owner may submit
the required NOI letter of information to the Director of IDEM and to the
Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager, and after 48
hours, proceed with construction activity.



   (G)   Notice of plan approval.  The Town of Chandler Engineer or
Storm Water Department Manager will provide the project site owner, or the
designated representative of the project site operator, with a notice of plan
approval (NPA) as soon as is practicable following the Town of Chandler
Engineer, Storm Water Management Board, and/or Storm Water Department
Manager's review and approval of the plan. The project site owner must
include the NPA as verification of plan approval with the NOI sent to the
Director of IDEM.



   (H)   Notice of plan deficiency.  If the Town of Chandler Engineer,
Storm Water Management Board, and/or Storm Water Department Manager
determines that a construction plan is deficient, the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager will issue a notice of deficiency
(NOD) letter requiring modifications, terms, and conditions as necessary for
the plan to meet the requirements of this subchapter.



   (I)   Appeal of notice of plan deficiency.  If the Town of Chandler
Engineer, Storm Water Department Manager, or Storm Water Management Board,
determines that a construction plan is deficient, the project site owner
receives a notice of deficiency (NOD) letter, and the project site owner
disagrees with the determination, the project site owner must appeal the
determination to the Board before taking any other legal action on the NOD.



   (J)   Construction activity with a deficient plan constitutes a
violation.  The initiation of construction activity at a project site
following notification by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager that the construction plan for the site does not meet the
requirements of the subchapter constitutes a violation of this subchapter
subject to an enforcement action, penalty, or fine.



   (K)   Required re-submittal of a corrected construction plan.  If
the project site owner receives a NOD letter of plan deficiency after the
plan review period expires and following commencement of construction
activities at the site, the construction plan must be modified to meet the
requirements of this subchapter, and resubmitted within 14 days of receipt of
the NOD.



   (L)   Sufficiency of construction plan. The Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager will determine the sufficiency of
a construction plan based upon the requirements, provisions, and criteria
enumerated, referenced, or attached to this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)  Penalty, see
§ 53.999



§ 53.022  NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI) LETTER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   For any new construction activity that will result in land
disturbance equal to or greater than 1 acre, the project site owner must
submit to the Director of IDEM and the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm
Water Department Manager a complete NOI letter in accordance with this
subchapter and 327 I.A.C. 15-5. The NOI letter must comprise, and otherwise
comply with the following criteria:



      (1)   Name, mailing address, and location of the project site
for which the notification is submitted;



      (2)   The project site owner's name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address (if available), ownership status as federal, state,
public, private, or other entity;



      (3)   Contact person (if different than project site owner),
person's name, company name, address, e-mail address (if available), and
telephone number;



      (4)   A brief description of the construction project,
including a statement of the total acreage of the project site. Total acreage
claimed in the NOI letter shall be consistent with the acreage covered in the
construction plan;



      (5)   Estimated dates for the initiation and completion of
construction activities. Within 48 hours of the initiation of construction
activity, the project site owner must notify the Director of IDEM and the
Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager of the actual
project start date;



      (6)   The latitude and longitude of the approximate center of
the project site to the nearest 15 seconds, and to the nearest quarter
section, township, range, and civil township in which the project site is
located;



      (7)   Total impervious surface area, in square feet, of the
final project site including structures, roads, parking lots, and other
similar improvements;



      (8)   The number of acres to be involved in the construction
activities;



      (9)   Proof of publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the affected area that notified the public that a construction
activity is to commence, that states, “(company name, address) is
submitting an NOI letter to notify the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management of our intent to comply with the requirements under 327 I.A.C.
15-5 to discharge storm water from construction activities for the following
project: (project name). Runoff from the project site will discharge to
(stream(s)) receiving the discharge(s);”



      (10)   As applicable, a list of all MS4 areas designated under
327 I.A.C. 15-13 within which the project site lies;



      (11)   A written certification by the operator that:



         (a)   The storm water quality measures included in the
construction plan comply with the requirements under this subchapter, and
under 327 I.A.C. 15-5-6.5, 327 I.A.C. 15-5-7, and 327 I.A.C. 15-5-7.5, and
that the storm water pollution prevention plan complies with all applicable
federal, state, and local storm water requirements.



         (b)   The measures required by 327 I.A.C. 15-5-7 will be
implemented in accordance with the storm water pollution prevention plan.



         (c)   If the projected land disturbance is 1 acre or
more, every applicable construction plan reviewing entity designated by IDEM
has been sent a copy of the construction plan for review.



         (d)    Storm water quality measures beyond those
specified in the storm water pollution prevention plan will be implemented
during the life of the permit if necessary to comply with 327 I.A.C. 15-5-7.



         (e)   Implementation of storm water quality measures
will be inspected by trained individuals.



      (12)   The name of the receiving water, or, if the discharge
is to a municipal separate storm sewer, the name of the municipal operator of
the storm sewer and the ultimate receiving water;



      (13)   The NOI letter must be signed by a person meeting the
signatory requirements in 327 I.A.C. 15-4-3(g); and



      (14)   Notification from each applicable construction plan
reviewing entity designated by IDEM indicating that the construction plans
are sufficient to comply with 327 I.A.C. 15-5. This requirement may be waived
if the project site owner has not received notification from the reviewing
agency within the time frame specified in § 53.021(F) of this subchapter.



   (B)   After the project site owner has received notification from
the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager that the
construction plans meet the requirements of this subchapter or the review
period has expired, all NOI letter information required in § 53.021(C)(2) of
this subchapter must be submitted to the Commissioner of IDEM at least 48
hours prior to the initiation of land disturbing activities at the project
site. A copy of the completed NOI letter also must be sent to the Town of
Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager. If the NOI letter is
deficient, the project site owner must address the deficient items and submit
an amended NOI letter to the Commissioner at the address specified below in
division (C).



   (C)   The project site owner must send, or cause to be sent, the NOI
letter to:



      Attention: Rule 5 Storm Water Coordinator



      Indiana Department of Environmental



      Management Office of Water Quality, Urban Wet Weather Section 100
North Senate



      Avenue Indianapolis, Indiana 46206-6015



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.023  REQUIREMENTS FOR A MAJOR PROJECT SITE.



   (A)   Project sites that do not meet criteria.  For project sites
that do not meet the criteria for a small, residential development in §
53.024 of this subchapter, a project site owner must develop and submit a set
of construction plans. Storm water quality measures included in the plan must
achieve the minimum project site requirements specified in §§ 53.025 and
53.027 of this subchapter. The construction plans must include the following
components, content, requirements and provisions as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Construction plan.  The construction plan must include the
following 8 major components:



      (1)   Project narrative and supporting documents; see division
(C)(1) below;



      (2)   Vicinity map; see division (C)(2) below;



      (3)   Existing project site layout; see division (C)(3) below;



      (4)   Final project site layout; see division (C)(4) below;



      (5)   Grading plan or land disturbing activity plan; see
division (C)(5) below;



      (6)   Storm water drainage plan; see division (C)(6) below;



      (7)   Construction phase storm water pollution prevention
plan; see division (C)(7) below; and



      (8)   Post-construction storm water pollution prevention plan;
see division (C)(8) below.



   (C)   Components must have sub-components.  Each of the 8 major
components of the construction plan must consist of the following
sub-components and their subdivisions of content:



      (1)   Project narrative and supporting documents, including
the following information:



         (a)   An index indicating the location, in the
construction plan, of all information required by this section;



         (b)   Description of the nature and purpose of the
project;



         (c)   Legal description of the project site. The
description must be to the nearest quarter section, township, and range, and
include the civil township;



         (d)   Soil properties, characteristics, limitations, and
hazards associated with the project site, and the measures that will be
integrated into the project to overcome or minimize adverse soil conditions;



         (e)   General construction sequence of how the project
site will be built, including phases of construction;



         (f)   Hydrologic unit code (14 digit) available from the
United States Geologic Survey (USGS) or the office of the Storm Water
Coordinator to indicate within which watershed or watersheds the project site
lies;



         (g)   A plat or project site map showing lot numbers,
lot boundaries, road layout and names. The plat must be legible and submitted
on a sheet or sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches and drawn at a
maximum scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet for all phases or sections of the
project. The Engineer or Storm Water Coordinator will determine the
appropriateness of the size and scale of the plat or map; and



         (h)   Identification of any other state or federal water
quality permits that are required for construction activities associated with
the owner's project site.



      (2)   Vicinity map depicting the project site's location in
relationship to recognizable local landmarks, cities, towns, major roads, and
railways. The applicable portion of a USGS topographical quadrangle map, or
county or municipal road map with the project site limits linked in will
suffice.



      (3)   An existing project site layout that must include the
following information:



         (a)   Location and name of all wetlands, lakes, streams,
waterways, and drains on, or adjacent to, the project site;



         (b)   Location of all existing structures on the project
site;



         (c)   One hundred year flood plains, floodway fringes,
and floodways; (Note if none exists)



         (d)   Soil map of the predominant soil types, as
determined by the USDA, NRCS Soil Survey, or equivalent publication, or as
determined by a soil scientist. The soil map must include a soil legend;



         (e)   Identification and delineation of the
pre-development vegetative cover such as grass, weeds, brush, and trees on
the project site;



         (f)   Land use of all adjacent properties;



         (g)   Existing topography extending at a minimum of 50
feet beyond the property lines to adequately indicate drainage patterns on
and off the project site. The contour intervals shall be drawn in accordance
to the following criteria:



            1.   Average ground slope between 0 and 2% use
1-foot contour intervals;



            2.   Average ground slope between 2 and 10% use
2-foot contour intervals; and



            3.   Average ground slope greater than 10% use
5-foot contour intervals.



         (h)   The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manger reserves the right to determine the appropriateness of the
contour intervals and request additional spot elevations to adequately
indicate drainage patterns on and off the project site.



      (4)   Final project site layout, including the following
information:



         (a)   Location of all proposed site improvements
including; roads, utilities, lot delineations and identification, proposed
structures, and common areas;



         (b)   One hundred-year flood plains, floodway fringes,
and floodways; (Note if none exists)



         (c)   Proposed final topography extending at a minimum
of 50 feet beyond the property lines to adequately indicate drainage patterns
on and off the project site. The contour intervals shall be drawn in
accordance to the following criteria:



            1.   Average ground slope between 0 and 2% use
1-foot contour intervals;



            2.   Average ground slope between 2 and 10% use
2-foot contour intervals; and



            3.   Average ground slope greater than 10% use
5-foot contour intervals.



         (d)   The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager reserves the right to determine the appropriateness of the
contour intervals and request additional spot elevations to adequately
indicate drainage patterns on and off the project site.



      (5)   A grading plan, including the following information:



         (a)   Delineation of all proposed land disturbing
activities, including off-site activities that will provide services to the
project site;



         (b)   Location of all soil stockpiles and borrow areas;



         (c)   Information regarding any off-site borrow,
stockpile, or disposal areas that are associated with the project site and
under the control of the project site owner; and



         (d)   Existing and proposed topographic information per
divisions (C)(3)(g) and (C)(4)(c) above.



      (6)   A drainage plan, including the following information:



         (a)   An estimate of the peak discharge, based on the
10-year storm event; of the project site for both pre-construction conditions
and estimates of the peak discharge based on the 10-year, 25-year, and
50-year storm events of the project site for post construction conditions.
The calculations to determine these discharges shall be included in the
drainage plan;



         (b)   Location, size and dimensions of all components of
the storm water drainage systems such as inlets, culverts, storm sewers, and
conveyance channels;



         (c)   Locations where storm water potentially will be
directly discharged into ground water, such as abandoned wells or sinkholes;
(Note if none exists)



         (d)   Location of every specific point where storm water
discharge will leave the project site;



         (e)   Name of all receiving waters. If a discharge is to
a separate municipal storm sewer, identify the name of the municipal operator
and the name of the ultimate receiving water; and



         (f)   Location, size, and dimensions of features such as
permanent retention or detention facilities, including existing or manmade
wetlands, used for the purpose of storm water management.



      (7)   A Storm Water Pollution Prevention plan (SWP3)
associated with construction activities. The SWP3 must be assembled to meet,
at a minimum, the requirements, provisions, and criteria of §§ 53.025 and
53.045 of this chapter, and must include the following:



         (a)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and
construction details of all temporary and permanent storm water quality
measures, ECMs, and BMPs;



         (b)   Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation;



         (c)   Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of
implementation;



         (d)   Final stabilization plans;



         (e)   All stabilization plans shall include the
following:



            1.   Specification and application rates for soil
amendments and seed mixtures;



            2.   The type and application rate for soil
amendments and seed mixtures; and



            3.   Other applicable data as may be required by
the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager.



         (f)   Construction sequence describing the relationship
between implementation of storm water quality measures, ECMs, and BMPs, and
the stages of construction activities;



         (g)   The project site owner's self-monitoring program
including plan implementation and procedures;



         (h)   A description of potential pollutant sources
associated with construction activities, which may reasonably be expected to
add a significant amount of pollutants to storm water discharges; and



         (i)   Material handling and storage associated with
construction activities that shall meet the spill prevention and spill
response requirements in 327 I.A.C. 2-6.1.



      (8)   The post-construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan (SWP3). The post-construction SWP3 must include the following
information:



         (a)   A description of potential pollutant sources from
the project site's proposed land use, which sources may reasonably be
expected to add a significant amount of pollutants to storm water discharges
from the post-construction project site;



         (b)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and
construction details of all post-construction storm water quality measures
and BMPs adequate to address division (C)(7)(a) above;



         (c)   A description of control measures and BMPs that
will be installed to control pollutants in storm water discharges that will
occur after construction activities have been completed. The measures and
practices include infiltration of storm water runoff; flow reduction by use
of open vegetated swales and natural depressions; installation of filter
strips, buffer strips, parking lot tree islands, and riparian zones;
minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness; maximum of open
space; and storm water retention and detention ponds;



         (d)   A sequence describing when each post-construction
storm water quality measure and BMP will be installed;



         (e)   Storm water quality measures and BMPs that will
remove or minimize pollution from storm water runoff within or from the
project site;



         (f)   Storm water quality measures and BMPs that will be
implemented to prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream and riparian
habitat;



         (g)   A narrative description of the maintenance
guidelines for all post-construction storm water quality measures and BMPs to
facilitate their proper long-term function; and



         (h)   A verifiable procedure, such as recorded plat
notices and covenants, by which the narrative description of water quality
measure and BMP maintenance guidelines will be made available to future
parties who will assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of
the post-construction storm water quality measures and BMPs.



   (D)   Illustrations.  Plan and profile sheets, project site
layouts, plats, and vicinity maps, must be drawn to a standard engineering
scale as indicated on each sheet, plat, or map, and be oriented north as
indicated by a north arrow on each sheet, plat, or map. All dimensions must
be accurately scaled, drawn, and labeled with dimensions given in feet and
tenths of a foot.



   (E)   Revision of approved construction plans.  The requirements
for construction plan content enumerated in this section are qualified by the
following statements:



      (1)   The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager may require, upon finding reasonable cause, the revision of a
construction plan if it is determined that a modification or modifications
are necessary to accomplish adequate control the quantity or quality of storm
water runoff, in accordance with this subchapter or with applicable federal,
state, and local rules, from a project site due to site conditions or project
specification changes identified, effected, or extant during or after plan
review an approval.



      (2)   If the Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Management
Board or Storm Water Department Manager requests a revised construction plan
under this division, the project site owner must submit the revised plan to
the appropriate entity or entities within 21 calendar days of a request for
plan revision.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.024  MAJOR PROJECT SITE; CONSTRUCTION PLAN.



   (A)   Construction plans.  For a single-family, residential
development consisting of 4 or fewer lots, or for a single-family,
residential strip development where the developer offers for sale or lease
without land improvements, and the project is not part of a larger common
plan of development and sale, a project site owner must develop and submit a
set of construction plans containing storm water quality measures
specifically selected to achieve the minimum project site requirements
specified in § 53.025 of this chapter.



   (B)   Construction plan components. The construction plan must
include the following 4 major components:



      (1)   Project narrative and supporting documents; see division
(C)(1) below;



      (2)   Vicinity map; see division (C)(2) below;



      (3)   Project site layout; see division (C)(3) below; and



      (4)   Storm water pollution prevention plan; see division
(C)(4) below.



   (C)   Components.  Each of the 4 major components of the
construction plan must consist of the following sub-components and their
subdivisions of content:



      (1)   Project narrative and supporting documents including the
following  information:



         (a)   An index indicating the location, in the
construction plans, of all required items in this section;



         (b)   Description of the nature and purpose of the
project;



         (c)   Legal description of the project site. The
description must be to the nearest quarter section, township, and range, and
include the civil township;



         (d)   Soil properties, characteristics, limitations, and
hazards associated with the project site, and the measures that will be
integrated into the project to overcome or minimize adverse soil conditions;



         (e)   Hydrologic unit code (14-digit code) available
from the United States Geologic Survey (USGS) to indicate within which
watershed or watersheds the project lies; and



         (f)   Identification of any other state or federal
permits that are required for construction activities associated with the
project site owner's project site.



      (2)   Vicinity map depicting the project site's location in
relationship to recognizable local landmarks, towns, major roads, and
railways. The applicable portion of a USGS topographic quadrangle map; or a
county or municipal road map with the project site limits inked in will
suffice.



      (3)   A project site layout that must include the following
information:



         (a)   Location and name of all wetlands, lakes, streams,
waterways, and drains on, or adjacent to, the project site;



         (b)   Location of all existing structures on the project
site (if applicable). One hundred year flood plains, floodway fringes, and
floodways; (Note if none exists)



         (c)   Soil map of the predominant soil types, as
determined by the USDA, NRCS Soil Survey, or equivalent publication, or as
determined by a soil scientist. The soil map must include a soil legend;



         (d)   Identification and delineation of the
pre-development vegetative cover such as grass, weeds, brush, and trees on
the project site;



         (e)   Land use of all adjacent properties;



         (f)   Existing and proposed topography- extending at a
minimum of 50 feet beyond the property lines to adequately indicate drainage
patterns on and off the project site. The contour intervals shall be drawn in
accordance to the following criteria:



            1.   Average ground slope between 0 and 2% use
1-foot contour intervals;



            2.   Average ground slope between 2 and 10% use
2-foot contour intervals; and



            3.   Average ground slope greater than 10% use
5-foot contour intervals.



         (g)   The Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water
Management Board or Storm Water Department Manager reserves the right to
determine the appropriateness of the contour intervals and request additional
spot elevations to adequately indicate drainage patterns on and off the
project site; and



         (h)   Location of all proposed site improvements,
including roads, utilities, lot delineations and identifications, and
proposed structures.



      (4)   A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3)
associated with construction activities. The SWP3 must be assembled to meet,
at a minimum, the requirements, provisions, and criteria of §§ 53.025 and
53.045 of this chapter, and must include the following information:



         (a)   Delineation of all proposed land disturbing
activities, including off-site activities that will provide services to the
project site;



         (b)   Location of all soil stockpiles and borrow areas;



         (c)   Location, size, and dimensions of all storm water
drainage systems such as inlets, culverts, storm sewers, and conveyance
channels;



         (d)   Locations where storm water potentially will be
directly discharged into ground water, such as abandoned wells or sinkholes;
(Note if none exists)



         (e)   Location of every specific point where storm water
discharge will leave the project site;



         (f)   Name of all receiving waters. If a discharge is to
a separate municipal storm sewer, identify the name of the municipal operator
and the ultimate receiving water;



         (g)   Location, dimensions, detailed specification, and
construction details of all appropriate temporary and permanent storm water
quality measures, ECMs, and BMPs;



         (h)   Plans for appropriate temporary stabilization,
permanent stabilization, and final stabilization compliant with this
subchapter, and a sequence for the implementation of applicable stabilization;



         (i)   Temporary, permanent, final stabilization plans
must include the following:



            1.   Specifications and application rates for soil
amendments and seed mixtures; and



            2.   The type and application rate for anchored
mulch.



         (j)   The project site owner's self-monitoring program
including plan implementation and procedures.



   (D)   Illustrations. Plan and profile sheets, project site layouts,
plats, and vicinity maps, must be drawn to a standard engineering scale as
indicated on each sheet, plat or map, and be oriented north as indicated by a
north arrow on each sheet, plat, or map. All dimensions must be accurately
scaled, drawn, and labeled with dimensions given in feet and tenths of a foot.



   (E)   Revision of approved construction plans.  The requirements
for construction plan content enumerated in this section are qualified by the
following statements:



      (1)   The Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Management
Board or Storm Water Coordinator may require, upon finding reasonable cause,
the revision of a construction plan if it is determined that a modification
or modifications are necessary to accomplish adequate control the quantity or
quality of storm water runoff, in accordance with this subchapter or with
applicable federal, state, and local rules, from a project site due to site
conditions or project specification changes identified, effected, or extant
during or after plan review and approval.



      (2)   If the Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Management
Board or Storm Water Department Manager requests a revised construction plan
under this division, the project site owner must submit the revised plan to
the appropriate entity or entities within 21 calendar days of a request for
plan revision.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.025  MAJOR PROJECT SITE; PLANNING AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   The project site owner of a major project site requiring a
construction plan must initiate, manage, and complete construction
activities, or must otherwise cause the initiation, managements, and
completion of construction activities at the project site in accordance with
the requirements and provisions of this section.



   (B)   The project site owner of a major project site must implement
and manage, or must otherwise cause the implementation and management of the
project site's storm water quality.



   (C)   For every project site regulated under this subchapter, the
project site owner, individual project site operator, individual lot owner,
contractor, subcontractor, homeowner, and resident of a regulated project
site must initiate, manage, and complete, or cause the initiation,
management, and completion of construction activities at a project site in
accordance, at a minimum, with the following requirements and provisions of
this section that are applicable to the project site according to this
subchapter:



      (1)   Sediment-laden water which otherwise would flow from the
project site must be treated by erosion and sediment control measures
appropriate to minimize sedimentation.



      (2)   Appropriate measures must be implemented to minimize or
eliminate wastes or unused building materials, including garbage, debris,
cleaning wastes, wastewater, concrete truck washout, and other substances
from being carried from the project site by runoff or wind. Identification of
areas where concrete truck washout is permissible must be clearly posted at
appropriate areas of the project site. Wastes and unused building materials
must be managed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable statutes
and regulations.



      (3)   An adequate stable construction site access must be
installed at each point of construction traffic ingress to and egress from a
project site.



      (4)   Public or private roadways must be kept cleared of
accumulated sediment that is a result of runoff or tracking. Bulk clearing of
sediment must not include flushing the area with water. Cleared sediment must
be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in accordance with
applicable statutes and regulations.



      (5)   Storm water runoff leaving a project site must be
discharged in a manner that is consistent with applicable federal, state, and
local laws and rules.



      (6)   The project site owner must post a notice near the main
entrance of the project site. For linear project sites such as a pipeline or
highway, the notice must be placed in a publicly accessible location near the
project field office. The notice must be maintained in a legible condition
and contain the following information:



         (a)   Copy of the completed NOI letter and the NPDES
permit number, where applicable;



         (b)   Name, company name, telephone number, e-mail
address (if available), and address of the project site owner or a local
contact person; and



         (c)   Location of the construction plan if the project
does not have an on-site location to store the plan.



      (7)   The permit and posting of the notice under division
(C)(6) above does not provide the public with any right to trespass on a
project site for any reason, and does not require that the project site owner
allow members of the public access to the project site.



      (8)   The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan must serve as
a guideline for storm water quality, but will not be interpreted as the only
basis for implementation of storm water quality measures for a project site.
The project site owner is responsible for implementing, in accordance with
this subchapter, all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted storm
water runoff from the project site.



      (9)   The project site owner must inform all general
contractors, construction management firms, grading or excavating
contractors, utility contractors, and the individual lot operators of the
terms and conditions of this subchapter and the conditions and standards of
the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and the schedule for proposed
implementation of the plan.



      (10)   Phasing of construction activities must be used, where
possible, to minimize disturbance of large areas of land.



      (11)   Appropriate storm water quality and quantity control
measures must be planned, installed, managed, and monitored as part of an
erosion and sediment control system. The measures shall be approved by the
Town of Chandler.



      (12)   All storm water quality measures must be planned,
installed, managed, and monitored under the guidance of a trained individual.



      (13)   Collected storm water runoff leaving a project site
must be either discharged directly into a well-defined, stable receiving
channel, or diffused and released to adjacent property by an adequate method
that does not cause an erosion, sediment, or pollution problem on the
adjacent property.



      (14)   Drainage channels and swales must be sized, configured,
constructed, and adequately protected so that their final gradients and
resultant velocities will not cause erosion in the receiving channel or at
the outlet.



      (15)   Natural features, including wetlands and sinkholes,
must be protected from pollutants associated with storm water runoff.



      (16)   Unvegetated areas that are scheduled or likely to be
inactive for 15 days or more must be temporarily or permanently stabilized
with measures appropriate for the season to minimize erosion potential.
Alternative measures to temporary or permanent stabilization are acceptable
if the project site owner, or the project site owner's designated
representative, can demonstrate the implementation of appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures are adequate to prevent sediment discharge.
Vegetated areas with a density of less than 70% must be re-stabilized using
appropriate methods to minimize erosion.



      (17)   During the period of construction activities, all storm
water quality measures, ECMs, and BMPs necessary to meet the requirements of
this subchapter must be maintained in working order.



      (18)   The project site owner must implement a self-monitoring
program that includes the following requirements from the initiation to the
completion of construction activities at the project site:



         (a)   A trained individual must perform a written
evaluation of the project site:



            1.   By the end of the next business day following
a measurable storm event; and



            2.   At a minimum of 1 time per week.



         (b)   The evaluation must address:



            1.   The maintenance of existing storm water
quality measures to ensure they are functioning properly; and



            2.   Identify additional measures necessary to
remain in compliance with this subchapter and all applicable statutes and
rules.



         (c)   Written evaluation reports must include:



            1.   The name of the individual performing the
evaluation;



            2.   The date of the evaluation;



            3.   Problems identified at the project site; and



            4.   Details of corrective actions recommended and
completed.



         (d)   All evaluation reports for the project site must
be made available to the inspecting authority within 48 hours of a request.



      (19)   Proper storage and handling of materials such as fuels
or hazardous wastes must be implemented and managed. Spill prevention and
clean-up measures must be planned and implemented to minimize the potential
for pollutants to contaminate surface or ground water or degrade soil quality.



      (20)   Final stabilization of a project site must be achieved
by the following criteria:



         (a)   All land disturbing activities have been completed
and a uniform (for example, evenly distributed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetative cover with a minimum density of 70% has been established
on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or
equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed; and



         (b)   For construction projects on land used for
agricultural purposes, the site is returned to its pre-construction
agricultural use, or disturbed areas not previously used for agricultural
production, such as filter strips and areas that are not being returned to
their pre-construction agricultural use, must meet the final stabilization
requirements in division (C)(20)(a) above.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.026  RESIDENTIAL PROJECT SITE; PLANNING AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   The project site owner is not required to submit an NOI and
construction plan for construction activities associated with a single-family
residential dwelling disturbing less than 1 acre, when the dwelling is not
part of a larger common plan of development or sale.



   (B)   For every project site comprising construction activities
associated with a single-family residential dwelling disturbing less than 1
acre, when the dwelling is not part of a larger common plan of development or
sale, the project site owner must initiate, manage, and complete or cause the
initiation, management, and completion of construction activities at the
project site in accordance, at a minimum, with the requirements of provisions
in § 53.025(C)(1) through (C)(5), § 53.025(C)(10) through (C)(17), §
53.025(C)(19) and (C)(20) and with § 53.026 of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.027  MINOR PROJECT SITE; PLANNING AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Neither an individual NOI nor construction plan is required
for an individual lot where land disturbance will be less than 1 acre and the
lot lies within a project site regulated under this subchapter, and permitted
under 327 I.A.C. 15-5. The individual lot operator, contractors, and
subcontractors working on an individual lot must comply with the requirements
and provisions of this section.



   (B)   From the initiation of construction activities or land
disturbing activities on the individual lot, or minor project site, the
individual lot operator, whether owning the property or acting as the agent
for the property owner, shall be responsible for the following requirements
and provisions:



      (1)   Compliance with provisions and requirements of the
approved construction plan developed by the project site owner of the larger
common development;



      (2)   Installation and maintenance of an adequate stable
construction site access at each point of ingress to and egress from the
individual lot by construction traffic;



      (3)   Installation of appropriate perimeter erosion and
sediment control measures prior to land disturbance, and maintenance
perimeter erosion and sediment control measures until completion of
construction activities on the lot;



      (4)   Minimization of sediment discharge and tracking from the
lot throughout the land disturbing activities on the lot until applicable
temporary, permanent, or final stabilization has been achieved;



      (5)   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed
onto roads. Bulk clearing of sediment must not include flushing the area with
water. Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner
compliant with all applicable statutes and rules; and



      (6)   The repair of any damaged land surface to a condition
the same as or better than existed before the damage occurred, and the
establishment of permanent stabilization upon a lot adjacent to the
individual lot operator's project site whenever the lot operator, or the lot
operator's employees, representatives, suppliers, subcontractors, or visitors
disturb, or cause to be disturbed, a land surface of a lot adjacent to the
individual lot operator's project site. The corrective work must be
accomplished by a process that indemnifies the Town of Chandler, the Storm
Water Management Board, the Engineer, Storm Water Department Manager, and
their officials, employees, and representatives against any claim of loss or
damage resulting from actions by or on behalf of the individual lot operator.



   (C)   For individual residential lots, the individual lot operator
must achieve final stabilization by one of the 2 following criteria:



      (1)   The individual lot operator must complete all land
disturbing activities and establish a uniform (for example, evenly
distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a
minimum density of 70% on all unpaved areas of the lot and areas of the lot
not covered by permanent structures, or must employ equivalent permanent
stabilization measures; or



      (2)   The individual lot operator must install appropriate
erosion and sediment control measures for the individual lot prior to the
occupation of the home by the homeowner, and must inform the homeowner of the
requirements for and benefits of final stabilization.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.028  INDIVIDUAL LOTS; PLANNING AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Neither an individual NOI nor construction plan is required
for an individual lot where land disturbance will be less than 1 acre and the
lot lies within an unplatted area or an existing subdivision that is not
regulated under this subchapter and is not permitted under 327 I.A.C. 15-5.
The individual lot operator, contractors, and subcontractors working on an
individual lot must comply with the requirements and provisions of this
section.



   (B)   From the initiation of construction activities or land
disturbing activities on the individual lot the individual lot operator,
whether owning the property or acting as the agent for the property owner,
shall be responsible for the following requirements and provisions:



      (1)   Installation and maintenance of an adequate stable
construction site access at each point of ingress to and egress from the
individual lot by construction traffic;



      (2)   Installation of appropriate perimeter erosion and
sediment control measures prior to land disturbance, and maintenance
perimeter erosion and sediment control measures until completion of
construction activities on the lot;



      (3)   Minimization of sediment discharge and tracking from the
lot throughout the land disturbing activities on the lot until applicable
temporary, permanent, or final stabilization has been achieved;



      (4)   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed
onto roads. Bulk clearing of sediment must not include flushing the area with
water. Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner
compliant with all applicable statutes and rules; and



      (5)   The repair of any damaged land surface to a condition
the same as or better than existed before the damage occurred, and the
establishment of permanent stabilization upon a lot adjacent to the
individual lot operator's project site whenever the lot operator, or the lot
operator's employees, representatives, suppliers, subcontractors, or visitors
disturb, or cause to be disturbed, a land surface of a lot adjacent to the
individual lot operator's project site. The corrective work must be
accomplished by a process that indemnifies the Town of Chandler, the Storm
Water Management Board, the Engineer, Storm Water Department Manager, and
their officials, employees, and representatives against any claim of loss or
damage resulting from actions by or on behalf of the individual lot operator.



   (C)   For individual residential lots, the individual lot operator
must achieve final stabilization by one of the 2 following criteria:



      (1)   The individual lot operator must complete all land
disturbing activities and establish a uniform (for example, evenly
distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a
minimum density of 70% on all unpaved areas of the lot and areas of the lot
not covered by permanent structures, or must employ equivalent permanent
stabilization measures; or



      (2)   The individual lot operator must install appropriate
erosion and sediment control measures for the individual lot prior to the
occupation of the home by the homeowner, and must inform the homeowner of the
requirements for and benefits of final stabilization.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.029  POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
REQUIREMENTS.



   A storm water quality management permit may only be issued after the
review and acceptance of a Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan ("SWPPP"). The Post-Construction SWPPP is part of the Storm Water
Quality Management Plan ("SWQMP") and must include the following information:



   (A)   A description of potential pollutant sources from the proposed
land use that may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount of
pollutants to stormwater discharges.



   (B)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and
construction details of all post-construction stormwater quality Best
Management Practices ("BMPs") so set forth in CMC § 53.031.



   (C)   A description of BMPs that will be installed to control
pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction
activities have been completed.  Such practices include infiltration of
run-off, flow reduction by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions, buffer strip and riparian zone preservation, filter strip
creation, minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness,
maximization of open space, and stormwater retention and detention ponds.



   (D)   A sequence describing when each post-construction stormwater
quality BMP will be installed.



   (E)   Stormwater quality BMPs that will remove or minimize
pollutants from stormwater runoff.



   (F)   Stormwater BMPs that will be implemented to prevent or
minimize adverse impact to stream and riparian habitat.



   (G)   A narrative description of the maintenance guidelines for all
post-construction stormwater quality measures to facilitate their proper
long-term function. This narrative description shall be made available to
future parties who will assume responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of the post-construction stormwater quality measures.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.030  BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.



   The SWPPP shall include provisions for buffers.



   (A)   No-disturbance buffer.



      (1)   The no-disturbance buffer will be used to define areas
where land disturbance activities shall not be permitted.  Grading clearing
and grubbing shall not be permitted in this area, but pruning, trimming and
partial removal of standing vegetation is permitted.



      (2)   The no-disturbance waterway buffer shall be defined as
25 feet from the top of the waterway bank as defined by geomorphic shape (not
by the current water surface elevation).



      (3)   The no-disturbance waterway buffer shall be applied to
all waterways and drainage systems that drain more than 25 acres of
contributing area or presented on a United States Geological Survey map as a
blue line stream.



   (B)   Waterway buffer.



      (1)   The waterway buffer will be used to define areas where
land disturbance activities shall be permitted, but construction of any
building or structure shall not be permitted.



      (2)   A waterway buffer shall be applied to all waterways
serving more than 25 acres of tributary area or presented on a United State
Geological Survey map as a blue line stream.



      (3)   Automatic exemptions are applied provided erosion
prevention and sediment control, water quality and cut-fill policies are
adequately addressed.  Exemptions shall be applied for:



         (a)   Roads and utilities crossing waterways; and



         (b)   Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to
waterways.



      (4)   The waterway buffer shall be defined as the area
contained within a boundary established 25-feet beyond the floodplain
boundary as defined by FEMA or 50-feet from the top of waterway bank as
defined by geomorphic shape (not by the current water surface elevation),
whichever is larger.



      (5)   At a minimum the waterway buffer shall be at least the
width of the no-disturbance buffer, if applicable.



      (6)   The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for
application of water quality devices. This may only be permitted provided
erosion prevention and sediment control, water quality, and cut-fill policies
are adequately addressed as determined by the Town of Chandler according to
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.031  APPROVED STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The SWPPP shall include provisions for storm water quality Best
Management Practices ("BMPs") functioning independently or in combination. 
Acceptable storm water quality BMPs include:



   (A)   Vegetated buffers;



   (B)   Bioretention swales;



   (C)   Vegetated and forested buffer strips;



   (D)   Level spreaders;



   (E)   Infiltration systems;



   (F)   Dry detention ponds;



   (G)   Wet detention ponds;



   (H)   Retention ponds;



   (I)   Constructed and pocket wetlands;



   (J)   Media filtration and screening systems;



   (K)   Baffle boxes and grit separators;



   (L)   Hydrodynamic separator systems;



   (M)   Sediment forebays;



   (N)   Oil/water separators;



   (O)   Vault storage/infiltration BMPs (infiltration prohibited
within wellhead protection areas); and



   (P)   Other measures reviewed and accepted by Town of Chandler.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.032  BMP DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND CRITERIA.



   The SWPPP shall include provisions for stormwater quality BMPs that are
designed to achieve the following design/performance objectives:



   (A)   Reduce total suspended solids (TSS) from the first flush as
defined by land use characteristics and contributing area; or, capture and
treatment of at least 0.5-inch precipitation applied over the contributing
area.



   (B)   Reduce or buffer increases in storm runoff temperature caused
by contact with impervious surfaces.



   (C)   Storm water detention/retention facilities shall be designed
to address the rate at which flow is released over the entire runoff
discharge period and the volume of discharge over the critical design-storm
period. The outlet structure shall be designed as a v-notch weir or other
multiple stage configurations capable of controlling the discharge rates for
the two-, ten-, and 100-year design-storm events.



      (1)   The Indiana Drainage Handbook or the Indiana Storm Water
Quality Manual should be reviewed and considered when preparing the SWPPP.



      (2)   Town of Chandler reserves the right to develop or adopt
other guidance documents to serve as design and implementation standards. 
Other guidance documents distributed by the Town of Chandler should be
reviewed and considered when preparing the SWPPP.  These documents may be
applied as standards by which designs are to be prepared and controls
implemented. The Town of Chandler shall have authority to implement this
chapter by appropriate regulations, guidance or other related materials. In
this regard, technical, administrative, or procedural matters may be modified
as needed to meet the objectives defined herein, so long as such
modifications as to technical, administrative, or procedural matters are not
contrary or beyond the intent of the objectives defined above.



         (a)   Regulations, guidance or other related materials
that may be given authority by this chapter may include, but are not limited
to: Best Management Practice (BMP) manuals, design regulations and
requirements, submittal checklists, review checklists, inspection checklists,
certifications, storm water management manuals and operation and maintenance
manuals.



         (b)   Materials may include information deemed
appropriate by the Town of Chandler including guidance and specifications for
the preparation of grading plans, selecting environmentally sound practices
for managing storm water, minimum specifications and requirements, more
complete definitions and performance standards.



         (c)   The above referenced documents shall not in any
way require specific commercially available products. However, they may refer
to performance specifications, class of devices, construction, or management
practice.



         (d)   The above referenced documents may restrict or
prevent the use of specific products, techniques or management practices
(that are to be accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative
impact on public infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as
unacceptable for performance, maintenance or other technically based reasons.



         (e)   Documents referenced above may be updated
periodically to reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be
made available to the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall
not relieve any applicant from the obligation to comply with this chapter,
and shall not prevent the Town of Chandler from imposing the most current and
effective practices.



   (D)   Soil bioengineering, “green” and other “soft” slope
and stream bank stabilization methods shall receive preference over rip rap,
concrete and other hard armoring techniques. “Hard” alternatives shall
only be permitted when their necessity can be demonstrated given
site-specific conditions.



   (E)   Retention - supportive data must be submitted to justify the
type of facility selected.  If the facility is designed to retain (volume
control) all or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to temporarily
detain), then appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the
Town of Chandler. This submission shall also discuss the impacts the facility
will have on local karst topography as found through a geotechnical
investigation of the site.  The facility may be designed to infiltrate
runoff to groundwater rather than transmit it downstream under conditions up
to a ten-year storm event.  It must be able to bypass all other storms up to
a 100-year event with a discharge rate equivalent to or less than
pre-development conditions without negatively impacting the 100-year
floodplain above or below the site.  If data indicates that the facility
cannot retain a significant portion of the runoff (95%) then the facility
must be sized to detain runoff.



   (F)   Detention facilities may, and are encouraged to, be designed
to serve multiple purposes. For example, runoff may be detained under
wet-weather conditions, but also serve as common or recreational areas during
dry-weather conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided, or where
flat grades or poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate
low-flow storm water management system may be required.  Where the
retention/detention facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or storm
water quality management practice with a permanent pool, water budget
calculations shall be performed and submitted to demonstrate that an adequate
pool is expected during dry summer months.



   (G)   A licensed professional engineer shall stamp all plans for
construction. This shall include all proposed improvements or modifications
to existing or new storm water infrastructure and other related improvements
or modifications.



   (H)   The Town of Chandler reserves the right to require superseding
or additional treatment criteria or objectives for specific pollutant(s) as
necessary to meet overall storm water quality management program objectives
or directives under a watershed improvement or total maximum daily load
("TDML") program.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.033  COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL BMPS.



   (A)   All properties are expected to implement on-site storm water
quality control measures, but the extent of application may be reduced given
the availability, proximity and nature of regional storm water quality BMPs.



   (B)   The extent and type of on-site storm water quality management
practices implemented must be proportionate to the land use, pollutant
discharge potential and proximity to regional storm water quality management
practices.



   (C)   For properties where storm water quantity management practices
are either not feasible or are not necessary in lieu of regional storm water
quantity controls, the Town of Chandler has the right to require on-site
controls for storm water quality.



   (D)   The Town of Chandler encourages regional storm water quantity
and/or quality management practices, serving 25 to 250 acres of tributary
area, which may be consistently and efficiently managed and maintained. These
types of practices will be encouraged in order to replace or reduce the
implementation of on-site storm water quantity and/or quality management
practices, as determined to be appropriate by the Town of Chandler.



   (E)   Where a regional storm water management facility has been
established by one or more local governments, or by an authority operating on
behalf of one or more local governments, a development or property may
participate in said program in lieu of runoff control required by this
chapter.



      (1)   This may be permitted provided that:



         (a)   Runoff from the development drains to an approved
existing or proposed public regional storm water management facility that
will be operational within one year.



         (b)   Participation in the form of contribution of
funds, contribution of land, contribution of storm water management facility
construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which shall
be in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the town.



         (c)   The Town of Chandler finds that the storm water
quality management plans are in compliance with all other applicable
requirements and ordinances.



         (d)   Each fiscal or in-kind contribution from a
development owner participating in a regional storm water quality management
facility shall be used for acquisition, design, construction or maintenance
of one or more such facilities in the same watershed in which the development
is located.



   (F)   Redevelopment of properties containing on-site storm water
quantity management practices may be permitted, at the discretion of the Town
of Chandler, provided the property and downstream public and private
properties, infrastructure or “Waters of the State” are adequately
protected by a regional facility(s) from storm water quantity or quality
impacts.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.034  COORDINATION WITH MASTER PLANS AND WATERSHED STUDIES.



   (A)   If available, each SWPPP shall be evaluated for consistency
with the storm water master plan or watershed study for the major watershed
or watersheds within which the project site is located.  The individual
project evaluation will determine if storm water quantity and quality
management practices can adequately serve the property and limit impacts to
downstream public and private properties. The presence of a regional
facility(s) will be considered in determining the extent to which quantity
and/or quality controls will be necessary.



   (B)   Special design criteria or requirements may be applied to
storm water quality BMPs based on the direction or results of master plans,
watershed studies and/or total maximum daily load (TMDL) requirements.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.035  STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT CLOSURE.



   (A)   A SWQMP shall be considered open and active until a time when
the Town of Chandler accepts the site conditions, as-built requirements have
been completed and a long-term operation and maintenance agreement has been
accepted.



   (B)   Acceptance of site conditions shall be made by Town of
Chandler through inspection.  If any of the following items are deemed to be
insufficient, not appropriate and/or inconsistent with the SWPPP or
objectives stated in this subchapter, then approval will not be granted.



      (1)   Pipes, channels, catch basins, water quality treatment
devices and other infrastructure are clear of sediment, obstructions and
debris, and are designed and operating as appropriate for final site
conditions.



      (2)   Slopes are permanently stabilized.



      (3)   Temporary erosion prevention or sediment control devices
(such as silt fence and staking, outlet protection, etc.) have been removed
(as appropriate) and any resulting soil disturbance stabilized.



      (4)   Temporary pollution prevention practices have been
demobilized or removed and/or affected areas stabilized.



      (5)   Sediment has been removed and slopes stabilized for
permanent flood control and water quality control practices.



      (6)   Detention pond grading is stabilized and/or excess
sediment removed so that actual volume is at least equal to design volume and
condition.



      (7)   Other items as deemed to be important by Town of
Chandler.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.036  AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to issuance of a use and occupancy permit, recording of
the final plat or final release of bond, the as-built condition (including:
invert elevations, size shape and location) of critical storm water
management features must be identified and approved.



   (B)   The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and topographic
information of all detention, retention and water quality practices shall be
certified by a licensed Professional Engineer. This information shall be
provided to the Town of Chandler, in the form of an as-built drawing or other
electronic form accepted/required by the Town of Chandler. The as-built
certification shall indicate if final conditions are consistent with, or
exceed, the SWQMP provisions.



   (C)   This section provides a set of guidelines and standards to
ensure all plan submittals in digital format are compatible with the GIS
system of the Town of Chandler.  The goal of these requirements is not to
burden the engineering, development and design community, but to standardize
submittals to ensure quality and compatibility. The following standards have
been developed and once initiated further revisions may be required.



      (1)   The media will be legibly labeled with project name and
phase; type of drawing (as-built, preliminary, final, etc.); submittal
number; file creation date; and contact information (name and phone number).



      (2)   As-built drawings shall be submitted in an electronic
format of either AutoCAD DWG or MicroStation format.



      (3)   Submittals shall be spatially referenced to NAD 83,
Indiana State Plane Coordinate System, East Zone, U.S. Survey feet and tied
to Grant corners, USGS or HARN monumentation as available.



      (4)   Elevations shall be referenced to the NAVD88 vertical
datum.



      (5)   Drawings elements shall reside in the primary drawing
file and not include cells, nodes, blocks or reference files (x-refs).



      (6)   All features included in the CAD drawing must be drawn
on their own layer and defined in the attribute table by a field named
“LAYER,” i.e. manholes should be attributed as MH in the field
“LAYER.”



      (7)   Metadata, or data documentation, should be included with
each submittal.  The metadata should include information outlining the
naming convention of each drawing file included in submittal, the type of
plans submitted (drainage or sewer), a description of each layer in the
drawing including names and descriptions of each submitted file, the
projection used to define the coordinate information used in the digital
submittal, a reference to the record number for the plans, date of
study/revision date, and any other notes pertinent to submittal.



   (D)   If it is determined that information provided in the as-built
drawing, certification, inspection or survey of the site do not meet or
exceed the SWQMP provisions, the Town of Chandler reserves the right to
withhold certification of occupancy or final bond. Furthermore, other
enforcement mechanisms, as identified within this chapter, may be applied to
the permittee or the person certifying the as-built information.



   (E)   If upon inspection by the Town of Chandler or its designated
representative it is determined that there is an item that must be addressed
to receive acceptance of site conditions, then the permittee shall be
required to continue inspections and maintenance as described in the SWQMP.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)



§ 53.037  LONG-TERM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   A SWQMP may not be closed until a long-term operation and
maintenance agreement has been accepted by Town of Chandler.



   (B)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements shall include a
maintenance plan for all storm water quality BMPs in new development or
redevelopment that require more than general maintenance (e.g., periodic
mowing).



      (1)   The plan will be developed to ensure that the storm
water quality BMP(s) is (are) kept functional. The maintenance agreement will
specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to be
performed by the property owner.



      (2)   The plan shall address schedules for inspections and
techniques for operation and maintenance including vegetation clearing or
mowing and removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and other
forms of pollution.



      (3)   The agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the
appropriate notation on the particular lot(s).



      (4)   The agreement shall be included with property ownership
title documents and shall be binding on the owner, its administrators,
executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in interest.



      (5)   The format for the long-term operational and maintenance
agreement(s) is included in Appendices A, B or C.



      (6)   Storm water detention and retention maintenance - care
must be taken to ensure that any required detention facilities do not become
nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should be
designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance expectations must be
clearly stated in a long-term operation and maintenance agreement.



      (7)   When a storm water quality BMP serves more than one
parcel, an owners' association or binding contract for the purpose of
operation and maintenance is required. The owners association shall be
responsible for operation and maintenance as directed by this ordinance.



      (8)   The maintenance responsibilities for permanent storm
water quality BMPs shall be determined based upon the type of ownership of
the property which is controlled by the facilities.



         (a)   1.   Single entity ownership. Where the
permanent storm water runoff control facilities are designed to manage runoff
from property in a single entity ownership, the maintenance responsibility
for the storm water control facilities shall be with the single entity owner.



            2.   A single entity shall be defined as an
association, public or private corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate
or any other legal entity allowed to own real estate exclusive of an
individual lot owner.



            3.   The stated responsibilities of the entity
shall be documented in the form of a long-term operation and maintenance
agreement.  Terms including owning, operating and maintaining the facilities
shall be submitted with plans in application for a SWQMP for determination of
their adequacy. Approval of a SWQMP shall be conditioned upon the approval of
these terms.  These terms shall be in writing, shall be in recordable form,
and shall, in addition to any other terms deemed necessary by the Town of
Chandler, contain a provision permitting inspection at any reasonable time by
the Town of Chandler of all facilities deemed critical in the public welfare.



            4.   Upon approval of the storm water quality BMPs
by the Town of Chandler, the facility owner(s) shall demonstrate the ability
to guarantee and apply the financial resources necessary for long-term
maintenance requirements. The funding mechanism shall be in a form approved
by the Town of Chandler.  The Town of Chandler will only accept funding
mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance responsibilities that can be
demonstrated to be permanent or transferable to another entity with
equivalent longevity.



            5.   In the event that proposed funding is through
an owners association, then it must be demonstrated that the association may
not dissolve unless long-term operation and maintenance activities are
accepted by another entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding.
Furthermore, the owners association's responsibility must be stated in the
association's declaration, covenants, or by-laws, as appropriate.



            6.   Unless made specifically clear in the
preliminary stages of the site design and construction plan review procedure,
it will be assumed that all storm water detention, retention, treatment or
storage facilities and/or devices shall be owned, operated and maintained by
a single entity as defined above.



         (b)   Town of Chandler ownership. Where the Town of
Chandler has  accepted an offer of dedication of the permanent storm water
quality BMPs, the Town of Chandler shall be responsible for operation and
maintenance.



         (c)   Maintenance bond. The Town of Chandler may require
the posting of a maintenance bond to secure the structural integrity of said
facilities as well as the functioning of said facilities in accordance with
the approved SWQMP for a term of 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication.  A cash contribution can be used as the financial assurance in
lieu of a maintenance bond although the contribution must be equivalent to
the amount that would be estimated for the maintenance bond.



(Ord. 2018-05, passed 5-24-2018)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 53.045  STANDARD REFERENCE MANUALS AND GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   The following reference manuals and guidance documents are
hereby incorporated by reference into this subchapter for use by the Town of
Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Board, Storm Water Department Manager, any
other MS4 personnel, project site owners, individual lot owners, planners,
trained individuals, certified personnel, and other persons operating subject
to this subchapter. The manuals and documents are hereby incorporated by
reference into this subchapter to assist in the selection, planning,
implementation, management, inspection, evaluation, monitoring, making
corrective recommendations, and reporting performance of storm water quality
measures, ECMs, and BMPs. Options are not limited to these manuals and
documents and the Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Board or Storm Water
Department Manager may approve the selection of control measures and
management practices from other sources:



      (1)   The Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual, and its
subsequent revisions, updates, addendums, and replacement additions;



      (2)   HERPICCStorm Water Drainage Manual, and its subsequent
revisions, updates, addendums, and replacement additions;



      (3)   Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, and its subsequent
revisions, updates, addendums, and replacement additions; and



      (4)   The Georgia Storm Water Management Manual, Vol. 2:
Technical  Handbook, available at: http://oeorgiastormwater.com.



   (B)   The Board may direct the creation of the Town of Chandler
Storm Water Manual and Standards as a part of the Town of Chandler Design and
Development Standards. After adoption of the Town of Chandler Storm Water
Manual and Standards, by resolution of the Board, the standards shall become
incorporated by reference to this subchapter, and the Board may subsequently
approve and adopt amendments to the manual. In addition, the Board may by
resolution incorporate by reference additional reference materials to this
subchapter, or delete reference, in order to assist and guide compliance with
this subchapter.



   (C)   The Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Board, or Storm
Water Department Manager will decide appropriateness of selection of an ECM,
BMP, or other storm water quality or quantity control measure submitted for
review based upon the most applicable engineering and technical criteria from
among the standard reference manuals and guidance documents attached to this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.046  PERMIT FEES.



   The following fees shall apply to permits required hereunder:



   (A)   Minor project site.  Single family residential project site
on no greater than 1 acre: $25;



   (B)   Minor project site.  Less than 1 acre and as a part of a
larger common plan of development than 1 acre: $40;



   (C)   Major project site. Construction disturbance on land greater
than 1 acre and a maximum of 5 acres: $100;



   (D)   Major project site.  Construction disturbance on land greater
than 5 acres and a maximum of 10 acres: $200;



   (E)   Major project site. Construction disturbance on land greater
than 10 acres and a maximum of 25 acres: $350; and



   (F)   Major project site.  Construction disturbance on land greater
than 25 acres: $500.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.047  POWERS OF INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Board, and Storm
Water Coordinator will develop appropriate procedures for project site
inspection, including protocols for use by project site inspectors and other
authorized representatives of the Town of Chandler, who will visit project
sites for the purpose of evaluating control measures and management
practices, examining conditions or information relative to this subchapter,
and making recommendations to ensure proper installation and maintenance of
sufficient appropriate control measures and management practices at project
sites regulated by this subchapter.



   (B)   The inspection procedures developed by the Town of Chandler
Engineer, Storm Water Department Manger, and Storm Water Board will
prioritize, to the extent allowable by state law, project sites for
inspection and enforcement based on nature and extent of construction
activity, topography, and the characteristics of soils and receiving water
quality.



   (C)   The Town of Chandler Engineer, Storm Water Board members or
Storm Water Department Manager may inspect any project site involved in
construction activities regulated by this subchapter at reasonable times for
the purpose of ascertaining the sufficient implementation and management of
appropriate storm water quality measures, ECMs, and BMPs at the project site
and for the purpose of enforcing compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager will make recommendations to the project site owner, individual lot
operator, or to the contractor, subcontractor, or other designated
representative of the project site owner or the individual lot operator to
correct or install appropriate control measures or management practices
corresponding to or beyond those specified in the Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWP3) necessary to achieve compliance with this subchapter.



   (E)   If after a specific or corrective recommendation from the Town
of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager to the project site
operator, or the designated representative of the project site operator, the
storm water quality measures, ECMs, and BMPs at a project site remain
insufficiently and improperly installed or maintained, the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager will pursue enforcement in
accordance with the penalty procedures in § 53.999 of this chapter.



   (F)   All persons engaging in construction activities on a project
site must comply with the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) for
the project site, and with the requirements, provisions, and regulations of
this subchapter.



   (G)   The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager will investigate violations, alleged violations, and potential
violations of this subchapter to determine which person or persons may be
responsible for violations. The Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager will, if appropriate, consider public records of
ownership, building permits issued by local units of government, and other
relevant information which may include site inspection records, SWP3s, NOIs,
and other documents related to the facts and circumstances of a violation.



   (H)   Any person or persons causing or contributing to a violation
of any requirement, provision, or regulation of this subchapter shall be
subject to enforcement and penalty under terms of this subchapter, and
additionally under I.C. 13-14-10, I.C. 13-15-7, I.C. 13-30, and any other
applicable state or federal law.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)  Penalty, see
§ 53.999



§ 53.048  MS4 PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS, CERTIFICATIONS, AND EDUCATION.



   (A)   The Town of Chandler Engineer and Storm Water Department
Manager and all personnel responsible for plan review, inspection, and
enforcement of construction activities must be trained individuals as defined
by this subchapter and must receive annual training addressing topics
including, but not limited to, appropriate control measures, inspection
protocol, and enforcement procedures.



   (B)   The Board, the Town of Chandler Engineer, and Storm Water
Department Manager will ensure each technician who reviews plans, inspects
project sites, exercises enforcement procedures, or presents or instructs an
element of this program does course work annually, and progresses toward
certification as a trained individual, and eventually as a state-certified
technician in technologies related to storm water management and MS4 program
assignments.



   (C)   The educational element of the Town of Chandler's construction
site runoff control program will require that each technician attend the
following programs provided by Indiana Department of Natural Resources:



      (1)   IDNR/DSC's existing and expanded outreach and education
program of specific training for local technicians to achieve adequacy in
plan review and permitting process procedures, and project site
implementation of erosion and sediment control measures.



      (2)   IDNR/DSC's comprehensive erosion and sediment control
courses established and available for in-house MS4 training.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.049  PUBLIC INPUT.



   (A)   The Town of Chandler Engineer and Storm Water Department
Manager must develop procedures for the receipt and considerations of public
inquiries, concerns, and information submitted whether written or oral,
regarding the quality of storm water runoff from construction sites.



   (B)   The Town of Chandler Engineer and Storm Water Department
Manager must implement a tracking process by which public information,
whether submitted orally or in writing, is documented and then given to
appropriate staff for follow-up, including an adequate investigation when
needed to determine appropriate resolution of the concern.



   (C)   The Town of Chandler Engineer and Storm Water Department
Manager may utilize other Town of Chandler agencies' applicable resources and
will use standardized documentation to other appropriate agencies to
accomplish appropriate follow-up.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.050  MEASURABLE PROGRAM GOALS.



   (A)   The Town of Chandler Engineer and/or Storm Water Board, Storm
Water Department Manger will develop measurable goals for the MS4
construction site runoff control program that identify specific outreach,
compliance, and implementation percentages and timetables.



   (B)   The measurable goals will address the implementation of this
subchapter and the MS4 program, especially with regard to
developer/contractor education outreach, site inspection procedure
implementation, construction site operator compliance improvement, and the
processing of public inquiries, concerns, and information.



   (C)   The Town of Chandler Storm Water Board, Engineer and/or Storm
Water Department Manager will set measurable goals to address the
implementation and steadily increasing achievement of the following 4
categories:



      (1)   Awareness and understanding of the requirements
established by this subchapter;



      (2)   Inspection protocol, frequency, assistance, and
enforcement toward achievement of project site control through appropriate
use of control measures;



      (3)   Construction site operator compliance with regulation
under this subchapter; and



      (4)   Public input and response regarding construction
activities.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.051  PROJECT TERMINATION.



   (A)   Regular termination of a project.  The project site owner
must plan an orderly and timely termination of construction activities,
including the implementation of storm water quality measures that are to
remain on the project site.



   (B)   Notice of termination.  The project site owner must submit a
notice of termination (NOT) letter to the Director of IDEM, and transmit a
copy of the NOT to the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager or his or her designee in accordance with this section.



   (C)   Conditions of termination.  Except as provided in this
section, at division (E) below, the project site owner shall submit an NOT
letter only when the following conditions have been met:



      (1)   All land disturbing activities, including construction
on all building lots, have been completed and the entire site has been
stabilized.



      (2)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures have
been removed.



   (D)   Statement.  The NOT letter must contain a statement, verified
by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager, that each
of the conditions in this section, at division (C) above have been met.



   (E)   Early release termination.  The project site owner may submit
a NOT letter to obtain early release from compliance with this subchapter and
from permit regulations under 327 I.A.C. 15-5, if the following conditions
are met:



      (1)   The project site owner has notified existing owners of
title of the remaining undeveloped lots that the individual lot owners and
the individual lot operators will be responsible for the implementation,
management, and timely removal of storm water quality measures appropriate
and sufficient to meet the requirements, provisions, and regulations of this
subchapter, and for final stabilization of the individual lot in accordance
with this subchapter.



      (2)   The project site owner has recorded a copy of each of
the notifications to the property owners in the record appropriate for chain
of title documents in the office of the Warrick County Recorder.



      (3)   The project site owner has provided the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager with verification of the recording
of the notification documents and verification of their delivery to the
affected property owners of record.



      (4)   The remaining undeveloped acreage does not exceed 5
acres, with contiguous undeveloped areas not to exceed 1 acre in aggregate.



      (5)   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all
remaining undeveloped lots, is attached to the NOT letter sent to IDEM, with
a copy sent to the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager.



      (6)   The map must contain a list of names and addresses of
the individual lot owners of title of all undeveloped lots and, if
applicable, the individual lot operators.



      (7)   All public and common improvements, including
infrastructure and storm water drainage facilities in accordance with the
approved construction plans and applicable plans approved by the Town of
Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager, have been completed and
permanently stabilized and have been transferred to the appropriate local
entity, homeowners association, or applicable property owner or land
management entity.



      (8)   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat
to the integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties, or water quality.



      (9)   All permanent storm water quality measures have been
implemented and are operational.



   (F)   IDEM requires notice to subsequent lot owners and lot
operators in accordance with the state rule.  Following the acceptance of
the NOT letter and written approval from IDEM for early release under 327
I.A.C. 15-5-8(b), a project site owner shall notify all current individual
lot owners and all subsequent individual lot owners of the remaining
undeveloped acreage and acreage with construction activity that they are
responsible for complying with 327 I.A.C. 15-7-5. The notice must contain a
statement verified by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department
Manager that each of the conditions enumerated in division (E) above have
been met; and the project site owner must inform the individual lot owners of
remaining undeveloped lots of the following 2 requirements:



      (1)   To install and maintain appropriate measures to prevent
sediment from leaving the individual building lots; and



      (2)   To maintain all erosion and sediment control measures
that are to remain on-site as part of the construction plan.



   (G)   Final inspection prior to early release NOT. The Town of
Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager must inspect the project
site to evaluate the adequacy of the remaining storm water quality measures
and compliance with the NOT letter requirements and make a relevant report to
IDEM. If the inspecting entity finds that the project site owner has
sufficiently filed a NOT letter, the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager shall forward (verified NOT) notification to IDEM. Upon
receipt of the verified NOT letter by IDEM and receipt of written approval
from IDEM, the project site owner shall no longer be responsible for
compliance with 327 I.A.C. 15-5.



   (H)   Post-permit responsibility for maintenance. After a verified
NOT letter has been submitted for a project site and approved by IDEM,
maintenance of the remaining storm water quality measures will be the
responsibility of the individual lot owner or occupier of the property in
accordance with this subchapter and other applicable local codes.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.052  COMPLIANCE WITH ALL PERTINENT ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The project site owner must comply with all appropriate
ordinances and regulations related to storm water discharges within the
jurisdictional areas regulated under this subchapter.



   (B)   This subchapter is required by 327 I.A.C. 15-13-15(b) and 327
I.A.C. 15-13-16(b) and shall be considered to have the same authority as 327
I.A.C. 15-5 within the jurisdictional areas of the Town of Chandler, Indiana,
regulated by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.053  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT BOARD; POWERS.



   The Board retains the right to certain statutory and discretionary
powers including, but not necessarily limited to considering appeals of a
project site owner, making findings and determinations, issuing orders, or
instructing and directing the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water
Department Manager with regard to and in accordance with this subchapter and
other applicable federal, state and local laws and rules.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.054  INTER-DEPARTMENT AND CO-REGULATORY AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The Board, with approval of the Town Council, may enter into
agreements with or direct the use of another entity, county or municipal
agency, or agent for the purpose of accomplishing the requirements of and
regulations under this subchapter so long as the Town of Chandler Engineer or
Storm Water Department Manager maintains the administrative control, within
the jurisdictional area of the Town of Chandler, of the plan review and
approval process and construction site runoff control program established by
this subchapter.



   (B)   The Board, with approval of the Town Council, may enter into a
legally binding agreement with another MS4 entity by which agreement the Town
of Chandler Engineer of Storm Water Department Manager performs services for,
receives services from, or exchanges services with the other MS4 entity to
the benefit of the parties to the agreement.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



DEPARTMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



§ 53.070  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND UTILITY.



   (A)   The Town of Council of the Town of Chandler finds, determines
and declares that the storm water system which provides for the collection,
treatment, storage and disposal of storm water provides benefits and services
to all property within the incorporated town limits.



   (B)   The benefits include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   The provision of adequate system of collection,
conveyance, detention, treatment and release of storm water;



      (2)   The reduction of hazards to property and life resulting
from storm water runoff;



      (3)   Improvements in general health and welfare through
reduction of undesirable storm water conditions; and



      (4)   Improvements to the water quality in the storm water and
surface water system and its receiving waters.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.071  CREATION OF STORM WATER UTILITY.



   (A)   For the purpose of the Federal Clean Water Act of the I.C.
8-1.5-5-1 et seq., there is hereby created a Department of Storm Water
Management, which shall be governed by a board of 3 directors, who shall be
appointed by the Municipal Director of the town, not more than 2 of whom
shall be the same political party. As provided in I.C. 8-1.5-5-4 and
8-1.5-5-6, the term of each Director shall be for a period of 4 years,
however; the initial term of each Director shall be staggered, so that 1
Director shall be appointed for 1 year; a second Director for 2 years; and a
third Director for a term of 3 years. The Municipal Executive of the town may
remove a Director at any time when, in the judgement of the Municipal
Executive, it is for the best interest of the Department. The Department of
Storm Water Management shall consist of a manager and the staff as deemed
necessary by the Board of Directors, with the approval of the Town Council.



   (B)   The Department of Storm Water Management, under the
legislative policy, supervision and control of the Town Council, shall:



      (1)   Administer the acquisition, design, construction,
maintenance and operation of the Department of Storm Water Management system,
including capital improvements designated in the capital improvement program;



      (2)   Administer and enforce this subchapter and all
regulations and procedures adopted relating to the design, construction,
maintenance, operation and alteration of the utility storm water system,
including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality and/or velocity of the
storm water conveyed thereby;



      (3)   Advise the Town Council and other town departments on
matters relating to the utility;



      (4)   Prepare and revise a comprehensive drainage plan for
adoption by the Town Council;



      (5)   Review plans and approve or deny, inspect and accept
extensions and connections to the system;



      (6)   Enforce regulations to protect and maintain water
quality and quantity within the system in compliance with water quality
standards established by the state, regional and/or federal agencies as now
adopted or hereafter amended; and



      (7)   Annually analyze the cost of services and benefits
provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and
other revenues of the utility.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008; Am. Ord.
2014-27, passed 7-15-2014)



§ 53.072  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. The word “shall” is mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive. Words not defined in this
section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary
use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      BASE RATE.  The storm water user’s fee for a detached single
family residential property in the town.



      CONSTRUCTION.  The erection, building, acquisition, alteration,
reconstruction, improvement or extension of storm water facilities;
preliminary planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of
storm water facilities; the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and
economic investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working
drawings, specifications, procedures, and other action necessary in the
construction of storm water facilities; and the inspection and supervision of
the construction of storm water facilities.



      DEVELOPED PROPERTY.  Real property which has been altered from
its natural state by the creation or addition of impervious areas, by the
addition of any buildings, structures, pavement or other improvements.



      EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU.  The average square footage
of a detached single family residential property determined pursuant to this
subchapter.



      EXEMPT PROPERTY.  All property that does not discharge storm
water runoff into the storm water or flood control facilities of the
municipality.



      FEE or STORM WATER USER'S FEE.  The charge established under
this subchapter and levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces or real
property to fund the costs of storm water management and of operating,
maintaining, and improving the storm water system in the municipality. The
storm water user’s fee is in addition to any other fee that the
municipality has the right to charge under any other rule or regulation of
the municipality.



      FISCAL YEAR.  January 1 of a calendar year to December 31 of the
same calendar year, both inclusive.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  A surface which is compacted or covered
with material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not
limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios,
driveways, parking lots, and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted, or
any other surface which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA.  The number of square feet of
horizontal surface covered by buildings, and other impervious surfaces. All
building, measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls,
foundations, columns or other means of support or enclosure.



      OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Developed property other than
single-family residential property. The property shall include, but not be
limited to commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots,
hospitals, schools, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices,
and churches.



      PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including
any individual, firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.



      PROPERTY OWNER.  The property owner of record as listed in the
county's assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual,
corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and
any trustee, receiver, or personal representatives.



      SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  A developed property which
services the primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit to a
single family. A single family detached dwelling or a townhouse containing an
accessory apartment or second dwelling unit is included in this definition.



      STORM WATER.  Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, street wash
waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration, and drainage.



      STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.  The planning, design, construction,
regulation, improvement, repair, maintenance, and operation of facilities and
programs relating to water, floodplains, flood control, grading, erosion,
tree conservation, and sediment control.



      STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FUND or FUND.  The fund created by this
subchapter to operate, maintain, and improve the town's storm water system.



      SURFACE WATER.  Water upon the surface of the earth in bounds
created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams,
other water courses, lakes and reservoirs.



      TOWN.  The Town of Chandler and all property located within the
corporate limits thereof together with the other property located in areas
over which the Department of Storm Water Management may exercise jurisdiction
under applicable law and regulation including, but not limited to 327 I.A.C.
15-13 and I.C. 8-1.5-5.



      USER.  The owner of record of property subject to the storm
water user’s fee imposed by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2004-7, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord.
2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.073  FUNDING.



   (A)   Funding for the Department of Storm Water Management's
activities may include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Storm water user’s fees;



      (2)   Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or
arising from the violation of the town's Storm Water Management ordinance;



      (3)   Soil and Erosion Control Plan permit fees;



      (4)   Compliance inspection fees;



      (5)   Taxes levied pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5 or other relevant
authority;



      (6)   Revenue bonds issued pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5; and



      (7)   Other funds or income obtained from federal, state,
local, and/or private sources as provided by law or from grants, or revolving
funds.



   (B)   To the extent that the storm water drainage fees collected are
insufficient to construct needed storm water drainage facilities, the cost of
the same may be paid from the town funds as may be determined by the Town
Council.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.074  STORM WATER FUND.



   All revenues generated by or on behalf of the Department of Storm Water
Management shall be deposited in a Department of Storm Water Management Fund
and used exclusively for the Department of Storm Water Management.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.075  OPERATING BUDGET.



   The Town Council shall adopt an operating budget for the Department of
Storm Water Management each fiscal year. The operating budget shall set forth
for the fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for
operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.076  FEE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Storm water user’s fee established.  There shall be imposed
on each and every developed property in the town, except exempt property, a
storm water user’s fee, which shall be set from time to time by ordinance
or resolution, and in the manner and amount prescribed by this subchapter.
Prior to establishing or amending user's fees, the municipality shall
advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in Warrick County at least 30 days in advance of the meeting of
the municipality's Town Council which shall consider the adoption of the fees
or its amendment.



   (B)   Soil and Erosion Control Plan permit fee. There shall be
imposed on each and every property being developed in the town, a Soil and
Erosion Control Plan permit fee, which shall be set from time to time by
ordinance or resolution, and in the manner and amount prescribed by this
subchapter. Prior to establishing or amending the Soil and Erosion Control
Plan permit fee, the municipality shall advertise its intent to do so by
publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Warrick County at
least 30 days in advance of the meeting of the municipality's Town Council
which shall consider the adoption of the fee or its amendment.



   (C)   Compliance inspection fee.  There shall be imposed on each
and every property in the town, a compliance inspection fee, for inspections
necessitated because of a violation of any provision of this subchapter,
which shall be set from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and in the
manner and amount prescribed by this subchapter. Prior to establishing or
amending the compliance inspection fee, the municipality shall advertise its
intent to do so by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
Warrick County at least 30 days in advance of the meeting of the
municipality's Town Council which shall consider the adoption of the fee or
its amendment.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.077  EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT.



   (A)   Establishment.  There is established for purposes of
calculating the storm water user’s fee the Equivalent Residential Unit
(ERU).



   (B)   Definition.  The ERU is the average square footage of a
detached single family residential property.



   (C)   Setting the ERU.  The ERU shall be set by the Town Council
from time to time by ordinance or resolution.



   (D)   Source of ERU. The Town Council shall have the discretion to
determine the source of the data from which the ERU is established, taking
into consideration the general acceptance and use of the source on the part
of other storm water systems, and the reliability and general accuracy of the
source. The municipality's Town Council shall have the discretion to
determine the impervious surface area of other developed property through
property tax assessor's rolls or site examination, mapping information,
aerial photographs, and other reliable information.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.078  PROPERTY CLASSIFICATION FOR USER’S FEE.



   (A)   Property classifications.  For purposes of determining the
storm water user’s fee, all properties in the town are classified into 1 of
the following classes:



      (1)   Single family residential property;



      (2)   Other developed property; and



      (3)   Exempt property.



   (B)   Single family residential fee.  The Town Council finds that
the intensity of development of most parcels of real property in the
municipality classified as single family residential is similar and that it
would be excessively and unnecessarily expensive to determine precisely the
square footage of the improvements (such as building, structures, and other
impervious areas) on each parcel. Therefore, all single family residential
properties in the town shall be charged a flat storm water user’s fee,
equal the base rate, regardless of the size of the parcel or the improvements.



   (C)   Other developed property fee.  The fee for other developed
property (i.e., non-single family residential property) in the municipality
shall be the base rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by
dividing the total impervious area (square feet) of the property by 1 ERU.
The impervious surface area for other developed property is the square
footage for the buildings and other improvements on the property. The minimum
storm water user’s fee for other developed property shall equal the base
rate for single family residential property.



   (D)   Exempt property.  There shall be no storm water user’s fee
for exempt property.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.079  BASE RATE.



   The Town Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish the base
rate for the storm water user’s fee. The base rate shall be calculated to
insure adequate revenues to fund the costs of storm water management and to
provide for the operation, maintenance, and capital improvements of the storm
water system in the town.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.080  ADJUSTMENTS TO USER’S FEE.



   The Department of Storm Water Management shall have the right on its
own initiative or upon appeal to adjust upward or downward the storm water
user’s fee of a person with respect to any property, based on the
approximate percentage on any significant variation in the volume or rate of
storm water, or any significant variation in the quality of storm water,
emanating from the property, compared to other similar properties. In making
determinations of the similarity of property, the Department of Storm Water
Management shall take into consideration the location, geography, size, use,
impervious area, storm water facilities on the property, and any other
factors that have a bearing on the variation.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.081  PROPERTY OWNER TO PAY CHARGES.



   The owner of each non-exempt lot or parcel shall pay the storm water
user’s fees and charges as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.082  BILLING PROCEDURES; PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   Rate and collection schedule.  The storm water user’s fee
must be set at a rate, collected on a schedule, established by ordinance or
resolution.



   (B)   Delinquent bills.  The storm water user’s fee shall be paid
in person or by mail at Chandler Town Hall, 417 E Jefferson Street, Chandler,
IN 47610 and shall become delinquent as of 17 days following the billing
date. Any unpaid storm water user’s fee shall bear interest at the legal
rate if it remains unpaid after the due date.



   (C)   Penalties for late payment.  Storm water user’s fees shall
be subject to a late fee established by ordinance or resolution. The
municipality shall be entitled to recover attorney's fees incurred in
collecting delinquent drainage fees. Any charge due under this subchapter
which shall not be paid may be recovered at law by the municipality.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.083  APPEALS OF FEES.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person who disagrees with the calculation of
the storm water user’s fee, as provided in this subchapter, or who seeks a
storm water user’s fee adjustment based upon storm water management
practices, may appeal the fee determination to the Department of Storm Water
Management within 30 days from the date of the last bill containing, storm
water user’s fees charges. Any appeal shall be filed in writing and shall
state the grounds for the appeal. The Department of Storm Water Management
Director may request additional information from the appealing party.



   (B)   Adjustments.  Storm water user’s fee adjustments for storm
water management practices may be considered for: reductions in runoff volume
including discharge to a non-town drainage system; and properly designated
constructed and maintained existing retention facilities, i.e. evaporation
and recharge. Based upon the information provided by the utility and the
appealing party, the Department of Storm Water Management shall make a final
calculation of the storm water user’s fee. The Department of Storm Water
Management shall notify the parties, in writing, of its decision.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.084  CREATION OF SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICT.



   There is hereby created, pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5-5, a special taxing
district encompassing all property within the territory of the Town of
Chandler, Warrick County, Indiana, and to the extent permitted all property
outside the limits of the corporate boundaries of the Town of Chandler,
Warrick County, Indiana, over which the Department of Storm Water Management
may exercise jurisdiction under applicable law and regulation including but
not limited to 327 I.A.C. 15-13.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.085  PAYMENT OF PENALTIES.



   (A)   All penalties shall be payable to the Town of Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of Chandler
Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under this
subchapter for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the
violation.



   (B)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not waive
trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town of
Chandler Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing
with the appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Violations.  The following acts, conditions, and
circumstances are violations of this ordinance and subject to enforcement,
penalties, and fines under §§ 53.001 et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§
53.045et seq. of this chapter:



         (a)   An act, a series of acts, or a group of acts that
contradicts the requirements, provisions, and regulations of §§ 53.001 et
seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter;



         (b)   A condition, a series of conditions, or a group of
conditions that exists in contradiction to the requirements, provisions, and
regulations of  §§ 53.001 et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et
seq. of this chapter;



         (c)   Each act and each condition that contradicts or is
in contradiction to a requirement, provision, and regulation of  §§ 53.001
et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter
constitutes a separate and single violation; and



         (d)   Each day that a violation exists constitutes a
separate violation and is subject to penalty or prosecution.



      (2)   Penalty procedures.  The Town of Chandler Engineer and
Storm Water Department Manager will employ the following procedures with
regard to assigning penalties to enforce the requirements, provisions, and
regulations of  §§ 53.001 et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et
seq. of this chapter.



         (a)   First violation.  The initial determination of a
violation or group of violations at a project site. Upon ascertaining and
documenting the occurrence of a first violation at a project site, the Town
of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager, project site
inspector, or authorized representative of the Town of Chandler Engineer or
Storm Water Department Manager will make a corrective recommendation to the
appropriate individual or individuals responsible for correcting the
violation, together with a notice that the correction must be accomplished
within 10 working days after the issuance of the notice to prevent the
citation of a second violation with regard to the same condition or
conditions that caused the first violation.



         (b)   Second violation.  The determination that after
10 working days past the notification of a first violation, the condition or
conditions constituting the first violation remain uncorrected or otherwise
not compliant with the requirements, provisions, and regulations of §§
53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. Upon ascertaining
and documenting the occurrence of a second violation at a project site, the
Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager will issue a
non-compliance citation to the appropriate individual or individuals
responsible for correcting the violating condition or conditions, together
with a notice that the correction must be accomplished within 5 calendar days
from the date of the noncompliance citation, and the potential for personnel
or a contractor employed by the Town of Chandler complete work to correct the
violating condition or conditions at the project site. The civil penalty for
the noncompliance citation of a second violation will be $200. If the penalty
is not paid within 30 days, the citation may be enforced in Court by any
remedy allowed by law, and an action or any other remedy allowed by law,
including filing a lien on the project site, may be maintained to recover the
costs of corrective measures employed by the Town of Chandler in addition to
the fine or penalty referred to above. Should the Town of Chandler resort to
collection procedures, it shall be entitled to recover a reasonable attorney
fee for the collection procedures.



         (c)   Third violation.  The determination that any time
after a specified or reasonable period for the correction of a second
violation has elapsed, the condition or conditions constituting the second
violation remain uncorrected or otherwise not compliant with the
requirements, provisions, and regulations of §§ 53.001et seq., §§
53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. Upon ascertaining and documenting the
occurrence of a third violation at a project site, the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager will issue a second noncompliance
citation to the appropriate individual or individuals responsible for
correcting the violating condition or conditions, together with a notice that
the project site is subject to a stop work order issued by the Town of
Chandler Building Department Administrative Official or other agency with the
authority to stop work at the project site, and the potential for the
immediate employment of personnel or a contractor employed by the Town of
Chandler to complete work to correct the violating condition or conditions at
the project site. The civil penalty for the second noncompliance citation
will be $500. If the penalty is not paid within 30 days, the citation may be
enforced in Court by any remedy allowed by law, and an action or any other
remedy allowed by law, including filing a lien on the project site, may be
maintained to recover the costs of corrective measures employed by the Town
of Chandler in addition to the fine or penalty referred to above. Should the
Town of Chandler resort to collection procedures, it shall be entitled to
recover a reasonable attorney fee for the collection procedures.



         (d)   Deadlines. The Board, the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager reserve the right to assign a
deadline for corrective action, impose a stop work order, or work to complete
corrective measures on a schedule or by a deadline accelerated or shortened
comparatively to the schedule or deadline assigned in this section for
correcting a violating condition if an accelerated schedule or deadline is
required to protect life or property from an eminent and severe threat of
loss or damage.



         (e)   Corrective measurers.  The Board, the Town of
Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager may perform or cause to
be performed, the work as necessary to accomplish corrective measures at a
project site by employees of the Town of Chandler or by a contractor hired to
perform the work.



         (f)   Stop work order.  A stop work order issued
pursuant to this section and §§ 53.001et seq., §§ 53.020et seq., and §§
53.045et seq. shall not be rescinded until all recommended corrective
measures have been completed and the Town of Chandler or its contractor has
been paid for all costs incurred.



         (g)   Liability.  Any project site owner, individual
lot operator, contractor, subcontractor, property owner, or other person or
persons responsible for construction activities at a project site who violate
the terms, requirements, provisions, or regulations of  §§ 53.001 et seq.,
§§ 53.020et seq., and §§ 53.045et seq. of this chapter are liable for the
costs of removal of sediment and other storm water pollutants deposited in
any right-of-way, drain, storm sewer, drainage easement, Town of Chandler
maintained or controlled property and any and all other corrective action
required to restore the property to a condition equal to or better than the
condition prior to a violation. The costs may be pursued in court and/or
filed as a lien against the property pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-2, or under any
other state law.



      (3)   Appeal of notice of violation.  Any person receiving a
notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Town of Chandler
Engineer or Storm Water Department Manager to the Board. The notice of appeal
must be received by the Town of Chandler Engineer or Storm Water Coordinator
within 10 working days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on
the appeal before the Board shall take place within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Board shall be final.



(Ord. 2006-6, passed - -)



   (C)   Further violations.



      (1)   A person who violates §§ 53.070et seq. shall be
subject to the following penalties:



         (a)   First offense: $100;



         (b)   Second offense: $1,000; and



         (c)   Third or subsequent offense: $2,500.



      (2)   Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.



      (3)   In addition to the monetary penalties provided in
division (C)(1) above, a court, upon application of the Town of Chandler, may
enter injunctive relief to prevent future violations of §§ 53.070et seq.



(Ord. 2004-4, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



CHAPTER 54: WATER



Section




Rates, Charges and Fees




   54.01   Waterworks Utility rates and charges; adopted by reference




Rationing and Withdrawal




   54.15   Conservation and rationing; water furnished by the town



   54.16   Withdrawal from town fire hydrants



 



   54.99   Penalty



RATES, CHARGES AND FEES



§ 54.01  WATERWORKS UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Town of Chandler, Indiana’s rates and charges for the use and
services rendered by the Waterworks Utility of the town, are hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 2000-16, passed 8-7-2000; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



RATIONING AND WITHDRAWAL



§ 54.15  CONSERVATION AND RATIONING; WATER FURNISHED BY THE TOWN.



   (A)   Application.  This section shall apply to all persons, firms,
partnerships, corporations, companies or organizations of any kind connected
to the Town of Chandler public water system or using water there from
(hereafter, users).



   (B)   Declaration of need.  Upon determination by the Town Council
that the public water system is in imminent danger of a shortage of water or
is experiencing a shortage of water, the Town Council may declare a water
conservation emergency and establish the appropriate conservation measures
and the duration thereof.



   (C)   Voluntary conservation.  Upon notice as required by division
(G) below, users shall be requested to reduce water consumption by practicing
voluntary conservation techniques. The Town Council shall suggest reasonable
and meaningful actions which will alleviate existing or potential water
shortage.



   (D)   Mandatory conservation.  Upon notice as required by division
(G) below, users shall be prohibited from the water uses listed below,
subject to reasonable terms, times and conditions as the governing body shall
determine:



      (1)   Sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees,
grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, or any other
vegetation;



      (2)   Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, mobile homes,
railroad cars or any other type of mobile equipment;



      (3)   Cleaning or spraying of sidewalk, driveways, paved
areas, or other outdoor surfaces;



      (4)   Washing and cleaning of any business equipment or
machinery;



      (5)   The filling of swimming pools, wading pools and
ornamental fountains; and



      (6)   Knowingly allowing leakage through defective plumbing.



   (E)   Rationing.  In addition to the mandatory conservation
measures identified in division (D) above, and upon notice as required by
division (G) below, users shall be limited to use per the following schedule:



      (1)   Residential use shall be limited to 50 gallons per
person per day.



      (2)   Business, commercial and industrial users shall be
limited to 90% of the volume of water used during the corresponding month of
the preceding year. Business, commercial or industrial users that were not in
business and operating in the area served by the Town of Chandler public
water system more than 1 year prior to the declaration of need shall be
restricted to 90% of the average monthly volume of water used during the
number of months the business, commercial and industrial user was in business
and operating in the public water system area.



   (F)   Exceptions.  The Town Council reserves the right to establish
alternative rationing requirements for the following:



      (1)   Health care providers;



      (2)   A reasonable use of water to maintain adequate health
and sanitary standards; and



      (3)   Those industrial and agricultural activities declared to
be necessary for the public health and well-being.



   (G)   Notice.



      (1)   Notice of voluntary conservation measures shall be by
publication in a local newspaper of general circulation or other means as
deemed appropriate by the governing body. The notice shall be effective upon
publication.



      (2)   Notice of mandatory conservation or rationing shall be
by first class United States mail, or by other door to door distribution to
each current user, and by electronic and print media. The notice shall be
deemed effective at the conclusion of door to door distribution, or at noon
of the third day after depositing same in the United States mail.



   (H)   Effective date.  This section shall be in full force and
effect upon passage and publication as required by law.



(Ord. 2006-8, passed 4-3-2006; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 54.16  WITHDRAWAL FROM TOWN FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   Scope.  This section will apply to the control of fire
hydrants owned and operated by the Town of Chandler, Warrick County, Indiana,
except that this section shall not apply to the utilization of the hydrants
by Fire Departments in the exercising of their duties and responsibilities.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FIRE HYDRANT.  The fire hydrants located in and on the Town of
Chandler Water System whether located within the corporate limits of the Town
of Chandler or otherwise.



      PERSON.  Any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation which includes any officer, employee, department, agency, or
instrumentally.



      TOWN OF CHANDLER WATER SYSTEM.  The water system owned and
operated by the Municipal Utility of the Town of Chandler, Warrick County,
Indiana.



   (C)   Prohibition.  No person shall cause to be removed from the
fire hydrants in and on the Town of Chandler Water System, any water, unless
and until the person shall secure a permission form from the Town of Chandler
Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 2003-3, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008) 
Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   A person who violates § 53.16 shall be subject to
the following penalties:



         (a)   First offense: $1,000.



         (b)   Second or subsequent offense: $2,500.



      (2)   At the discretion of the Director of Public Works or
Town of Chandler Chief of Police, the enforcement provision of § 53.16 may
be deferred of pending enforcement of any appropriate criminal sanctions
provided under the laws of the State of Indiana.



(Ord. 2003-3, passed 7-21-2003)



   (C)   Any user who violates § 53.15(D) and (E) may be punished by a
fine of not more than $2,500, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B). Each day of
violation shall constitute a serrate offense. In addition to, or in the
alternative to a fine, water service may be terminated for any user who
violates § 53.15(D) and (E).



(Ord. 2006-8, passed 4-3-2006; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      72.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Reserved



   70.02   Public streets and alleys; regulating use and vehicle weights




Off-road Vehicles




   70.15   Number of occupants



   70.16   Headlights, taillights, brakes and rear view mirror



 



   70.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 70.01  RESERVED.



§ 70.02  PUBLIC STREETS AND ALLEYS; REGULATING USE AND VEHICLE WEIGHTS.



   (A)   It shall hereafter be unlawful to operate or to cause to be
operated, upon any public street or alley within the Town of Chandler,
Indiana, any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross weight,
with load, in excess of 30,000 pounds.



   (B)   The Street Department of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, may
erect appropriate signs stating the existence of the limitation, but division
(A) above shall be operative whether or not the signs are erected.



   (C)   Any person or persons, natural or corporate, hereafter
operating or causing to be operated upon the public streets or alleys of the
Town of Chandler, Indiana, any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a
total gross weight, with load, in excess of 30,000 pounds, shall be guilty of
a violation of this section and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in
any sum not to exceed $10, along with the costs of any action.



   (D)   Whereas, an emergency exists for the immediate taking effect
of this section, it shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage.



(Ord. 2-1968, passed 2-5-1968)  Penalty, see § 70.99




OFF-ROAD VEHICLES




§ 70.15  NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS.



   No off-road vehicle shall be occupied by more persons than for which
the vehicle was designed. Each occupant shall have and use a separate seat.
Provided however, no vehicle commonly referred to as an ATV may be occupied
by no more than 2 persons when equipped with original manufacturer equipment
or equivalent. No part of the body of the operator or an occupant shall
extend outside the perimeter of the off-road vehicle while in operation.



(Ord. 2009-10, passed 8-17-2009)



§ 70.16  HEADLIGHTS, TAILLIGHTS, BRAKES AND REAR VIEW MIRROR.



   The off-road vehicle must meet those standards of headlights,
taillights, and brakes required under I.C. 14-16-1-21. The off-road vehicle
shall be equipped with a functional rear view mirror at all times when the
vehicle is being operated.



(Ord. 2010-7, passed 8-27-2010)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99



   (B)   Traffic schedules.



      (1)   Any person operating a motor vehicle who fails to stop
at the locations of the stop signs shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed
to be guilty of a violation of Chapter 71, Schedule I, numbers 1 and 2, and
shall be fined in any sum not less than $1, along with the costs of any
action.



(Ord. 1994-4, passed 9-19-1994)



      (2)   Any person or persons who fail to comply with the
provisions of Chapter 71, Schedule I, numbers 3 and 4, Schedule III, number
1, and Schedule IV, number 1, shall upon conviction be fined in an amount of
not less than $10 or more than $2,500 per violation.



(Ord. 1992-20, passed 12-21-1992)



      (3)   Any person or persons who fail to comply with Chapter
71, Schedule II, number 1 shall, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of
an infraction and shall be fined accordingly.



(Ord. 1991-11, passed 6-17-1991)



      (4)   Any person or persons who fail to comply with the
provisions of Chapter 71, Schedule I, numbers 5 through 12, and Schedule III,
number 2, shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction, be fined in
the appropriate amount as defined by Indiana Statute.



(Ord. 1991-10, passed 4-15-1991)



      (5)   Any persons operating a motor vehicle or motor vehicles
in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of Chapter 71, Schedule
I, number 13 and Schedule III, number 3, shall be guilty of an infraction and
upon conviction, be fined in the appropriate amount as defined by Indiana law.



(Ord. 1987-13, passed 12-21-1987)



      (6)   Any persons operating a motor vehicle or motor vehicles
in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of Schedule I, numbers
14 and 15, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined in
any sum not to exceed $10 along with the costs of any action.



(Ord. 6-1974, passed 4-20-1974)



      (7)   Any person hereafter operating or causing to be operated
upon the public streets or alleys of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, any motor
vehicle or combination of motor vehicles in excess of the limits contained in
Schedule III, numbers 4 and 5, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not to exceed $10, along with
the costs of any action.



(Ord. 5-1974, passed 4-20-1974)



      (8)   Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of Chapter
71, Schedule IV, numbers 3 and 4, shall be deemed guilty and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $10, along with the costs
thereof.



(Ord. 4-1969, passed 1-5-1970)



      (9)   Any person or persons who fail to comply with Chapter
71, Schedule I, number 16, and who fail to stop at any of the 4 corners of
the intersection of State Street and Washington Street in Chandler, Indiana,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not to exceed $10, along
with the costs thereof.



(Ord. 3-1967, passed 10-2-1967)



      (10)   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of
Chapter 71, Schedule I, number 17 shall be subject to a civil penalty as
follows:



            1.   Ten dollars for the first violation in any
12-month period:



            2.   Twenty-five dollars for the second violation
in any 12-month period;



            3.   One hundred dollars for the third violation
in any 12-month period;



            4.   Two hundred and fifty dollars for the fourth
and subsequent violations accruing during any 12-month period



         (b)   1.   All penalties shall be payable to the Town
of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town
of Chandler Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under
this division for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the
violation.



            2.   All cases wherein persons cited for a
violation do not waive trial and admit the violation or default in appearance
before the Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing
with the appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-19-2007)



   (C)   Parking schedules.



      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of Chapter 72,
Schedule I, division (A) shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows:



         (a)   Ten dollars for the first violation in any
12-month period;



         (b)   Twenty-five dollars for the second violation in
any 12-month period;



         (c)   Fifty dollars for the third violation in any
12-month period; and



         (d)   One hundred dollars for the fourth and subsequent
violations accruing during any 12-month period.



(Ord. 2003-2, passed 4-21-2003)



      (2)   A person who violates Chapter 72, Schedule I, division
(A) shall be subject to the following penalties:



         (a)   First offense: $10;



         (b)   Second offense: $25; and



         (c)   Third or subsequent offense: $100.



      (3)   All fines and penalties shall be payable to the Town of
Chandler Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of
Chandler Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under
Chapter 72, Schedule I, division (A) for which the violator desires to waive
trial and admit violation.



      (4)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not
waive trail and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town
of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing
with the appropriate court in Warrwick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 2002-8, passed 12-3-2002)



      (5)   Any person who violates any provision of Chapter 72,
Schedule I, division (C) shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows:



         (a)   Ten dollars for the first violation in any
12-month period;



         (b)   Twenty-five dollars for the second violation in
any 12-month period;



         (c)   Fifty dollars for the third violation in any
12-month period; and



         (d)   One hundred dollars for the fourth and subsequent
violations accruing during any 12-month period.



   (D)   Public rights-of-way.



      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of § 70.01 shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall
be fined pursuant to the following schedule:



         (a)   First offense in a calendar year: $50.



         (b)   Second offense in a calendar year: $100.



         (c)   Third offense in a calendar year: $250.



      (2)   Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate
offense.



      (3)   All fines and penalties shall be payable to the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.  The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the Town Violations Clerk and
shall receive all payment of penalties under this chapter for which the
violator desires to waive trial and admit the violation.  The
Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept the payment of the monetary
penalties into the General Fund of the town.



      (4)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not
waive trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing with the
appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 2000-11, passed 8-21-2000; Am. Ord. 2013-4, passed 5-6-2013)



CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop intersections



   II.   Stop and yield intersections



   III.   Speed limits



   IV.   Through and preferential streets



SCHEDULE I: STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The Street Department of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall
place or cause to be placed appropriate signs stating the requirement that
vehicular traffic stop at the points stated in Schedule I, numbers 1 and 2,
and shall cause the same to be conspicuous and visible to all motor vehicle
traffic. The Department may, in addition to the stop signs, cause other
markings to be placed upon the pavement of Fisher Drive or in the vicinity of
the stop signs which shall notify the operators of motor vehicles of the stop
signs.



(Ord. 1994-4, passed 9-19-1994)



   (B)   Fuquay Road and Gardner Road within the corporate limits of
the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall be designated as snow routes for the
purpose of snow removal.



(Ord. 1992-20, passed 12-21-1992)



 

No.
 
Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




1.
 
At a point approximately 135 feet from the entrance upon Fisher Drive off
North Fourth Street, which the location may further be described as being
near the northeast corner of the lake in the Chandler Park.
 
1994-4
 
9-19-1994


2.
 
At a point approximately 300 feet from the entrance upon Fisher Drive from
North Fourth Street, or approximately 165 feet in a westerly direction from
the location of the sign described in number 1 above. This location is at or
near the northwestern corner of the lake in the Chandler Park.
 
1994-4
 
9-19-1994


3.
 
Because of Annexation Ord. 1992-9, that Fuquay Road at its beginning at the
Old E.S. and N.R.R. (now abandoned) to its intersection with the south
right-of-way of Gardner, be accepted by the Town of Chandler, Indiana for
maintenance and control, and that Gardner Road at its beginning with State
Road 62 west to its intersection with the east right-of-way of Fuquay Road,
be accepted by the Town of Chandler, Indiana for maintenance and control.
 
1992-20
 
12-21-1992


4.
 
All traffic traveling west on Gardner Road shall stop at its intersection
with State Road 62.
 
1992-20
 
12-21-1992


5.
 
All traffic traveling upon McCool Road at its intersection with North State
Street in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


6.
 
All traffic traveling upon North First Street at its intersection with McCool
Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


7.
 
All traffic traveling upon North Second Street at its intersection with
McCool Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


8.
 
All traffic traveling upon North Third Street at its intersection with McCool
Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


9.
 
All traffic traveling upon North Fourth Street at its intersection with
McCool Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


10.
 
All traffic traveling upon North Fifth Street at its intersection with McCool
Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


11.
 
All traffic traveling upon Berkshire Avenue at its intersection with McCool
Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


12.
 
All traffic traveling on Constitution Drive at its intersection with Fuquay
Road in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991>


13.
 
Motor vehicles traveling on the following streets located in the Town of
Chandler, Indiana, shall be required to stop at the intersections listed
hereinafter before proceeding into the intersection:

a. On Grant Street with its intersection with West Taylor Avenue.

b. On North Ohio Street with its intersection with West Taylor Avenue.

c. On West Monroe Street with its intersection with North Ohio Street.

d. On West Adams Street with its intersection with North Ohio Street.

e. On West Monroe Street with its intersection with Inderrieden Road.

f. On West Adams Street with its intersection with Inderrieden Road.

g. On North Ohio Street with its intersection with West Avenue.

 
 
1987-13
 
12-21-1987


14.
 
Motor vehicles traveling on the following streets shall be required to stop
at the intersections listed hereafter before proceeding into the intersection:

a. On North Indiana Street at its intersection with Green Valley Drive.

b. On North First Street at its intersection with East Jefferson Street.

c. On North Second Street at its intersection with East Jefferson Street.

d. On North Third Street at its intersection with East Jefferson Street.

e. On West Walnut Street at its intersection with South Tennessee Street.

f. On West Walnut Street at its intersection with South Kentucky Street.

g. On South Ohio Street at its intersection with West Walnut Street.

h. On South Ohio Street at its intersection with West Maple Street.

i. On North Indiana Street at its intersection with West Adams Street.

j. On North Illinois Street at its intersection with West Adams Street.
 
 


 
k. On North Indiana Street at its intersection with West Monroe Street.

l. On North Illinois Street at its intersection with West Monroe Street.

m. On East Williams Street at its intersection with the Southern Railway
Company tracks.

n. On East Mary Street at its intersection with South Fourth Street.

o. On South Iowa Street at its intersection with West Williams Street.

p. On West Adams Street at its intersection with North Kentucky Street.

q. On North Kentucky Street at its intersection with West Monroe Street.

r. On North First Street at its intersection with East Monroe Street.

s. On North Second Street at its intersection with East Monroe Street.

t. On South First Street at its intersection with East Williams Street.

u. On South Second Street at its intersection with East Williams Street.

v. On South Third Street at its intersection with East Williams Street.

w. On West Maple Street at its intersection with West Washington Street.

x. On Heim Road at its intersection with West Lincoln Avenue.

y. On South Delaware Street at its intersection with West Washington Street.
 
6-1974
 
4-20-1974

 


15.
 
The Department shall, in addition to other signs and markings, cause solid
painted lines to be placed upon the pavement of West Maple Street at its
intersection with West Washington Street, of Heim Road at its intersection
with West Lincoln Avenue, and of South Delaware Street and its intersection
with West Lincoln Avenue, and of South Delaware Street at its intersection
with West Washington Street, which the solid painted lines shall be prior to
the commencement of the intersection itself and motor vehicle traffic shall
be required to stop at the solid painted lines before proceeding into the
intersection.
 
6-1974
 
4-20-1974


16.
 
All traffic traveling upon State Street at its intersection with Washington
Street in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, shall stop at the intersection and
all traffic traveling upon Washington Street at its intersection with State
Street shall stop at the intersection and hereafter the intersection shall be
a 4-way.
 
3-1967
 
10-2-1967


17.
 
The intersection of Williams and Jaycee Streets shall be designated as a stop
intersection. The operator of all vehicles shall stop before entering the
intersection from any entrance thereto.
 
2007-13
 
11-19-2007




 



(Ord. 3-1967, passed 10-2-1967; Ord. 6-1974, passed 4-20-1974; Ord. 1987-13,
passed 12-21-1987; Ord. 1991-10, passed 4-15-1991; Ord. 1992-20, passed
12-21-1992; Ord. 1994-4, passed 9-14-1994; Ord. 2007-13, passed 11-19-2007)



SCHEDULE II: STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



 

No.
 
Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


1.
 
All traffic traveling east upon West Washington in the Town of Chandler,
Indiana, shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic traveling west on West
Washington Street at its intersection with Delaware Street.
 
1991-11
 
6-17-1991



 



(Ord. 1991-11, passed 6-17-1991)



SCHEDULE III: SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall hereafter be unlawful to operate or cause to be
operated, upon any public street or alley within the Town of Chandler,
Indiana, any motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles in excess of 25
mph, except upon the public streets where other limits may be posted.



   (B)   The appropriate persons and departments in the Town of
Chandler, Indiana, shall hereafter cause to be erected appropriate signs
advising of the limits contained in Schedule III, numbers 4 and 5.



(Ord. 5-1974, passed 4-20-1974)



 

No.
 
Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


1.
 
The speed limits for Fuquay Road and Gardner Road shall be 30 mph.
 
1992-20
 
12-21-1992


2.
 
It shall hereafter be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated, upon
McCool Road within the corporate limits of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, any
motor vehicle in excess of 30 mph.
 
1991-10
 
4-15-1991


3.
 
The following speed limits shall be established for the below listed streets:

a. West Taylor Avenue: 25mph.

b. North Ohio Street: 25 mph.
 
1987-13
 
12-21-1987


4.
 
It shall hereafter be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated, any motor
vehicle or combination of motor vehicles in excess of 20 mph upon Washington
Street in the Town of Chandler, Indiana, from the intersection of Washington
Street with South Second Street to the intersection of Washington Street with
West Cherry Street.
 
5-1974
 
4-20-1974


5.
 
It shall hereafter be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated, any motor
vehicle or combination of motor vehicles in excess of 20 mph on any part of
South Illinois Street in the Town of Chandler, Indiana.
 
5-1974
 
4-20-1974


6.
 
It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, any motor vehicle
or combination of motor vehicles in excess of 40 mph on any part of Gardner
Road between its intersections with Fuquay Road and with State Highway 62.
 
2008-11
 
11-17-2008



 



(Ord. 5-1974, passed 4-20-1974; Ord. 1987-13, passed 12-21-1987; Ord.
1991-10, passed 4-15-1991; Ord. 1992-20, passed 12-21-1992; Am. Ord. 2008-11,
passed 11-17-2008)



SCHEDULE IV: THROUGH AND PREFERENTIAL STREETS.



 

No.
 
Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


1.
 
Faquay Road at its beginning at the Old E.S. and N.R.R (now abandoned) to its
intersection with south right-of-way of Gardner, and that Gardner Road at its
beginning with State Road 62 west to its intersection with the east
right-of-way of Fuquay Road are hereby declared through and preferential
streets within the Town of Chandler, Indiana, and that all traffic before
entering or turning into the streets shall come to a complete stop.
 
1992-20
 
12-21-1992


2.
 
The following streets located in the limits of the Town of Chandler, Indiana,
shall hereafter be deemed as through and preferential streets for the use of
motor vehicles:

a. Lincoln Avenue at all places within the town except where traffic may be
controlled or regulated by any mechanical device or signal.

b. Washington Street at all places within the town except at its intersection
at State Street.

c. State Street at all places within the town except at its intersections
with Lincoln Avenue and Washington Street.

d. North Fourth Street at all places in the town except at its intersection
with Lincoln Avenue.

e. North Iowa Street at all places within the town except at its
intersections with Lincoln Avenue and Les Drive.

f. South Illinois Street at all places within the town except its
intersections with Lincoln Avenue and Washington Street.
 
6-1974
 
4-20-1974


3.
 
North Iowa, North Fourth and North Fifth Streets are hereby declared through
and preferential streets within the Town of Chandler, and that all traffic
before entering or turning into the streets shall come to a complete stop,
except where these streets cross or intersect with Lincoln Avenue.
 
4-1969
 
1-5-1970


4.
 
South Illinois Street is hereby declared a through and preferential street,
and that all traffic before entering or turning into the street shall come to
a complete stop, except where it crosses Washington Avenue.
 
6-1974
 
4-20-1974



 



(Ord. 4-1969, passed 1-5-1970; Ord. 6-1974, passed 4-10-1974; Ord. 1992-20,
passed 12-21-1992)



CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking schedules



SCHEDULE I: PARKING SCHEDULES.



   (A)   Iowa Street.



      (1)   No person shall park any motor vehicle, or any part
thereof, any portion of Iowa Street between Less Drive and Indiana Highway
No. 62 in the Town of Chandler.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle which is parked in violation of this
section shall be subject to being towed to a storage point as may be
specified from time to time by the Chandler Police Department and the motor
vehicle may be redeemed and claimed by the owner thereof after presenting
proof of ownership and paying the towing and accrued storing charges.



      (3)   Terms utilized herein shall have the meaning as defined
in I.C. 9-13-2 except that the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean A VEHICLE THAT
IS SELF-PROPELLED.



(Ord. 2003-2, passed 4-21-2003)



   (B)   Washington Street.



      (1)   Scope.  This division shall apply to the control of
parking along Washington Street between Jaycee Street and South Iowa Street
within the limits of the Town of Chandler.



      (2)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this division, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any automobile, truck, road tractor, trailer,
van, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, motor scooter, dune buggy,  snowmobile,
all-terrain vehicle, go-cart, minibike, or trail bike.



      PERSON.  Any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation which includes any officer, employee, department, agency, or
instrumentality.



      (3)   Parking prohibited.  No person shall park a motor
vehicle along Washington Street between Jaycee Street and South Iowa Street
on the days of Monday through Friday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:30
p.m.



      (4)   Posting.  The Town of Chandler shall cause appropriate
signs informing the public of the restrictions imposed by this division along
the route affected by this division.



      (5)   Effective date.  This division shall be effective upon
its passage and publication as is by law required.



(Ord. 2002-8, passed 9-3-2002)



   (C)   Parking in the town.



      (1)   No person shall park any motor vehicle, or any part
thereof, within the traveled portion of any street or road in the Town of
Chandler.



      (2)   No person shall park any motor vehicle within the south
right-of-way of West Oak Street in the Town of Chandler.



      (3)   No person shall park any motor vehicle within 300 feet,
either on the right-of-way or on the paved section, of the intersection
formed by Jaycee Street and West Oak Street in the Town of Chandler.



      (4)   No person shall park any motor vehicle within the east
right-of-way of Inderrieden Road within the limits of the Town of Chandler.



      (5)   The Town of Chandler, may with respect to all traveled
streets and roads within the Town of Chandler, decree by resolution, duly
enacted at a public meeting, any other area as restricted parking zones and
the areas shall be identified by the placement of signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles on the
streets and roads wherein the town has determined the need for the
restriction. The signs so placed, must be a official signs.



      (6)   No person may park a motor vehicle in an area prohibited
from the parking by signs as placed in accordance with provisions hereof.



      (7)   Any motor vehicle which is parked in violation of this
division shall be subject to being towed to a storage point as maybe
specified from time to time by the Chandler Police Department and the motor
vehicle may be redeemed and claimed by the owner thereof after presenting
proof of ownership and paying the towing and accrued storing charges.



      (8)   Terms utilized herein shall have the meaning as defined
in I.C. 9-13-2 except that the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean A VEHICLE THAT
IS SELF-PROPELLED.



(Ord. 2000-11, passed 9-21-2000)



Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   GENERAL GUIDELINES



      91.   ANIMALS



      92.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      93.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND RIGHT-OF-WAYS



      94.   NUISANCES



      95.   TREES, SHRUBS AND WEEDS



      96.   NOISE CONTROL



      97.   USE OF PROPERTY FOR ILLEGAL AND NUISANCE ACTIVITY



CHAPTER 90: GENERAL GUIDELINES



Section



   90.01   Burning regulations



   90.02   Exterior lighting



   90.03   Handgun applications; fees



   90.04   Fireworks



   90.05   Mining prohibited in town



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  BURNING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Title.  This section shall be referred to as The Chandler
Burning Ordinance.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PERSON.  Any natural person and any entity recognized as an
entity by the State of Indiana.



      TOWN.  All incorporated areas of Chandler, Warrick County,
Indiana.



   (C)   Regulated and prohibited acts.



      (1)   All burning, not specifically permitted herein, shall
within the town be prohibited.



      (2)   No person shall burn any material within the town except
as permitted by this section.



      (3)   This section does not apply to indoor heating units
using coal, clean wood, fuel oils, white gas, propane, Sterno, or other
natural gas as fuel for heating purposes.



   (D)   Exceptions.



      (1)   The only exceptions to division (C) above shall be as
follows:



         (a)   Fires celebrating school pep rallies;



         (b)   Fires celebrating scouting activities;



         (c)   Burning of natural growth derived from a clearing
operation, i.e., removal of natural growth for change in use of the land
where every reasonable means possible has been utilized to reclaim the
cleared, marketable trees or portions thereof for lumber, pulpwood, firewood,
and the like before a permit will be considered;



         (d)   Fires approved by and used by full- time or
volunteer Fire Departments for training purposes;



         (e)   Fires used for recreational and cooking purposes
that are on the ground, i.e., campfires;



         (f)   Fireplaces, fireplace inserts, wood burners for
heating purposes, and gas and charcoal grills; and



         (g)   Fires conducted by town employees.



         (h)   Residential maintenance fires during times and in
areas designated by the Town Council to dispose of leaves; wood resulting
from pruning; and wood broken away from trees as a result of weather
conditions so long as the wood burned is 3 inches or less in diameter at the
largest end thereof



(Ord. 2007-7, passed 11-5-2007).



      (2)   All exceptions under this division shall be subject to
the following:



         (a)   Only wood products may be burned unless otherwise
stated above.



         (b)   Fires shall be attended at all times until
completely extinguished.



         (c)   If a fire creates a nuisance or fire hazard as
determined by the Chandler Police or Fire Department, it shall be immediately
extinguished.



         (d)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
meteorological conditions, such as temperature inversions, high winds, air
stagnation, and the like.



         (e)   The issuance of a permit for the burning under the
exception provided in division (D)(1)(h).



(Ord. 2007-7, passed 11-5-2007)



   (E)   Permits.  Any person desiring to conduct burning in the town
under 1 or more of the exceptions as set forth herein under division (D)
except division (D)(1)(h) must first obtain a permit for the burning prior
thereto.



      (1)   Permits for divisions (D)(1)(a), (b), (d), and (e)
above.  Applications for permits under divisions (D)(1)(a), (b), (d), and
(e) above shall be to the Chandler Police Department at least 2 days in
advance of the requested excepted use. The application shall state the
purpose of the exception; the date and time of the burning; and the person or
persons who shall be responsible for the supervision of the burning. The
application shall be signed by the person or persons responsible or the
supervision of the burning and by the owner or owners of the property upon
which the burning shall occur. The application must be approved by the Police
Chief, Fire Chief, or Clerk-Treasurer, or the designated representative
thereof before the permit shall be issued. The decision of the official
acting thereon shall be final.



      (2)   Permits for division (D)(1)(c) above.  Applications for
permits under division (D)(1)(c) above shall be to the Chandler Police
Department at least 10 days in advance of the requested excepted use. The
application shall state the purpose of the exception; the date and time of
the burning; and the person or persons who shall be responsible for the
supervision of the burning. The application shall be signed by the person or
persons responsible for the supervision of the burning and by the owner or
owners of the property upon which the burning shall occur. The application
must be approved by the Chandler Fire Chief or his or her designated
representative before the application is submitted to the Chandler Police
Department. The Chandler Police Chief or his or her designated representative
must also approve the permit before the permit will be issued. The decision
of the officials acting thereon shall be final.



      (3)   Divisions (D)(1)(f), (g) and (h) exceptions.  There is
no requirement for a permit for burning included in the exception set forth
in divisions (D)(1)(f), (g) and (h) above.



(Ord. 2007-7, passed 11-5-2007)



   (F)   Payment of penalties to Violations Bureau.



      (1)   All penalties shall be payable to the Town of Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of Chandler
Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under this
section for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the violation.



      (2)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not
waive trial and admit the violation or default in appearance to the Town
Attorney for filing with the appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



   (G)   Effective date.  This section shall be effective upon its
passage and publication as is by law required.



(Ord. 2004-3, passed 3-1-2004)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   (A)   This section shall apply to the control of external lighting
within the limits of the Town of Chandler.



   (B)   The Town Council of the Town of Chandler, Warrick County,
Indiana, deems it necessary to regulate the use of spot lights, flood lights
and dusk to dawn type lighting as external lighting within the Town of
Chandler to protect the best interests of the Town of Chandler and its
citizens.



   (C)   No person shall install, utilize, and/or occupy real property
utilizing external lighting of a type commonly known as flood lights, spot
lights, and/or dusk to dawn type lights that are so positioned as to cast the
light therefrom directly or indirectly onto the property of another.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to lighting utilized to
illuminate any athletic, organized community events, or similar type events
occurring on governmentally owned or maintained property.



   (E)   (1)   All fines and penalties shall be payable to the Town
of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town
of Chandler Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under
this section for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the
violation.



      (2)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not
waive trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town
of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing
with the appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



   (F)   This section shall be effective upon its passage and
publication as is by law required.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 8-19-2002)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  HANDGUN APPLICATIONS; FEES.



   (A)   The fees for the processing of handgun applications are
established in this Code under § 30.02(F).



   (B)   The fees shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer to be
deposited in a separate fund, to be known as the Firearm Training Fund.



   (C)   In the event a handgun permit application is denied, the
statutorily provided refund shall be made from the Firearm Training Fund
without appropriation upon the presenting of a proper claim filed, allowed
and paid in the customary manner of processing claims by the town. No refunds
are to be made from any other fund of the Town of Chandler.



(Ord. 5-1981, passed 9-8-1981; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 90.04  FIREWORKS.



   Consumer fireworks may be used within the corporate limits of the Town
of Chandler only under the provisions of this section.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the term CONSUMER FIREWORKS
means a small firework that is designed primarily to produce visible effects
by combustion, and that is required to comply with the construction, chemical
composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR 1507. The term also includes
some small devices designed to produce an audible effect, such as whistling
devices, ground devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive
composition, and aerial devices containing 130 milligrams or less of
explosive composition. Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a
mixture of charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate are not considered as
designed to produce an audible effect. Consumer fireworks:



      (1)   Include:



         (a)   Aerial devices, which include sky rockets, missile
type rockets, helicopter or aerial spinners, roman candles, mines, and shells;



         (b)   Ground audible devices, which include
firecrackers, salutes, and chasers; and



         (c)   Firework devices containing combinations of the
effects described in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) of this section; and



      (2)   Do not include the following items:



         (a)   Dipped sticks or wire sparklers. However, total
pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 100 grams per item. Devices containing
chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed 5 grams in total composition per
item.



         (b)   Cylindrical fountains.



         (c)   Cone fountains.



         (d)   Illuminating torches.



         (e)    Wheels.



         (f)    Ground spinners.



         (g)    Flitter sparklers.



         (h)    Snakes or glow worms.



         (i)    Trick noisemakers, which include:



            1.   Party poppers.



            2.   Booby traps.



            3.   Snappers.



            4.   Trick matches.



         (j)   Cigarette loads.



         (k)   Auto burglar alarms.



   (B)   No person shall use, ignite or discharge consumer fireworks
within the corporate limits of the Town of Chandler except during the
following times:



      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on
June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and
July 9; and



      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on
July 4; and



      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00
a.m. on January 1.



   (C)   No person may use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks on
any public street or in any public park or public area within the corporate
limits of the Town of Chandler at any time.



   (D)   No person may use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks in
a manner which causes them to land upon property owned or occupied by another
person.



   (E)   No person may use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks
within the corporate limits of the Town of Chandler during any day on which a
burn ban has been issued by state or local authorities.



   (F)   This section shall not apply to supervised public fireworks
displays which have been properly permitted and approved by the State of
Indiana or by the Town Council of Chandler, Indiana.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 90.05  MINING PROHIBITED IN TOWN.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall mine or remove coal,
gas, oil, or other minerals from within the limits of the town by either the
stripping, open pit, auger, underground, room and pillar, longwall,
cut-and-fill, block, shaft, sublevel, borehole, vertical crater, slope, or
deep mine method of removing coal and minerals or of drilling for gas, oil,
or other energy materials by any commercially known means whatsoever.



   (B)   In addition to the general penalties provided by § 90.99 the
town is further authorized to take whatever injunctive relief is necessary to
enjoin and restrain the aforementioned removal of coal, gas, oil, or other
energy materials.



   (C)   There is hereby excepted from the above prohibitions the
mining or removal of coal or other minerals that may be necessary so as to
prepare ground within the town for the construction of buildings or dwellings
thereon. If such buildings or dwellings could not be constructed without the
removal of the subjacent or lateral shafts, then the mining or removal of
coal or minerals is permissible.



(Ord. 2017-05, passed 9-18-2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Violations covered by § 90.01(D)(1)(c).  Any person
who violates this section in a manner that would have been covered by §
90.01(D)(1)(c) of the exceptions, shall be penalized as follows:



         (a)   First offense: $500; and



         (b)   Second or subsequent offenses of violating this
section in a manner that would have been covered by § 90.01(D)(1)(c) above
occurring within a 24-month period: $2,500.



(Ord. 2007-7, passed 11-5-2007)



      (2)   Violations not covered by § 90.01(D)(1)(c). Any person
who violates any provision of this section except for violations that would
have been covered by § 90.01(D)(1)(c) above shall be penalized as follows:



         (a)   First offense: $50;



         (b)   Second offense of violating any division of §
90.01 occurring within a 24-month period: $250;



         (c)   Third offense of violating any division of §
90.01 occurring within a 24-month period: $1,000; and



         (d)   Fourth or subsequent offense of violating any
division of § 90.01 occurring within a 24-month period: $2,500.



(Ord. 2007-7, passed 11-5-2007)



      (3)   Additions to penalties.  In addition to the penalties
set forth above, any person found to have violated any provision of § 90.01
shall be liable for payment of court costs.



      (4)   Separate violations.  Each daily violation of any
provision of § 90.01 shall be considered a separate violation.



      (5)   Injunctive relief.  Nothing herein shall be construed
as limiting the right of the Town of Chandler to seek injunctive relief to
prohibit continuing violations.



(Ord. 2004-3, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 2007-7, passed 11-5-2007)



   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates § 90.02(C) shall be subject
to the following penalties:



         (a)   First offense: $50;



         (b)   Second offense: $100; and



         (c)   Third or subsequent offense: $350.



      (2)   In addition to the monetary penalties provided in §
90.02(A) above, a court, upon application of the Town of Chandler, may enter
injunctive relief to prevent future violations of § 90.02.



(Ord. 2005-5, passed 8-19-2002)



CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS



Section



   91.01   Prohibiting the release of fowl on town property



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  PROHIBITING THE RELEASE OF FOWL ON TOWN PROPERTY.



   No person shall release or cause to be released upon property owned,
leased or otherwise controlled by the Town of Chandler any chicken, duck,
goose or other fowl.



(Ord. 2001-12, passed 7-2-2001)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $25 for the first violation in any 12-month period and $50 for any
second or subsequent violation in any 12-month period.



(Ord. 2001-12, passed 7-2-2001)



CHAPTER 92: ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Adoption of state law



   92.03   Responsibility of owner



   92.04   Powers of the town



   92.05   Costs and charges



   92.06   Bill of sale



   92.07   Disposition of vehicle parts



   92.08   Inapplicability



   92.09   Abandoned vehicle account



   92.10   Removed abandoned vehicles



   92.11   Reclaiming vehicle



   92.12   Statutory references



   92.13   Effective date



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (a)   A vehicle located on public property illegally,
including, but not limited to, a vehicle on a public street or right-of-way
without proper registration or state license plate, or a vehicle illegally
parked;



         (b)   A vehicle left on public property without being
moved for 3 days;



         (c)   A vehicle located on public property in such a
manner as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic on a public right-of-way;



         (d)   A vehicle that has remained on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of that property for
more than 48 hours;



         (e)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission or
differential has been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property;



         (f)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing
service or public agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or an
ordinance other than this chapter or I.C. 9-22-1, if the impounded vehicle is
not claimed or redeemed by the owner or the owner's agent within 20 days
after the vehicle's removal; and



         (g)   A vehicle that is at least 3 model years old, is
mechanically inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a
location visible from public property for more than 20 days.



      OFFICER.  A member of the Chandler Police Department.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Property owned, leased, or otherwise under the
control of a governmental entity including, but not limited to, public
rights-of-way.



   (B)   All other terms shall have the meaning provided in I.C. 9-13-2
and I.C. 9-22-1.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000: Am. Ord.
2002-1, passed 4-1-2002; Am. Ord. 2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.02  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the removal and
disposal of abandoned vehicles. The town hereby in all respects adopts the
powers and procedures for the removal, storage, disposal and impoundment of
abandoned vehicles and parts as set forth in I.C. 9-22-1 and as those
provisions may from time to time be amended by the State of Indiana. In
addition, the town exercises its authority under Home Rule to supplement or
clarify state law and procedure to effectuate the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.03  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   The owner of an abandoned vehicle or parts is responsible for the
abandonment and is liable, to the extent of the market value of the vehicle,
for all costs incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle
or parts.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996: Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.04  POWERS OF THE TOWN.



   The Town Council is hereby authorized to enter into towing contracts,
employ personnel, and acquire equipment, property, and facilities, subject to
appropriation, for the purpose of removal, storage, and disposition of
abandoned vehicles and parts.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.05  COSTS AND CHARGES.



   The following fees and charges are hereby imposed upon the owner of an
abandoned vehicle or parts, or upon a lienholder seeking to obtain possession
of the vehicle or parts, when any vehicle or parts are towed, removed,
stored, or impounded pursuant to this section or state law, and the fee shall
be paid before the owner or lienholder is entitled to reclaim the vehicle:



   (A)   A processing charge of $10;



   (B)   A towing charge of $35; and



   (C)   A storage charge of $10 per day or any part thereof.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.06  BILL OF SALE.



   A purchaser shall be furnished a bill of sale for each abandoned
vehicle sold by the town. The fee for the bill of sale is $6.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.07  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE PARTS.



   (A)   If the properly identified owner or lienholder appears at the
site of storage before disposal of the vehicle or parts and pays all proper
costs incurred against it at that time, then the vehicle shall be released.
The release must contain the owner's or lienholder's signature, name,
address, vehicle or parts description, costs, and date of release.



   (B)   If the vehicle or parts are in the condition that vehicle
identification number or other means of identification are not available to
determine the owner or lienholder, the vehicle may be disposed without
notice. If, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the market value of an
abandoned vehicle or parts, following the mandate of I.C. 9-22-1-12, is less
than $100, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall immediately
dispose of the vehicle or parts to an automobile scrap yard. The
documentation required by I.C. 9-22-1-12 shall be forwarded and filed as
required by I.C. 9-22-1-13.



   (C)   If the owner or lienholder does not appear within 20 days
after the mailing of notice as provided by I.C. 9-22-1-20(3)(B), the town
shall cause the vehicle or parts to be sold at a sale conducted under I.C.
5-22-22.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.08  INAPPLICABILITY.



   This chapter does not apply to the following:



   (A)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or
constructed for operation on privately owned raceways;



   (B)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the Armed
Forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment;



   (C)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot or at a commercial
vehicle servicing facility;



   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an
automobile scrap yard; and



   (E)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18-12 as an
antique vehicle.



(Ord. 1996-6, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord.
2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.09  ABANDONED VEHICLE ACCOUNT.



   (A)   There is hereby created a new account to be known as the
Abandoned Vehicle Account.



   (B)   The cost for removing and storing an abandoned vehicle or
parts not claimed by the owner or lienholder shall be paid from the Abandoned
Vehicle Account.



   (C)   The proceeds from any sale of an abandoned vehicle or parts
shall be credited against all costs incidental to the removal, storage, and
disposal of the vehicle or parts. All proceeds from the sale of an abandoned
vehicle or parts that are sold, including charges for bills of sale, and all
monies received from an owner or lienholder for the cost of removal, storage
of the vehicle or parts, shall be deposited with the Town Clerk-Treasurer and
placed in the Abandoned Vehicle Account.



(Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.10  REMOVED ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   As long as a vehicle is considered abandoned because it is located on a
public right-of-way and is not properly registered, does not have the proper
license plate or has the engine, transmission or differential removed or is
otherwise inoperable and on a public right-of-way, the vehicle shall continue
to be considered abandoned unless it is removed from all public rights-of-way
and public property. The removed abandoned vehicle may be considered to
remain an abandoned vehicle if it meets the definition found in § 92.01.



(Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.11  RECLAIMING VEHICLE.



   A vehicle shall continue to be abandoned until the owner or lienholder
has it moved from the storage lot. The payment of storage and towing fees
shall not affect the status of the vehicle as an abandoned vehicle. A vehicle
may be disposed of without re-tagging or providing additional notice to the
owner or lienholder if the owner or lienholder does not remove the vehicle
from the storage lot; however, the vehicle shall not be disposed of within 72
hours of the payment of towing and storage fees, weekends and holidays
observed by the town shall be excluded from the calculation of the 72 hour
holding period.



(Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.12  STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   Generally.  See I.C. 9-22-1.



   (B)   Responsibility of owner.  See I.C. 9-22-1-4.



   (C)   Authority of local unit of government.  See I.C. 9-22-1-5.



   (D)   Disposal of vehicle of less than $100 in value. See I.C.
9-22-1-13.



   (E)   Bill of sale.  See I.C. 9-22-1-24.



(Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000)



§ 92.13  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be effective upon its passage and publication as is
by law required.



(Ord. 2004-6, passed 4-5-2004)



§ 92.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to allow a motor vehicle to remain on his or her property, as an owner
or tenant, in a condition which is prohibited by §§ 92.01et seq. The person
shall be subject to the procedures and penalties provided herein. Any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $50 for the first violation in any 12 month period; a civil
penalty of $100 for the second violation during any 12-month period; and a
civil penalty of $250 for the third and subsequent violations during any
12-month period.



   (B)   Separate violations.  Each day a violation exists shall be
considered a separate violation and the town or the Court may assess a
monetary civil penalty for each day a violation exists.



(Ord. 2000-9, passed 9-5-2000)



CHAPTER 93: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND RIGHT-OF-WAYS



Section




General Provisions




   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   General provisions



   93.03   Games or sports



   93.04   Maintenance of right-of-way




Driveways and Streets




   93.11   Construction of entrance, driveway or approach



   93.12   Driveway and street permits



   93.13   Maintenance and repair of private driveways




Buildings and Numbering




   93.30   Street numbers required



   93.31   System of numbering



   93.32   Direction of streets



   93.33   Numbers to a block



   93.34   Broken or irregular streets



   93.35   Construction and placement of numbers



   93.36   Naming or renaming streets



Regulation of Public Rights-of-Way



   93.50   Definitions



   93.51   Maintenance of right-of-way



   93.52   Permit required; fee



   93.53   Supervision



   93.54   Repairs



   93.55   Street cuts and boring



   93.56   Resurfacing of entire street



   93.57   Enforcement and penalties



 



   93.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING. Any structure maintained for residential, business,
commercial, industrial, recreational, or other purposes. However, for
purposes of numbering buildings, the term BUILDING shall be construed to
apply to the primary or major structure located on a lot or lots and shall
not be construed to include any subsidiary or secondary structure which is
used for the benefit of the primary structure; provided, however, that any
building which has an independent use not associated with the primary
structure, shall be considered as requiring a separate number. By way of
explanation, a shed, storage building, unattached garage or carport, animal
house or kennel or tool shed shall not be considered as a separate building.
However, a mobile home being occupied by persons living independently of the
primary structure shall be considered as a building for the purposes of this
chapter and shall require separate numbering which may be by designation as
the primary number plus one-half.



   PUBLIC WAY. A sidewalk, street, highway, alley, bridge, square, or
another open space to which the public has access, as of right or by
invitation, expressed or implied.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any area over which a public right-of-way exists,
including the strip of land used by a public way; the strip of land used by a
railroad; and the strip of land used by a public utility.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, drop,
deposit, or sweep any litter, rubbish, refuse, trash, debris, or garbage in,
into, on or upon any public way, playground, public building, public ground,
or any public place within the town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, hurl, or cast
any hard or heavy material or object on or upon the paved surface of any
public way or public place in the town in such a manner as to damage it.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix mortar or any other
substances upon the pavement of any right-of-way, unless the action has been
approved and sanctioned by the Department of Public Works and the mixture is
confined in a good, watertight box or other vessel, preventing thereby the
mixture or any part thereof from coming in contact with the pavement.



   (D)   Whenever the Department of Public Works of the town shall
place or cause to be placed any barrier or barricade in or upon any public
way or right-of-way in the town because of any repairs or improvements, or
because of any excavation made therein for public improvement, it shall be
unlawful for any person to remove or destroy such barrier or barricade, or to
drive any vehicle upon the street, alley or sidewalk, or walk or run upon the
same.



   (E)   No public way, including any median (the portion of a divided
highway separating the traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions),
shall be utilized by any person for the purpose of sale or distribution
without charge of any goods or materials, and/or the solicitation of
donations for charitable purposes from the drivers or occupants of any motor
vehicle.



   (F)   Except for any use explicitly permitted herein, it is unlawful
for any person to use any of the public right-of-ways in the town for any
purpose which interferes with the full utilization thereof by the pubic;
provided however, this section shall not apply to any vehicular parking that
is authorized by this code or any other applicable law or regulation.



   (G)   To the extent a provision in Chapter 50 or Chapter 53
concerning drainage or stormwater management applies to any act or omission
relating to any right-of-way, such provision shall be deemed to be in
addition to this chapter relating to similar subject matters and, in such
case, both provisions shall be applicable.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.03  GAMES OR SPORTS.



   (A)   Except as explicitly permitted herein, it shall be unlawful
for any person to play games, sports, or recreational activity on the streets
or sidewalks of the town.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to place, or allow remaining in
place, any basketball goals or other recreational equipment in public
streets, highways, alleys, bridges, or squares.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to place, or to allow remaining
in place, any basketball goals or other recreational equipment adjacent to
the following public right-of-ways in the town when the utilization of the
basketball goal or other recreational equipment allows the participants to
actually encroach into the public right-of-way:



      (1)   Lincoln Avenue.



      (2)   The following streets north of Lincoln Avenue:



         (a)   State Street;



         (b)   Iowa Street;



         (c)   Jefferson Avenue;



         (d)   Fourth Street;



         (e)   Fifth Street;



         (f)   Heim Road;



         (g)   Inderrieden Road.



      (3)   The following streets south of Lincoln Avenue:



         (a)   Washington Avenue;



         (b)   State Street;



         (c)   Iowa Street;



         (d)   Greenwood Road;



         (e)   Fuquay Road;



         (f)   Gardner Road.



   (D)   If a basketball goal is permitted adjacent to a public
right-of-way pursuant to this section, it shall comply with the following
standards:



      (1)   At least 5 feet from manholes, catch basins, traffic
signs, fire hydrants, and above ground electrical transformers, telephone
boxes, and cable boxes. The pole for the basketball goal must be a minimum of
3 feet from street, trees, light poles, and mailboxes;



      (2)   A basketball goal backboard shall not extend beyond the
face of the roadway curb;



      (3)   A basketball goal ring shall be at least 10 feet above
the surface of the street, measured vertically from the public roadway; and



      (4)   There shall be at least a 100 feet unobstructed view as
measured 10 feet out from the face of the curb and 5 feet high along the
public roadway in both directions. There shall be no obstructions resulting
from curves in such roadway, elevation changes, landscaping, or other
fixtures located alongside such roadway, except if on a cul-de-sac, the hoop
shall have an unobstructed view of at least 50 feet.



   (E)   Impoundment of property.



      (1)   Any basketball goal, other recreational equipment or
other property blocking the right-of-way in violation of this section may be
removed by the enforcing officer. The property shall be held until retrieved
by the owner. The impounded property shall not be released from impoundment
until:



         (a)   The actual charge for the impounding of the
property to the place of impoundment is paid; and



         (b)     Storage charges in the amount of $5 per day, or
part thereof, have been paid.



      (2)   The town shall not be responsible for any loss or damage
sustained by any property so impounded or stored hereunder.  Impounded
property not reclaimed within 30 days from the date of impoundment shall be
deemed abandoned and shall be sold as surplus property.



   (F)   All law enforcement officers of the town shall have the power
and it shall be their duty to enforce the provisions of this section unless
otherwise prevented by state statutes regarding the enforcement of state laws.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.04  MAINTENANCE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Any limbs and foliage of trees planted on any premises that
abuts any right-of-way that is not trimmed at least 10 feet above the ground
of a sidewalk and 15 feet above any street, highway, or alley, or any
similarly planted vegetation that hinders, obstructs, or endangers the
passage of persons or vehicles along any public way so as to obstruct
drainage or the view of any traffic control sign or electronic device or the
illumination of any public street light by any person traversing any
right-of-way is declared to be a nuisance. Any person violating the
provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to the town and to private
persons or entities for any injury or damage arising therefrom.



   (B)   The owner of any property abutting a right-of-way shall
maintain it in a reasonably neat, clean, and sanitary condition. Property
areas, including any right-of-way, shall be maintained free from any
accumulation of garbage, litter, debris, overgrown or noxious vegetation, or
other conditions which constitute a nuisance as defined by Chapter 94 of this
Code. For the purposes of this section, owners shall be responsible for
maintaining the property to the centerline of abutting right-of-ways.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises abutting
upon any right-of-way to cause or contribute to a physical condition of the
right-of-way by constructing, placing, causing, creating, maintaining, or
permitting to remain upon any part of the right-of-way anything, structure,
or condition dangerous or hazardous to the use of the right-of-way by the
public, including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Defective sidewalk surfaces, including, but not limited
to, broken cement or stub-toes and depressions within or between sidewalk
joints;



      (2)   Defective cement surfaces placed adjacent to the public
sidewalk or defects at the juncture between said cement surfaces and the
public sidewalks, including stub-toes or depressions at the junction;



      (3)   Defects in sidewalks or public ways caused or
contributed to by the roots of trees located either on private adjoining
property or on the planting strip portion of the street right-of-way;



      (4)   Defective conditions caused by tree limbs, foliage,
brush, or grass on or extending over public sidewalks;



      (5)   Defective conditions on the planting strip area between
the curb line and the sidewalk or, if there is no curb line, then between the
edge of the traveled portion of the street and the sidewalk and between the
sidewalk and the abutting property line;



      (6)   Defects resulting from accumulation of ice and snow on
public sidewalks or on the right-of-way between the curb line or, if there is
no curb line, then between the adjacent edge of the traveled portion of the
street roadway and the abutting property line;



      (7)   Defects consisting of foreign matter on the public
sidewalks, including, but not limited to, gravel and oil thereon;



      (8)   Defective handrails or fences or other similar
structures within or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way area; or



      (9)   Bicycle ramps, skateboard ramps, or other similar
structures or obstructions within the right-of-way area.



   (D)   Any structures or obstructions installed or omitted within the
right-of-way in violation of this chapter shall be considered a nuisance and
may be corrected by the town at the property owner's expense in accordance
with Chapter 94 of this Code.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



DRIVEWAYS AND STREETS



§ 93.11  CONSTRUCTION OF ENTRANCE, DRIVEWAY OR APPROACH.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct any private
entrance, driveway, or approach connecting with any street nor shall any curb
along the street be cut or removed without a written permit from the Town of
Chandler.



   (B)   Any lot of less than 200 feet in width shall be limited to 1
driveway entrance. Any lot of 200 to 300 feet in width shall be limited to 2
entrances.



   (C)   Any lot of 300 feet or more in width shall be limited to
entrances as approved by the Plan Commission.



   (D)   For a corner lot bordering on 2 streets, whenever it is
feasible, the driveway entrance location shall be located on the street
carrying the least amount of traffic.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.12  DRIVEWAY AND STREET PERMITS.



   (A)   The entrance/driveway permits shall be in 2 classes.



      (1)   Class I shall be any driveway or approach that serves
commercial or industrial property.



      (2)   Class II shall be any driveway or approach that serves
residential property.



   (B)   Each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied
by a fee made payable to the Town of Chandler Plan Commission. No part of any
filing fee shall be returnable to the applicant.



      (1)   Class I: $50;



      (2)   Class II: $10.



   (C)   No permit shall be issued without review and approval of the
Town of Chandler.



   (D)   No application for permit will be accepted unless accompanied
with a drawing of the layout of the driveway or approach. The drawing shall
be to a proper scale. Applications and drawings shall be filed in triplicate
with the Town of Chandler Area Plan Commission.



   (E)   No permit will be required in subdivisions with streets with
rolled type curbs. In such cases the Town of Chandler Area Plan Commission
shall cause to have affixed the statement "No Driveway Permits Required" to
appear on the plat which has final approval.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.13  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.



   The owners and occupants of the property abutting private entrances,
driveways, and approaches shall maintain and keep in repair all the private
entrances, driveways, and approaches thereto, but no such private entrances,
driveways, and approaches shall be constructed or maintained in such manner
as to obstruct or interfere with the street, the traffic thereon, or with any
drain or ditch which has been constructed on or which serves the street.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



BUILDINGS AND NUMBERING



§ 93.30  STREET NUMBERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All persons owning, occupying, or serving as agents for any
owner or occupant of any building or buildings which now exist or which may
hereafter be erected or moved from one location to another within the town,
shall have numbers placed on the buildings in accordance with the plan
hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   The Executive Director of Planning Commission or his or her
designee, upon being informed of the exact location of any building, shall
thereafter designate to the owner, occupant, or agent thereof, the proper
number of the building.



   (C)   No owner, occupant, or agent for any owner or occupant of any
building now in existence, or any building erected hereafter, or any building
moved to a new location, shall fail or refuse to place or cause to be placed
upon the building the number ascribed thereto by the Executive Director of
Planning Commission or his or her designee and the numbers shall be placed
upon each building within 30 days after notification by the Executive
Director of Planning Commission or his or her designee of the correct number
of the building.



   (D)   No persons shall take down or alter, deface, destroy, or
conceal any number on any building, or place or allow to be placed an
erroneous number thereon, or permit any erroneous number to remain on any
building owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.31  SYSTEM OF NUMBERING.



   Numbering of all buildings on every street in the town, except as
otherwise provided, shall commence with number "1" at one of the following
streets, which shall divide the town and serve as base lines for the purposes
of numbering:



   (A)   Lincoln Avenue: Street shall divide the town from north to
south.



   (B)   State Street: Street shall divide the town from east to west.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.32  DIRECTION OF STREETS.



   (A)   East and west.  On all streets crossing State Street from
east to west or running parallel or approximately parallel with that street,
that portion of every street lying east of State Street or the approximate
line in its prolongation north or south shall, unless otherwise provided in
this section, be designated by the word east, and that portion of every
street lying west of State Street or the approximate line of its prolongation
north or south shall, unless otherwise provided in this section, be
designated by the word west. The descriptive words shall be prefixed to the
names of the streets respectively.



   (B)   North and south. On all streets crossing Lincoln Avenue from
north to south or running parallel or approximately parallel with Lincoln
Avenue, that portion of every street lying north of Lincoln Avenue or the
approximate line of its prolongation east or west shall be designated by the
word north and that portion of every street lying south of Lincoln Avenue or
the approximate line of its prolongation east or west shall, unless otherwise
provided in this section, be designated by the word south. The descriptive
words shall be prefixed to the names of the streets respectively.



   (C)   Miscellaneous streets. Streets whose direction is neither
north and south or east and west, shall be considered as extending in a
general northerly, southerly, easterly, or westerly direction, according to
which of those directions the streets most closely approximate, and buildings
on the streets shall be numbered as though the streets ran due north, south,
east, or west.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.33  NUMBERS TO A BLOCK.



   (A)   One hundred numbers shall be assigned to each block or square
on each street so far as it is practicable to do so, but this procedure may
be varied by assigning 200 numbers to 1 block or 100 numbers to 2 or more
blocks where necessary, on account of irregular street layout, in order to
provide corresponding numbers for all blocks in a series of parallel or
approximately parallel streets at their intersection with any thoroughfare
which is approximately parallel with the base line for the series of streets.
In each block 1 number shall be assigned to every 25 feet of frontage on
either side of the street, odd numbers always on the right, even numbers on
the left in the direction of numbering.



   (B)   In the event that it may be impracticable to use 25 feet as
the frontage unit for assignment of numbers in certain areas or blocks
without resorting to half numbers, the town shall have authority to reduce
the frontage as may be necessary to avoid the use of half numbers.



   (C)   Numbers assigned to any block and not needed shall not be
carried onto another block but shall be dropped so that numbers shall
commence in the next block with the next higher one hundred.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.34  BROKEN OR IRREGULAR STREETS.



   In case of a break in the line of any street or in the case of a street
not crossing or terminating on any of the streets serving as base line, or
the approximate prolongation thereof, for the purposes of numbering these
streets, they shall be assigned the same numbers as would have been assigned
had the streets been straight and continuous from one of the base lines.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.35  CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT OF NUMBERS.



   Each number used on a building in compliance with provisions of this
subchapter shall be composed of figures at least 2½ inches in height and
being made of a material and color which will cause the number to stand out
distinctly against its background. Each number shall be placed at or upon the
front door to the building, preferably upon the door facing on the side of
the door which opens, or as nearly to the door facing as possible and at a
height from 5 feet to 7 feet from ground level or at the other height as
shall make it most clearly visible to someone upon the street.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 93.36  NAMING OR RENAMING STREETS.



   All streets presently named, or hereafter to be named or renamed, shall
be so named or renamed in the manner that their names are easy to understand
and so as to avoid duplication or conflict with other names. In the event of
the naming of a new street or the renaming of an existing street, the names
and records of the town shall be corrected and the town plat books and
records in the offices of the Auditor, Recorder, Surveyor, or other public
official of Warrick County, Indiana, shall be amended to reflect the naming
or renaming.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



REGULATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 93.50  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The following terms and phrases when used throughout this
Chapter 93 shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.



      ARTICLE. Sections 93.50 through 93.57 of this Chapter 93 .



      DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICES. Such director and any person to whom
such director specifically delegates the powers under this Chapter 93 .



      EFFECTIVE DATE. The date upon which this article is considered
adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-3-4-14.



      ENTITY. A corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
association, firm, other entity, and any governmental agency, authority,
board, agency and department.



      FACILITIES. Include, without limitation, any pipes, conduits,
wires, cables, amplifiers, transformers, fiber optic lines, antennae, poles,
ducts, conductors, lines, mains, vaults, appliances, attachments, equipment,
structures, manholes, and other like equipment, fixtures and appurtenances
used in connection with transmitting, receiving, distributing, offering, and
providing utility services, cable television, communications, signaling,
electricity, water, steam and other services or functions.



      MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITY FACILITIES. Any facilities owned by the
town, or any division, department, bureau or agency thereof, including the
utilities department and the department of public works, and for which a user
fee or charge is made or collected by or on behalf of such owner.



      OCCUPANT. Any person or entity who owns any facilities occupying
the public rights-of-way. If the owner of any facilities leases or licenses
such facilities exclusively to another person or entity and if the lease or
license so provides and a copy of such lease or license is filed with the
department of public works, then the lessee or licensee thereof shall be
deemed the OCCUPANT of such facilities for purposes of this subchapter.



      OCCUPY (AND THE VARIOUS FORMS OF SUCH WORD, SUCH AS OCCUPYING,
OCCUPIED, ETC.). To install, construct, maintain, operate or own any
facilities in the public rights-of-way.



      PERSON. An individual or natural person.



      PUBLIC EASEMENT. Any easement owned or controlled by the town and
established, acquired, dedicated, or devoted to public utility purposes,
including the area above and below such easements.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any travelled way and/or any public easement.



      PUBLIC UTILITY. Shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C.
8-1-2-1(a).



      REGULATION. Any regulation adopted by the Town Council as well as
the whole or any part of an agency statement of general applicability that:



         (a)   Is adopted pursuant to authority delegated by an
ordinance of the council or statute of the state;



         (b)   Has or is intended to have the effect of law; and



         (c)   Implements, interprets or prescribes laws or
policy of the agency.



      TRAVELED WAY. Any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other
public right-of-way for motor vehicle or pedestrian travel under the
jurisdiction or control of the town, including any areas within any public
right-of-way that may be unpaved and the unoccupied area above and below such
rights-of-way.



      UTILITIES DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Utilities of the
town created under I.C. 8-1.5.



   (B)   The terms public easement, public rights-of-way, travelled way
and thoroughfare do not include the airwaves above the same as those airwaves
are used for cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast
services.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.51  MAINTENANCE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Any limbs and foliage of trees planted on any premises that
abuts any right-of-way that is not trimmed at least ten feet above the ground
of a sidewalk and 15 feet above any street, highway, or alley, or any
similarly planted vegetation that hinders, obstructs, or endangers the
passage of persons or vehicles along any public way so as to obstruct
drainage or the view of any traffic control sign or electronic device or the
illumination of any public street light by any person traversing any
right-of-way is declared to be a nuisance. Any person or entity violating the
provisions of this article shall be liable to the town and to private persons
or entities for any injury or damage arising therefrom.



   (B)   The owner of any property abutting a right-of-way shall
maintain it in a reasonably neat, clean, and sanitary condition. Property
areas, including any right-of-way, shall be maintained free from any
accumulation of garbage, litter, debris, overgrown or noxious vegetation, or
other conditions which constitute a nuisance as defined by Chapter 94 of this
Code. For the purposes of this article, owners shall be responsible for
maintaining the property to the centerline of abutting right-of-ways.



   (C)   Except as otherwise permitted and required under this
subchapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises abutting upon
any right-of-way to cause or contribute to a physical condition of the
right-of-way by constructing, placing, causing, creating, maintaining, or
permitting to remain upon any part of the right-of-way anything, structure,
or condition dangerous or hazardous to the use of the right-of-way by the
public, including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Defective sidewalk surfaces, including, but not limited
to, broken cement or stub-toes and depressions within or between sidewalk
joints;



      (2)   Defective cement surfaces placed adjacent to the public
sidewalk or defects at the juncture between said cement surfaces and the
public sidewalks, including stub-toes or depressions at the junction;



      (3)   Defects in sidewalks or public ways caused or
contributed to by the roots of trees located either on private adjoining
property or on the planting strip portion of the street right-of-way;



      (4)   Defective conditions caused by tree limbs, foliage,
brush, or grass on or extending over public sidewalks;



      (5)   Defective conditions on the planting strip area between
the curb line and the sidewalk or, if there is no curb line, then between the
edge of the traveled portion of the street and the sidewalk and between the
sidewalk and the abutting property line;



      (6)   Defects resulting from accumulation of ice and snow on
public sidewalks or on the right-of-way between the curb line or, if there is
no curb line, then between the adjacent edge of the traveled portion of the
street roadway and the abutting property line;



      (7)   Defects consisting of foreign matter on the public
sidewalks, including, but not limited to, gravel and oil thereon;



      (8)   Defective handrails or fences or other similar
structures within or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way area; or



      (9)   Bicycle ramps, skateboard ramps, or other similar
structures or obstructions within the right-of-way area.



   (D)   Any structures or obstructions installed or omitted within the
right-of-way in violation of this article shall be considered a nuisance and
may be corrected by the town at the property owner's expense in accordance
with Chapter 94 of this Code.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.52  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig into, excavate in, bore
under, or in any manner change the surface of any public right-of-way within
the town without first having submitted a written plan to, and obtained a
written permit from, the Director of Public Services. The written plan shall
be in a form reasonably required by the Director of Public Services. The
permittee shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer or agent the sum of $100 for the
permit.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.53  SUPERVISION.



   Unless exempted by the Director of Public Services, the operation of
excavating, boring, or in any manner changing the surface of, any public
right-of-way within the town, and the refilling and resurfacing of any
excavation or boring, shall be done under the supervision of the Director of
Public Services or other officer or employee designated by the Town Council.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.54  REPAIRS.



   (A)   All excavations in, or boring under, a public right-of-way
shall be repaired according to the type of the existing surface as follows:



      (1)   Existing asphalt surface.



         (a)   Excavation shall be filled with thoroughly
compacted sand to a depth not less than ten inches below finished grade;



         (b)   Portland cement concrete with a 3,000 psi minimum
shall be deposited on top of the sand fill to within one inch below finished
grade;



         (c)   After Portland cement concrete has cured for a
minimum period of four days, asphaltic primer RC-3 shall be applied at a rate
of 0.5 gallons per square yard;



         (d)   A one-inch course of hot asphaltic concrete,
Indiana State Highway Department, Type B shall be applied, thoroughly
compacted and rolled.  If the weather is unsuitable for properly applying
hot asphaltic concrete for repairing the surface, a temporary patch may be
applied consisting of asphalt coated aggregate (cold patch), provided that
when suitable paving weather occurs, the temporary patching materials shall
be removed and replaced with hot asphaltic concrete as specified above.



      (2)   Existing concrete surface.



         (a)   Excavation shall be filled with thoroughly
compacted sand to a depth not less than eight inches below finished grade;



         (b)   Portland cement concrete with a 3,000 psi minimum
shall be placed in the remaining cavity and troweled with a wooded float to
finish grade.



      (3)   Existing aggregate surface.



         (a)   Excavation shall be filled with sand up to a depth
not less than eight inches below finished grade;



         (b)   The remaining depth shall be filled with crushed
stone of the size required by the Street Commissioner.



      (4)   Existing earth surface. Excavation or boring shall be
filled with earth, and earth mounded above the excavation or boring to a
height above finished grade amounting to 10% of the depth of the excavation.
After settling has occurred, earth shall be added or removed to level the
fill with finished grade, and the surface restored to the same condition as
existed before excavation was made.



   (B)   Exploratory drill holes shall be filled in the same manner as
trench or pit excavations, except that when the holes are made in an existing
earth surface, it shall be refilled with sand except the upper six inches of
fill material, which shall be earth.



   (C)   Excavation or boring under sidewalks shall be refilled with
fully compacted earth or sand to a level four inches below finished grade of
the sidewalk in pedestrian travelled areas and six inches below finished
grade of sidewalk in driveway areas. The sidewalk shall be replaced to the
same width as that removed and to a depth of four or six inches respectively
in pedestrian and driveway areas.  Sidewalk material shall be portland
cement concrete, air-entraining type, 3,000 psi strength, finished with a
wooden flute and steel edging tool and scored to match adjacent sidewalk
scoring.



   (D)   The entire expense of excavating, boring under, or in any
manner changing, the surface of any public right-of-way within the town shall
be borne by the permittee. The town shall not be liable for any expenses
incurred therefrom, nor for any injury or damages caused to any person or
property.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.55  STREET CUTS AND BORING.



   (A)   All cuts made in the driving area of a street, sidewalk, or
alley shall be covered with steel plates and anchored safely to the paved
surface until the cut is ready for traffic. Cold-patch type asphalt concrete
shall be placed all around the plate to lessen any possible damage to the
vehicles crossing the area. No more than ten calendar days shall elapse
between the date the hole is first cut in the street right-of-way and the
date on which the repair is complete and the patch is paved to finish grade
and open to traffic.



   (B)   All boring under public right-of-ways shall be located at
least 36 inches below the pavement surface or 36 inches below the bottom of
roadside drainage ditches, whichever is a greater depth.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.56  RESURFACING OF ENTIRE STREET.



   Any person or entity causing a total of five or more holes, a maximum
of three feet by three feet, or a trench or trenches totaling 30 feet in
length to be made in an average 300 foot-long city block during one 12-month
period shall be required to resurface the entire width of the street or alley
for the full city block within the current paving season with a one-inch
compacted thickness of surface-type hot asphaltic concrete. The existing
paved surface shall be tack-coated before paving.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.57  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   The Department of Public Services is exempted from the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   If the place or places where the excavation and repairs are
refilled or replaced under the provisions of this subchapter fail within the
life of the street pavement or before the street is repaved by the town, the
permittee shall, at his own expense within ten days after receipt of written
notice from the Clerk-Treasurer, refill and resurface it.



   (C)   If the permittee fails to refill or resurface after the
receipt of ten days written notice, the town shall make the necessary repairs
and render a statement of charges to the permittee which statement shall be
due and payable within 30 days after receipt of the statement.



   (D)   Should any excavation, cut, jacking, or boring in project be
willfully started by a person or entity before receiving the permit required
by this subchapter, said person or entity shall for each violation be fined
an amount not to exceed $1,000 and such excavation, cut, jacking, or boring
shall be stopped and temporarily repaired until a proper permit has been
issued.



   (E)   In addition to all other penalties and fines, if any person or
entity violates, or commits any act prohibited herein, or fails to perform
any duty lawfully mandated, within the time prescribed, or fails, neglects,
or refuses to obey any lawful order given by the town in connection with the
provision of this article, such person or entity shall be fined $100 for the
first offense and $500 for each subsequent offense within a calendar year.
Each such violation, act, failure, or refusal, and every day the
aforementioned continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-7-2018)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 and, in
addition, subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   First offense: $100;



      (2)   Second offense: $200;



      (3)   Third or subsequent offense: $500.



   (B)   Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.



   (C)   In addition to the monetary penalties provided in division (A)
above, a court, upon application of the Town of Chandler, may enter
injunctive relief to prevent future violations to this chapter.



   (D)   The penalty for a violation of §§ 93.30 et seq. shall be a
fine of not less than $1 or more than $10 for each day that any such
violation shall continue, along with court costs. A violation shall be deemed
to have commenced upon the day following service of notice of an alleged
violation, which notice shall be in writing and signed by the Executive
Director of Planning Commission and served by the Executive Director of
Planning Commission or his or her designee upon the owner, occupant, or agent
for any owner or occupant of any such building alleged to be in violation.



(Ord. 2017-04, passed 10-2-2017)



CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Illustrative enumeration



   94.03   Nuisance prohibition



   94.04   Order to abate



   94.05   Abatement by town



   94.06   Right to contest notice or bill



   94.07   Failure to maintain house, building, structure, or real
estate



   94.08   Hearing authority



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Executive Director of the Planning and
Zoning Department.



   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Town Council of the town, or such individual as
the Town Council may designate for purposes of this chapter.



   NUISANCE. Doing an unlawful act, or omitting performance of a duty, or
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:



      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;



      (2)   Offends decency or the senses;



      (3)   Causes injury to property;



      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to
obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street,
highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch, or drainage;



      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the
use of property; or



      (6)   Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



   UNSAFE BUILDING. A building or structure, or any part of a building or
structure, that is:



      (1)   In an impaired structural condition that makes it unsafe
to a person or property;



      (2)   A fire hazard;



      (3)   A hazard to public health;



      (4)   A public nuisance;



      (5)   Dangerous to a person or property because of a violation
of a statute or ordinance concerning building condition or maintenance; or



      (6)   Vacant or blighted and not maintained in a manner that
would allow human habitation, occupancy, or use under the requirements of a
statute or an ordinance.



   UNSAFE PREMISES. An unsafe building and the tract of real property on
which the unsafe building is located. For purposes of this chapter, a tract
of real property that does not contain a building or structure, not including
land used for production of agriculture, is considered an unsafe premises if
the tract of real property is:



      (1)   A fire hazard;



      (2)   A hazard to public health;



      (3)   A public nuisance; or



      (4)   Dangerous to a person or property because of a violation
of a statute or an ordinance.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.02  ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.



   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permitting to
be or remain on any public or private property the following items,
conditions, or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting, or restrictive:



   (A)   Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation;



   (B)   Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, and other
abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things;



   (C)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes,
and other vermin;



   (D)   Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated
condition that it is unfit for human habitation, kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in
the vicinity where it is located;



   (E)   All unreasonable or unauthorized noises and annoying
vibration, including noises;



   (F)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as
the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of such odors and stenches;



   (G)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a
reasonable time after death;



   (H)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal, or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes,
or other substances;



   (I)   Any building, structure, or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, state, or Federal law is conducted,
performed, or maintained;



   (J)   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on
any lot or piece of ground;



   (K)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (L)   The unauthorized obstruction of any public street, road, or
sidewalk;



   (M)   Any abandoned vehicle; or



   (N)   Any building, sidewalk, or driveway that is defaced, including
any detraction from the perfection or wholeness of the external appearance
thereof.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.03  NUISANCE PROHIBITION.



   Any person who causes, permits, maintains, or allows the creation or
maintenance of a nuisance shall be punished as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.04  ORDER TO ABATE.



   (A)   Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the town, the
Enforcement Authority, Environmental Manager, and/or Police Chief may give
written order to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance.



   (B)   The order to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall contain the following:



      (1)   The name of the person to whom the order is issued.



      (2)   The legal description or address of the location of the
nuisance, unsafe building, or unsafe premises that is the subject of the
order.



      (3)   The action that the order requires.



      (4)   The period of time in which the action is required to be
accomplished, measured from the time when the notice of the order is given.



      (5)   If a hearing is required, a statement indicating the
exact time and place of the hearing, and stating that person to whom the
order was issued is entitled to appear at the hearing with or without legal
counsel, present evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses, and present
arguments.



      (6)   If a hearing is not required, a statement that an order
becomes final 10 days after notice is given, unless a hearing is requested in
writing by a person holding a fee interest, life estate interest, or
equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the unsafe premises, and the
request is delivered to the Enforcement Authority before the end of the 10
day period.



      (7)   A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken
by the Enforcement Authority if the order is not complied with.



      (8)   A statement, if applicable, indicating the obligation
created by I.C. 36-7-9-27 relating to notification of subsequent interest
holders and the Enforcement Authority.



      (9)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
Enforcement Authority.



      (10)   A statement, if applicable, that the Hearing Authority
may determine the applicable properties to be abandoned as provided in I.C.
36-7-37.



   (C)   The order to abate must allow a sufficient time of at least 10
days, but not more than 60 days, from the time when the notice of order is
given, to accomplish the required action. If the order allows more than 30
days to accomplish the action, the order may require that a substantial
beginning be made in accomplishing the action within 30 days.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.05  ABATEMENT BY TOWN.



   (A)   Upon the failure of the person upon whom an order to abate a
nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a duly
designated officer or employee of the town may proceed to abate such nuisance
and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.



   (B)   Should the town abate the nuisance pursuant to this § 94.05,
the town will issue a bill to the person upon whom the order to abate the
nuisance was served outlining the administrative and removal costs of the
abatement.



   (C)   Upon the failure of the person, upon whom order to abate a
nuisance was served, to pay any and all costs incurred by the town in the
abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, the town may
obtain a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed and shall
be certified by the Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor who shall cause
such costs to be placed upon the tax duplicate of the owner of such property
and such costs shall be collected from the owner as other taxes are collected.



   (D)   In addition to any other remedies, the costs described in this
§ 94.05 shall be a debt which may be collected by the town in an appropriate
civil action.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.06  RIGHT TO CONTEST ORDER OR BILL.



   (A)   A hearing before the Hearing Authority must be held for each
order issued by the Enforcement Authority pursuant to § 94.07(B)(1), (6),
(7), and (8).



   (B)   An order issued, except for orders requiring a hearing
pursuant to division (A) above, becomes final 10 days after notice is given,
unless a hearing before the Hearing Authority is requested before the 10 day
period ends.



   (C)   Any person upon whom an order to abate a nuisance was served
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has the right to request a trial
before court as provided by law.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.07  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN HOUSE, BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR REAL ESTATE.



   (A)   The town hereby adopts, in its entirety, I.C. 36-7-9, known as
the Indiana Unsafe Building Law, including the definition of SUBSTANTIAL
PROPERTY INTEREST as defined in the Unsafe Building Law. The Planning and
Zoning Department shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter
and I.C. 36-7-9, adopted hereby.



   (B)   Following an order to abate pursuant to § 94.04, the
Enforcement Authority may issue an order to any person with a substantial
interest in the property affected requiring action relative to any unsafe
premises, including:



      (1)   Vacating an unsafe building;



      (2)   Sealing an unsafe building against intrusion by
unauthorized persons, in accordance with a uniform standard established and
adopted by the Planning and Zoning Department;



      (3)   Extermination of vermin in and about the unsafe premises;



      (4)   Removal of trash, debris, fire hazardous material, or a
public health hazard in and about the unsafe premises;



      (5)   Repair or rehabilitation of an unsafe building to bring
it into compliance with standards for building condition or maintenance
required for human habitation, occupancy, or use by a statute, a rule adopted
under I.C. 4-22-2, or an ordinance;



      (6)   Demolition and removal of part of an unsafe building;



      (7)   Demolition and removal of an unsafe building if:



         (a)   The general condition of the building warrants
removal; or



         (b)   The building continues to require re-inspection
and additional abatement action after an initial abatement action was taken
pursuant to notice and an order; and



      (8)   Requiring, for an unsafe building that will be sealed
for a period of more than 90 days:



         (a)   Sealing against intrusion by unauthorized persons
and the effects of weather;



         (b)   Exterior improvements to make the building
compatible in appearance with other buildings in the area; and



         (c)   Continuing maintenance and upkeep of the building
and premises.



   (C)   Maintaining an unsafe building or unsafe premises shall be
deemed a public nuisance. An owner, tenant, or resident found responsible for
such violation of the Unsafe Building Law shall, in addition to any and all
remedies available pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500, and each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (D)   The Enforcement Authority shall be empowered to maintain an
action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the abatement of the
nuisance and the recovery of all costs and expenses of the town, including
reasonable attorney fees.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.08  HEARING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Town Council elects to establish a Hearing Authority for
the enforcement of applicable unsafe building violations and public
nuisances. Such Hearing Authority will consist of the Town Council, with
support from any other necessary town staff members. This Hearing Authority
may be commonly referred to as the Hearing Officer.



   (B)   Administrative procedures.



      (1)   The Town Council hereby designates authority to the
enforcement authority, who shall be the party responsible for the
administration of the unsafe building law, in accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-1
through I.C. 36-7-9-23.



      (2)   The Town Council hereby designates the Hearing
Authority, in conjunction with relevant staff members and town department
heads, with authority to establish additional administrative procedures as it
deems necessary for the administration of the Unsafe Building Law, in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-23, including but not
limited to the following items:



         (a)   Time and frequency of hearings;



         (b)   Type and severity of cases which are heard by the
Hearing Officer;



         (c)   Documentation procedures needed for each case
presented to the Hearing Officer; and



         (d)   Other administrative elements needed for the
day-to-day operation of the Hearing Authority.



      (3)   The Hearing Authority will abide by the rules, laws, and
regulations required under I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-29, as
appropriate and applicable, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Type of orders issued;



         (b)   Requirements for all orders;



         (c)   Enforcement of orders; and



         (d)   Notice and advertising requirements for hearings.



   (C)   As provided by I.C. 36-7-9-14 of the Unsafe Building Law, a
fund designated as the "unsafe building fund" shall be established in the
operating budget of the Planning and Zoning Department. Any balance remaining
at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried over in the fund for the
following year and shall not revert to the general fund. Monies for such fund
may be received from any source including appropriations by local, state, or
Federal governments, and donations.



   (D)   An ordinance citation may be issued with respect to any
existing building or structure which is in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, or which is in violation of the unsafe building law, I.C.
36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, as it may be amended from time to time. Such a
citation shall be issued to any person with a substantial interest in the
property affected. Each day after the expiration date of the time limit
ordered for abatement of a nuisance condition under this chapter shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   When a public nuisance is found to exist and after all persons
known to have a substantial interest in the property have been given notice
pursuant to an order to abate under § 94.04, and given reasonable
opportunity to bring the property into compliance and have not done so, the
Town Council, Police Chief, and/or the Enforcement Authority may issue a town
ordinance violation citation to the record owner of the property or to the
person shown to have right of exclusive possession of the property. Such
citation shall impose a fine in conformance with this section.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, any person found in violation of
a provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 for a first
offense, not less than $50 for a second offense, and not less than $100 for
all subsequent offenses. The amount of fine shall be determined by the
Enforcement Authority, subject to review by the Hearing Authority as provided
for herein.



   (C)   Each day after the expiration date of the time limit ordered
for abatement of a nuisance condition under this chapter shall constitute a
distinct and



separate offense. No fine shall be imposed for the 10-day period immediately
following receipt of the required order to abate.



   (D)   Any person served with a citation for violating the provisions
of this chapter may appear before the Clerk-Treasurer, admit the violation,
and pay the civil penalty. If a person does not appear within 7 days of
issuance of the citation, it may be filed with a court of competent
jurisdiction and processed accordingly.



   (E)   When the town abates a nuisance pursuant to an order or by a
third party acting under this chapter, or for payment of citations issued
under this chapter, each person who held a fee interest, life estate
interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser in the violating
property is jointly and severally responsible for said costs, and in the case
of contractor work, responsibility shall begin from the time when the order
requiring the work performed was recorded to the time that the work was
completed, and include the following costs:



      (1)   The actual costs of the work performed by the
Enforcement Authority or the bid price of work accomplished by the
contractor; and



      (2)   An amount that represents a reasonable forecast of the
average processing expense that will be incurred by the Enforcement Authority
in taking the technical, administrative, and legal actions concerning typical
nuisance premises that are necessary under this section so that the action
required by an order may be performed by a contractor.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



CHAPTER 95: TREES, SHRUBS AND WEEDS



Section




Trees and Shrubs




   95.01   Reserved




Weeds




   95.15   Definitions



   95.16   Designation and enforcement authority



   95.17   Notice to remove



   95.18   Appeal of notice to remove weeds and/or rank vegetation



   95.19   Removal of weeds and/or rank vegetation



   95.20   Liability for costs of removal of weeds and/or rank
vegetation



   95.21   Notice of costs incurred in removal of weeds and/or rank
vegetation



   95.22   Payment of penalties



 



   95.99   Penalty




TREES AND SHRUBS




§ 95.01  RESERVED.




WEEDS




§ 95.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context  indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HIS or HER.  The personal and organized entities recognized under
Indiana law.



   OWNER.  The owner of record of the real estate as found in the records
of the Assessor of Warrick County.



   OWNER'S ADDRESS.  Owner's address refers to the most recent mailing
address of the owners and being that address maintained upon the records of
the Assessor of Warrick County as being the address to which the County
Treasurer would send tax duplicates.



   PERSON.  Individuals, partnerships, corporations, limited liability
companies and any other entities recognized by the laws of the State of
Indiana.



   RANK VEGETATION.  Any plant growth which is or may be harmful to the
senses, health or well being of the citizens of the Town of Chandler.



   WEEDS.  Any growth of vegetation, other than trees, woody shrubs,
ornamental plants, or plants cultivated in an orderly manner for the purpose
of producing food. Trees, bushes or woody shrubs which have sprouted as
volunteers and are not maintained and/or are growing along fence lines or
public rights-of-way, and are not maintained shall be considered to be weeds.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002)



§ 95.16  DESIGNATION AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The Storm Water and Environmental Management Department of the Town of
Chandler is designated as the Department of the Town of Chandler responsible
for the administration of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord. 2013-16, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.17  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   (A)   Notice to owner; content.  For any property found to be in
violation, the Enforcement Authority shall issue a notice to remove weeds or
rank vegetation to the owner giving the owner 5 calendar days to remove the
weeds and/or rank vegetation. The notice shall also state if the weeds and/or
rank vegetation are not removed within the 5 days, the Enforcement Authority
will direct the removal of the weeds and/or rank vegetation either by the
employees of the Town of Chandler or by a contractor hired by the Town of
Chandler for this purpose. The notice shall also state that if the weeds
and/or rank vegetation are required to be removed by the Enforcement
Authority or its agents or contractors, the owner shall be liable for the
costs incurred by the Town of Chandler in removing the weeds and/or rank
vegetation as well as the estimated costs in research of ownership,
processing costs and other administrative expenses incurred by the Town of
Chandler and the Enforcement Authority in processing the matter. The notice
must also state that if the premises are enclosed by a locked gate or other
barricade, the lock shall be removed in order to gain access to the property
for removal of the weeds and/or rank vegetation.



   (B)   Manner of legal service.  Any of the following shall
constitute sufficient notice:



      (1)   Sending a copy of the notice by registered or certified
mail to the owner at the owner's address;



      (2)   Delivering a copy of the notice to the owner or either
of the owners if there be multiple owners, personally; and



      (3)   By leaving a copy of the notice at the dwelling or usual
place of abode of the owner and by mailing a copy by first class mail to the
address of the owner.



   (C)   Date of notice.  The notice shall be deemed to have been
given upon any of the following:



      (1)   The date of personal service to one or more of the
owners;



      (2)   The date of mailing of notice by ordinary to the mail
when a copy has been left at the owner's address; and



      (3)   The date of deposit in the United States of mail of
notice by certified mail or signature delivery mail.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord.
2013-16, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.18  APPEAL OF NOTICE TO REMOVE WEEDS AND/OR RANK VEGETATION.



   (A)   Upon giving of notice herein, an owner who desires to appeal
the notice shall file a written appeal to the Enforcement Authority. The
appeal may be filed in person with the Enforcement Authority or by certified
mail. The appeal must be received by the Enforcement Authority on or before
the fifth calendar day after which the notice to remove weeds and/or rank
vegetation is given, as herein above provided.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Enforcement
Authority, or his or her designee, shall immediately investigate the appeal,
giving due notice to the owner to present the appeal to the Enforcement
Authority and the Enforcement Authority shall, forthwith, rule upon the
appeal.



(Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord. 2013-16, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.19  REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND/OR RANK VEGETATION.



   The Enforcement Authority of the Town of Chandler shall inspect each
property for which a notice to remove weeds and/or rank vegetation has been
issued at least 5 calendar days from the giving of the notice, as aforesaid.
If the weeds and/or rank vegetation have not been removed by the owner at the
time of this inspection, the Enforcement Authority may have the weeds and/or
rank vegetation removed by the employees of the Town of Chandler or by a
contractor engaged by the Town of Chandler for that purpose. In the event
that the weeds and/or rank vegetation are located in an enclosed area, the
entry of which is limited by locked gate, the Enforcement Authority shall
direct the town employees or the town's contractor to remove the lock and
enter onto the property for the purpose of removing the weeds and/or rank
vegetation that are in violation of this subchapter. Prior to the removal of
a lock, the Enforcement Authority shall have given notice of the intended
removal to the owner as a part of the notice to remove weeds and/or rank
vegetation as herein above provided.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord.
2013-16, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.20  LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND/OR RANK VEGETATION.



   When weeds and/or rank vegetation are removed by action of the
Enforcement Authority, town employees or contractors, as herein above
provided, the owner shall be liable, jointly and severally, for the following
costs:



   (A)   The actual costs of the work performed by the Town of Chandler
or work performed by a contractor;



   (B)   The reasonable charges for work done by town employees and
utilization of town equipment for the work performed; and



   (C)   An amount that represents a reasonable charge for the
processing expenses that have been incurred by the Enforcement Authority in
taking the technical, research, administrative and legal actions concerning
typical weed and rank vegetation violations that are necessary to remove
weeds and/or rank vegetation which the cost shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The cost of obtaining reliable information concerning
the identity and address of the owner;



      (2)   The cost of preparing and mailing notices;



      (3)   The salaries and fringe benefits of employees;



      (4)   The reasonable cost of motor vehicle use necessitated in
the enforcement of the ordinance for the particular property; and



      (5)   The cost of supplies, equipment and office space.



   (D)   The Town of Chandler shall determine and establish the amount
of the average processing expenses at a public meeting.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord.
2013-16, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.21  NOTICE OF COSTS INCURRED IN REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND/OR RANK
VEGETATION.



   (A)   The Enforcement Authority shall send a notice of cost of
removal of weeds and/or rank vegetation to the owner after completion of the
removal and determination by the Enforcement Authority of the costs incurred
in removing the weeds and/or rank vegetation or upon receipt by the
Enforcement Authority of an invoice from the contractor which removed the
weeds and/or rank vegetation. The notice shall include the property address
and the short form legal description of the property or the real property
parcel number as shown on the records of the Assessor of Warrick County, from
which the weeds and/or rank vegetation was removed, the date on which the
weeds and/or rank vegetation were removed, the cost of the actual removal of
the weeds and/or rank vegetation and the administrative costs as provided
herein above. The notice shall inform the owner that unless the Chandler Town
Clerk-Treasurer receives payment in full within 15 calendar days of the
mailing of the notice, that the Town of Chandler will file a copy of the
notice with the Auditor of Warrick County. Any costs incurred in the filing
of the notice with the Auditor of Warrick County shall be added to the amount
owed by the property owner. The Auditor shall, pursuant to Indiana law, place
the amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the property effected by the
work. The amount collected shall accrue interest at the rate of 8% per annum
from the date of the lien. The amount, including accrued interest, shall be
collected as taxes, are collected and shall be disbursed to the general fund
of the town.



   (B)   An owner desiring to appeal the costs of removal of
vegetation, shall petition the Town Council in writing within 15 days of the
date of mailing of the notice of costs incurred, as aforesaid. The basis for
appeal which the Town Council may consider are as follows:



      (1)   The property for which the notice was issued was not cut
by the Enforcement Authority, town employees or contractors.



      (2)   The property for which the notice was issued was cut by
the Enforcement Authority, town employees or contractors before the 5-day
notice required by this chapter.



      (3)   The amount of charges is incorrect based on the size of
the property.



      (4)   The owner was not given notice.



   (C)   The Town Council shall consider the appeals and shall take the
action as the Council deems just and appropriate with regard to the
circumstances as warranted by the evidence.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord.
2013-16, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.22  PAYMENT OF PENALTIES.



   (A)   All fines and penalties shall be payable to the Town of
Chandler Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of
Chandler Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under
this chapter for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the
violation.



   (B)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not waive
trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town of
Chandler Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing
with the appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Prohibitions.



         (a)   No owner of real property within the Town of
Chandler shall be allowed any growth of weeds in excess of 8 inches in height
upon his or her property.



         (b)   No owner of real property shall allow the growth
of rank vegetation upon his or her property.



      (2)   Violations.  It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to fail to comply with division (B)(1) above. Any penalty for
the violation herein shall be in addition to any costs and expenses incurred
in the removal of the violation by the Town of Chandler, its agents,
employees and/or contractors.



      (3)   Penalty.



         (a)   Any person who violates division (B)(1) above
shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $50 for the first violation in
any 12-month period for each violation.



         (b)   Any person who violates division (B)(1) above a
second time in any 12-month period shall be subject to a penalty of not less
than $100 for each violation.



         (c)   Any person who violates division (B)(1) above for
a third or subsequent occasion in any 12-month period shall be subject to a
penalty of not more than $500.



         (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Chandler is
hereby authorized to accept the payment of the monetary penalties into the
general fund of the town.



(Ord. 1996-7, passed 6-5-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-6, passed 8-19-2002)



CHAPTER 96: NOISE CONTROL



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Violations



   96.03   Exceptions



   96.04   Payment of fines



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



      A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so
read is designated as db(A) or dbA.



      DECIBEL (DB). A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal
to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
micro-newtons per square meter).



      LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE. Any automobile, van, motorcycle, motor
driven cycle, motor scooter, dune buggy, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle,
go-cart, minibike, trail bike, or truck with a gross vehicular weight of less
than 8,000 pounds.



      MINOR. A person under 18 years of age.



      MODIFIED AND DEFECTIVE EXHAUST SYSTEMS. An exhaust system in
which the original noise abatement devices have been physically altered,



causing them to be less effective in reducing noise than their original
devices, or devices which have been added to the original noise abatement
devices so that noise levels are increased.



      NOISE LEVEL. The A-weighted sound level produced by or from a
motor vehicle.



      PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation
which includes any officer, employee, department, agency, or instrumentality.



      SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. This instrument
shall be used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in
decibels as standardized by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Readings shall be made on a db(A) scale.



      TOWN OF CHANDLER OWNED PROPERTY. Any right-of-way, property in
which the town is the title holder of record, or property in which the town
owns a leasehold interest.



      TRAFFIC NOISE. Sound made by or from a motor vehicle operated
either on public property or right-of-way or on private property.



   (B)   All definitions and terminology used in this chapter and not
defined above, shall be defined in conformance with an applicable publication
of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or its successor body.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 96.02  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person
to cause noise levels from the operation or use of light motor vehicles in
excess of 80 db(A) in any area within the corporate limits of the town, at
any time. This noise level limit shall be measured at a distance of not less
than 15 feet from the noise source.



   (B)   It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person
to operate, cause to operate, or use a light motor vehicle so as to cause
excessive noise levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust system;
acceleration, deceleration, revving, or tire squeal; or the operation of
audio devices such as, but not limited to, radios, smart phones, compact disc
and tape players, on or from the vehicle.



   (C)   The generation of sound in violation of this chapter is deemed
to be a public nuisance.



   (D)   A custodial parent shall be responsible for ensuring a minor
child complies with this chapter and is responsible for any fine imposed.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 96.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of
emergency work, including sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency
vehicles;



   (B)   Burglar alarms on light motor vehicles of the electronic
signaling type which transmit an audible signal to a receiver which can be
carried by the owner or operator of the vehicle;



   (C)   Duly-authorized parades and celebrations; and



   (D)   Any activity authorized by the Town Council, Board of Parks
and Recreation, Police Chief, or other governmental board having jurisdiction
and control over the property.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 96.04  PAYMENT OF FINES.



   (A)   All fines and penalties pursuant to this chapter shall be
payable to the Town Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of
Chandler Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under
this chapter for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the
violation or ordered by a court.



   (B)   All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not waive
trial and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town
Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing with the
appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In any prosecution for a violation of this chapter the court
may admit evidence of a noise level as tested by a sound level meter which
meets or exceeds the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
specifications for Type II equipment. A person shall be found to have
violated this chapter for the emission of excessive noise from or on any
motor vehicle source in excess of the limitations established herein.



   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter may be
issued a citation for a violation of this noise control ordinance. Whenever
any law enforcement officer issues a citation for violation of this chapter,
he or she shall take down the name, address, operator's license number, and
registration number of the vehicle if readily available and shall issue to
the alleged violator in writing on the form provided by the town, a citation
for a violation of this chapter. A person who violates this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second
offense, and $350 for the third or subsequent offenses.



   (C)   In addition to the monetary penalties provided in division (B)
above, a court, upon application of the town, may enter injunctive relief to
prevent future violations for maintaining a nuisance.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-6-2016)



CHAPTER 97:  USE OF PROPERTY FOR ILLEGAL AND NUISANCE ACTIVITY



Section



   97.01   Purpose and definitions



   97.02   Abating nuisances in residential areas



   97.03   Nuisance reports



   97.04   Activities resulting in the issuance of a nuisance
determination



   97.05   Abatement of nuisance



   97.06   Abated nuisance and subsequent nuisance activity



   97.07   Activities resulting in automatic issuance of an eviction
filing order



   97.08   Filing of criminal charges



   97.09   Procedural review of nuisance determination or an eviction
filing order



   97.10   Eviction proceedings as a defense



   97.11   Police Department cooperation



   97.12   Prohibition of renting to tenant



   97.13   Nonexclusive remedy



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The town finds it to be in the best interests of
residents of the town and the general public to prevent illegal acts and to
promote public peace, health, and safety, and to this end, the town enacts
this chapter.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABATE. To stop an activity or eliminate a condition if of a
continuing nature, and to not repeat an activity that constituted a single
event.



      CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.



         (a)   A review panel consisting of the:



            1.   President of the Town Council;



            2.   President of the Chandler Planning
Commission; and



            3.   Chief of the Police Department.



         (b)   The Town Attorney shall be present at all meetings
of the Code Enforcement Board in an advisory capacity.



      COMPUTER AIDED DISPATCH SYSTEM. The computer systems and software
utilized by the Police Department and emergency services to dispatch police,
fire, medical and related personnel to the public and to generate reports
regarding public safety personnel responses to such emergencies or complaints.



      CONTACT INFORMATION. The name, address, phone number, and email
address (if applicable).



      DWELLING UNIT. A group of rooms or a room occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters, and may encompass permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



      INITIATE EVICTION PROCEEDINGS. To take the necessary steps
required under Indiana law, including any notice requirements, to begin the
process of eviction ultimately resulting in the filing of a cause of action
for the eviction of a tenant.



      LEASE. The oral or written agreement between the owner or
property agent and tenant regarding rental unit or residential rental
building.



      MUNICIPAL CODE. The code of ordinances of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana.



      NEIGHBOR. A person who lives in a dwelling unit, residential
rental building, or residence on the same street or an adjacent street, but
no further than a quarter of a mile, to that of a tenant creating a nuisance
or a person who lives within the same dwelling unit or residential rental
building as a tenant creating a nuisance but under a separate lease.



      NEIGHBORHOOD. The dwelling unit, residential rental building,
street, or adjacent street no further than a quarter of a mile, of a tenant
creating a nuisance. If the tenant creating a nuisance lives in an apartment
complex, the neighborhood shall include to the grounds of the apartment
complex.



      NOTICE. A written document served upon the owner or property
agent, as listed in the town's rental registry, or in the event a property is
not registered, the Warrick County Assessor's records, and tenant by personal
service followed up with regular mail, postage prepaid, as contemplated in
the Indiana Trial Rules. An owner or property agent may elect in their
registration to receive notices by facsimile and/or email. A tenant may not
waive their right to notice as defined in this paragraph.



      NUISANCE. Any violation of this chapter which also includes a
condition or activity for which a tenant is responsible which interferes with
a neighbor's possession and/or ordinary use and enjoyment of their dwelling
unit, residential rental building or residence. For purposes of this chapter,
any violation of § 97.04(A)(1) through (23) or § 97.07(A)(1) through (13)
is presumed to be a nuisance.



      OWNER. Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others,
shall have title to any residential rental building or dwelling unit with or
without having actual possession.



      POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Chandler Police Department.



      PROPERTY AGENT. A person, operator, firm, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity designated by the owner to manage a
residential rental building, including the authority to receive notices or
citations.



      RENT. To offer a building or dwelling unit for use or occupation
for a definite period of time in exchange for remuneration, whether it be for
money, property, or any other form of payment.



      RESIDENCE. A residential building within the town containing one
or more dwelling units that are owner-occupied.



      RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A building or structure that is intended
for and used as a residence or multiple residences.



      RESIDENTIAL RENTAL BUILDING. Any residential building within the
town containing one or more dwelling units held or intended to be held for
rent.



      REVISED LEASE. The amended oral or written agreement between the
owner or property agent and the remaining tenant(s) after one of the persons
obligated or listed on the lease were subject to an eviction filing order.



      TENANT. A lessee, occupant, or guest of a residential rental
building, dwelling unit, residence or residential building. For purposes of
this chapter, a tenant is responsible for the actions of their guests even if
a guest is asked to leave and becomes a trespasser.



      TOWN. The Town of Chandler, Indiana, or, as appropriate, its
employees, officers, agents, consultants, or contractors acting under and
within the scope of authority of the town to carry out and enforce the
provisions of this code.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.02  ABATING NUISANCES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Abating nuisances. No owner or property agent of a residential
rental building located in the town shall knowingly allow a tenant to be a
nuisance to their neighbors. For purposes of this chapter, an owner or
property agent becomes aware of a nuisance upon receipt of a notice of a
complaint, nuisance determination, or an eviction filing order as provided
for in this chapter.



   (B)   Discrimination forbidden. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to encourage or authorize the discrimination by lessors against any
persons based upon any protected class established by the legislative,
executive or judicial branch of Federal, state or local government. Rather,
it is the intent of this chapter to hold persons accountable for acquiescing
in or participating in the continued use of their property in a manner that
results in a nuisance or nuisance activity affecting the quality of life of
residents of the town.



   (C)   This chapter is not intended to be used against victims of
reported incidents of domestic violence.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 97.03  NUISANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   Reports of nuisance activity.



      (1)   The Police Department may, in its discretion, initiate a
complaint in connection with a suspected nuisance activity based on
information obtained through central dispatch or reports generated by the
computer aided dispatch system ("report"). In the event of a situation not
requiring an immediate response from the Police Department, a report
regarding suspected nuisance activity may be submitted directly to the Police
Department. Upon receipt of a report, the Police Department or its
representative shall log and collect the following information from the
complaining party:



         (a)   Contact information of the party submitting the
report;



         (b)   Contact information of the party causing the
nuisance if available;



         (c)   A description of the condition or activity causing
a nuisance;



         (d)   Date of the incident or the date the condition or
activity began;



         (e)   Address of the dwelling unit, residence, or
residential rental building where the nuisance activity exists or occurred;



         (f)   Contact information of any witnesses or any party
otherwise involved; and



         (g)   The disposition of the investigation and contact
information regarding the investigating officer of the Police Department.



      (2)   In the case of a report initiated by the Police
Department, the contents of reports generated by the computer aided dispatch
system shall be sufficient for purposes of documenting a report.



   (B)   Investigation and notice to owner or property agent.



      (1)   Following the investigation of a report, the Police
Department may serve notice of the report, in the form prescribed by the Town
Council and Code Enforcement Board, on the tenant and the owner or the
property agent ("complaint"). The Police Department may, in its discretion,
redact contact information from the complaint. An owner or property agent
shall have 10 calendar days from the date of the complaint to contact the
officer of the Police Department.



      (2)   The officer and the owner or property agent shall have
10 calendar days to collaborate and make a good faith effort to jointly
investigate and determine whether a tenant's activities constitute a nuisance
under this chapter. In the event that a nuisance determination is made, the
Police Department shall serve notice of the nuisance finding upon the tenant,
owner and/or property agent ("nuisance determination"). The Police Department
shall make the final decision regarding the issuance of a nuisance
determination based on a preponderance of the evidence standard.



   (C)   Failure to respond to a complaint. If an owner or property
agent fails to respond to a complaint within ten calendar days from the date
of mailing, the Police Department shall proceed with investigating the
complaint and shall make a determination regarding the issuance of a nuisance
determination.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.04  ACTIVITIES RESULTING IN THE ISSUANCE OF A NUISANCE DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Criminal and nuisance activity. Notwithstanding § 97.03 and
upon having knowledge, based upon a preponderance of the evidence (which may
include a review of the facts forming the basis of the citations, probable
cause affidavits, police reports, witness statements, and other relevant
documentation), that a tenant committed any of the following offenses, the
Police Department may issue a nuisance determination (collectively,
hereinafter referred to as "nuisance activity"):



      (1)   Criminal mischief in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (2)   Intimidation of a neighbor;



      (3)   Theft, forgery, or fraud with a neighbor as the victim
or intended victim;



      (4)   Battery against a neighbor;



      (5)   Harassment of a neighbor;



      (6)   Invasion of privacy or criminal trespass related to a
neighbor;



      (7)   Vandalism in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (8)   Disorderly conduct or resisting law enforcement in the
tenant's neighborhood, provided that disorderly conduct shall not include any
directly related actions of a victim of a reported incident of domestic
violence;



      (9)   Public indecency in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (10)   Public intoxication in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (11)   Criminal conversion with a neighbor as the victim;



      (12)   Maintaining a common nuisance;



      (13)   Alcohol offenses related to underage drinking at the
tenant's dwelling unit or residential rental building;



      (14)   Voyeurism in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (15)   Possession of marijuana from the tenant's dwelling unit
or residential rental building;



      (16)   Illegal gambling occurring at the tenant's dwelling
unit or residential rental building;



      (17)   Violation of the municipal code related to firearms in
the tenant's neighborhood (§ 130.20);



      (18)   Violation of the municipal code related to residential
noise in the tenant's neighborhood (§§ 94.20 et seq.);



      (19)   Violation of the municipal code related to abandoned
vehicles in the tenant's neighborhood (Chapter 92);



      (20)   Violation of the municipal code related to property
maintenance of the tenant's residential rental building if the tenant is
responsible pursuant to the lease (Chapter 94 and Chapter 96);



      (21)   Violation of the municipal code related to weeds and
rank vegetation related to the tenant's residential rental building if the
tenant is responsible pursuant to the lease (Chapter 95);



      (22)   Violation of the municipal code related to open burning
(§ 90.01); or



      (23)   Any attempt to commit and/or conspiracy to commit any
of the above activities, behaviors, or conduct.



   (B)   The Police Department shall send a copy of the nuisance
determination to the owner or property agent of record.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 97.05  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   An owner, property agent, and tenant receiving a nuisance determination
must abate the cited nuisance within 72 hours of receipt of the nuisance
determination. An owner or property agent shall submit a written response to
the Police Department detailing the action taken by the owner to abate the
nuisance. If the nuisance is not abated within 72 hours of receipt of the
nuisance determination, the Police Department shall issue a notice to evict
the tenant responsible for the nuisance ("eviction filing order") to the
tenant and owner or property agent directing the owner or property agent to
initiate eviction proceedings against the responsible tenant. An owner or
property agent must initiate eviction proceedings within 10 calendar days of
being served an eviction filing order from the Police Department. All parties
served with the nuisance determination shall be served with an eviction
filing order. A copy of any eviction filing order shall be submitted to the
Town Council president and the Town Attorney. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
if an owner or property agent has demonstrated that an eviction of the
responsible tenant has already been filed or the tenant has already vacated
the dwelling unit, residence or residential rental unit, an owner or property
agent shall not be required to initiate eviction proceedings.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.06  ABATED NUISANCE AND SUBSEQUENT NUISANCE ACTIVITY.



   The Police Department shall issue an eviction filing order if a tenant
receives 2 or more nuisance determinations pursuant to § 97.04(A)(1) through
(16) within a calendar year or 3 or more nuisance determinations pursuant to
§ 97.04(A)(17) through (23) within a calendar year. For purposes of this
chapter, a nuisance determination issued pursuant to § 97.04(A)(1) through
(16) is equal to 2 nuisance determinations if considered in combination with
one or more nuisance determinations issued pursuant to § 97.04(A)(17)
through (23). An owner or property agent shall initiate eviction proceedings
against a tenant responsible for a nuisance if the tenant and the owner or
property agent receives an eviction filing order.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.07  ACTIVITIES RESULTING IN AUTOMATIC ISSUANCE OF AN EVICTION FILING
ORDER.



   (A)   Automatic eviction of a tenant. Upon becoming aware of a crime
enumerated in this section and the Police Department's knowledge, based upon
a preponderance of the evidence (which may include a review of the facts
forming the basis of the citations, probably cause affidavits, police
reports, witness statements, and other relevant documentation), that such
criminal act or parole violation was committed by a tenant, the Police
Department shall serve an eviction filing order to the owner or property
agent if a tenant is arrested and charged with or is subsequently in
violation of parole for any of the following crimes as defined within the
Indiana Code:



      (1)   Murder;



      (2)   Rape;



      (3)   Child molestation;



      (4)   Prostitution occurring in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (5)   Sale, cultivation, or possession of illegal drugs or the
sale of controlled substances, with the exception of the possession of
marijuana, in the tenant's neighborhood;



      (6)   Stalking related to a neighbor;



      (7)   Manufacturing of methamphetamines in the tenant's
neighborhood;



      (8)   Arson;



      (9)   Robbery;



      (10)   Burglary;



      (11)   Sexual crimes as defined in I.C. 35-42-4-1 through
35-42-4-13, as may be amended from time to time;



      (12)   Any violation of § 97.12;



      (13)   Any attempt to commit and/or conspiracy to commit any
of the above activities, behaviors or conduct.



   (B)   Issuing notice. The Police Department shall serve written
notice to the tenant responsible and the owner or property agent within 10
calendar days of the arrest or filing of a petition for revocation of parole.
The property agent or owner shall initiate eviction proceedings within 10
calendar days of receiving the eviction filing order. If the tenant is one of
multiple tenants on a single lease, the owner or property agent may, at its
discretion, contract with the remaining tenants so long as the offending
tenant is excluded from the revised lease. The owner or property agent does
not waive any rights it may have under the original lease.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 97.08  FILING OF CRIMINAL CHARGES.



   Charging an owner or property agent of real estate with a violation of
this chapter shall be in addition to and not a substitution for any criminal
charges or petitions for revocation of parole filed as a result of
investigation by the Police Department against occupants or tenants.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.09  PROCEDURAL REVIEW OF NUISANCE DETERMINATION OR AN EVICTION FILING
ORDER.



   (A)   An owner or property agent may petition for review of a
nuisance determination or an eviction filing order in writing within 5
calendar days of receipt of such notice. The Code Enforcement Board shall
accept petitions for review filed in person, by email, facsimile, or mail on
a form prescribed by the Code Enforcement Board which form shall include
information regarding the review process including all relevant deadlines and
information regarding the prohibition of renting to an evicted party pursuant
to § 97.13. Any owner or property agent submitting a petition for review
shall identify only issues related to procedural violations of this chapter
in their petition for review.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall conduct a procedural review
of the manner in which the subject nuisance determination or eviction filing
order was issued at its first reasonable opportunity and no later than 30
calendar days after a petition for review has been received. An owner or
property agent who filed a petition for review shall receive notice of the
date, time, and place of the meeting at which a determination shall be issued
at least 5 calendar days prior to the date of the meeting. The Code
Enforcement Board's review shall be limited to whether the procedural
requirements of this chapter resulting in the issuance of a nuisance
determination or an eviction filing order have been followed. The Code
Enforcement Board shall not hear any testimony or comment when making its
determination. A determination issued by the Code Enforcement Board shall be
final. In the event the procedures of this chapter are not followed and a
determination is issued in favor of the owner or property agent, the nuisance
determination or eviction filing order that is the subject of the petition
for review shall be vacated. Following the timely filing of a petition to
review by an owner or property agent, the town shall not commence an action
against an owner or property agent for violation of this chapter until a
procedural review has been conducted by the Code Enforcement Board.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.10  EVICTION PROCEEDINGS AS A DEFENSE.



   No person shall be charged with the violation of this chapter if such
person:



   (A)   Has instituted eviction proceedings within 10 days of receipt
of an eviction filing order, in accordance with division (B) of this section,
against the tenant responsible for a nuisance or nuisance activity;



   (B)   Has proceeded with reasonable diligence in the prosecution of
said eviction proceedings;



   (C)   If any eviction proceedings are not completed within 30 days
by reason of court-ordered delays in such proceedings, the person charged
with the violation of this chapter must, nonetheless, move forward
expeditiously with any such eviction proceedings; or



   (D)   Has initiated an action under I.C. 32-30-8-1 et seq. or any
other similar eviction law which will cause such nuisance or nuisance
activity to cease upon the property.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.11  POLICE DEPARTMENT COOPERATION.



   The Police Department shall use reasonable efforts to train, educate,
and assist owners of real estate in avoiding placing tenants or occupants in
their real estate who are known violators of this chapter. Police officers
shall appear in court to testify if subpoenaed by owners or property agents
and, subject to applicable law, work diligently to assist owners or property
agents acting pursuant to this chapter through the disclosure of information,
statements, witnesses or evidence related to a complaint, nuisance
determination or eviction filing order, unless otherwise prohibited by law.
Within 120 days from the effective date of this chapter, the Police
Department shall maintain records of complaints, nuisance determinations and
eviction filing orders and make such records available to owners and property
agents upon request, unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.12  PROHIBITION OF RENTING TO TENANT.



   An owner or property agent who evicts a tenant under this chapter may
not rent to or otherwise allow the evicted tenant to occupy a dwelling unit,
residence, or residential rental building owned or operated by the owner or
property agent within the town for 1 year from the date of eviction of the
tenant.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.13  NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not in any manner be construed to
limit or be a condition precedent to bringing an action under I.C. 32-30-8-1
et seq. or under any other law. This chapter shall not create a right for a
third party to bring a cause of action pursuant to any provision herein nor
shall this chapter increase or expand an owner or property agent's duty to
provide property in a habitable condition under existing law.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   An owner or property agent who fails to comply with an eviction filing
order shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $750 for violation of this
chapter. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation
and a court may assess a monetary civil penalty for each day a violation
exists. The maximum fine for a violation under this chapter shall be $5,000.



(Ord. 2016-01, passed 2-15-2016)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Transient merchants; regulations within corporate limits



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; REGULATIONS WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.



   (A)   (1)   The words TRANSIENT MERCHANT, when used in this
section, shall include all persons, firms, and corporations, both as
principals and agents, who engage in, do, or transact any temporary or
transient business within the corporate limits of the Town of Chandler,
Indiana, by offering for sale or selling goods, wares, or merchandise, and
those who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, shall hire, lease or
occupy any building, structure or real estate or shall utilize any motor or
otherwise mobile vehicle or conveyance for the transaction of such business.



      (2)   The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT as used in this section
shall not include:



         (a)   Any person, individual, co-partner, or corporation
which grows the goods, wares or merchandise that is sold or offered for sale;



         (b)   An auctioneer who is licensed by the State of
Indiana;



         (c)   A person who has resided in the Town of Chandler,
Indiana, for more than 6 months continuously immediately preceding the
commission of any of the acts previously described in this section;



         (d)   Any person engaged in sanctioned activity of any
school located in Warrick County; and



         (e)   Any person engaged in activity sanctioned by a
duly organized church, charitable, civic or community improvement group
having a location in Warrick County.



   (B)   Each transient merchant shall apply to the Clerk-Treasurer of
the Town of Chandler, Indiana, for such license and shall furnish the
following information:



      (1)   The person’s or entity's full name;



      (2)   The person’s or entity's permanent address and
telephone number;



      (3)   The person’s or entity's local address and telephone
number;



      (4)   A description of the goods, wares, merchandise or
services to be sold;



      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the employer
of the person making such application, if such person is in the employ of
another;



      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the immediate
supervisor of the person making such application; and



      (7)   The applicant's social security number or other federal
tax identification number.



   (C)   (1)   At the time of the filing of the application, the
applicant shall also file and deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer a certificate
of liability insurance covering any building or other real estate utilized by
the applicant and/or a certificate of automobile liability insurance, if a
mobile unit is to be utilized in the transaction of the applicant's business.
In either event, providing minimum liability insurance coverage of not less
than $100,000 per individual claimant and $300,000 for any occurrence.



      (2)   At the time of the filing of the application, the
applicant shall also file and deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer a bond with
sureties to be approved by the Clerk-Treasurer in the penal sum of $2,000 to
be payable to the Town of Chandler, Indiana, and being for the protection of
the public and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the applicant's
obligation to the town.



   (D)   The applicant shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a license fee
of $25 for each representative. Said license shall be valid for a period of
365 days from the date of issuance. No license shall be issued for longer
than 1 year and no license shall be transferred from 1 person to another.



   (E)   Any mobile vehicle or other mobile conveyance utilized by a
transient merchant for the transaction of business hereunder shall contain an
emergency flasher, as approved by the Police Department, to adequately call
attention to said vehicle to provide for the safety of those operating in and
around said vehicle. In addition thereto, any such vehicle or conveyance
utilized by a transient merchant herein shall be inspected for requisite
safety equipment by the Police Department before utilization of said vehicle
or conveyance.



   (F)   Upon the fulfillment of the requirements for issuance of a
license, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue over his or her signature and the
town's seal, a license which shall contain the information required by
division (B) of this section.



   (G)   The applicant shall carry the license on the applicant's
person and shall display the license when requested to do so and shall
surrender the license upon departure from the town or upon expiration,
whichever occurs first.



   (H)   The surety bond required by this section shall remain in
effect for not less than 3 months from the time the license herein shall have
expired or until such time as said license shall be surrendered by the
transient merchant to the Town of Chandler and, provided that all conditions
of the surety bond have been faithfully performed, shall then be released by
the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 1989-1, passed 2-27-1989; Am. Ord. 2008-4, passed 4-21-2008)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to sell or
offer to sell any goods, wares, merchandise or services within the corporate
limits of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, without having first obtained a
license to do so.



   (B)   Any person who acts as a transient merchant within the
corporate limits of the Town of Chandler, Indiana without having first
obtained a license to do so, or who violates any other provision of §
110.01, shall pay penalty of $250 for the first such violation; $500 for a
second violation within any 1 calendar year; and $2,500 for any third or
subsequent violations within any 1 calendar year. Each day in which a
violation occurs shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   All penalties shall be payable to the Town of Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer. The Town of Chandler Clerk-Treasurer is the Town of Chandler
Violations Clerk and shall receive all payment of penalties under this
chapter for which the violator desires to waive trial and admit the
violation. All cases wherein persons cited for a violation do not waive trial
and admit the violation or default in appearance before the Town of Chandler
Clerk-Treasurer shall be referred to the Town Attorney for filing with the
appropriate court in Warrick County, Indiana.



(Ord. 1989-1, passed 2-27-1989; Am. Ord. 2008-4, passed 4-21-2008)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section




Curfew




   130.01   Curfew hours for children 15, 16, and 17 years of age



   130.02   Curfew hours for children younger than 15 years of age



   130.03   Application



   130.04   Enforcement



   130.05   Responsibility of parent, guardian, or custodian



   130.06   Effectiveness




Firearms




   130.20   Regulations of discharge




Disorderly Conduct




   130.35   Civil emergencies



   130.36   General provisions



Alcohol



   130.50   Public consumption and possession of open container



 



   130.99   Penalty




CURFEW




§ 130.01  CURFEW HOURS FOR CHILDREN 15, 16, AND 17 YEARS OF AGE.



   It is unlawful for a child 15, 16, or 17 years of age to be in a public
place in the Town of Chandler at any time during the following curfew hours:



   (A)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;



   (B)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday; or



   (C)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or
Friday.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  CURFEW HOURS FOR CHILDREN YOUNGER THAN 15 YEARS OF AGE.



   It is unlawful for a child younger than 15 years of age to be in a
public place in the Town of Chandler after 11:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on
any day.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  APPLICATION.



   Sections 130.01 and 130.02 of this subchapter, do not apply to a child
who is:



   (A)   Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian;



   (B)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child's parent,
guardian, or custodian; or



   (C)   With the consent of the child's parent, guardian, or
custodian, either participating in, going to, or returning from:



      (1)   Lawful employment;



      (2)   A school-sanctioned activity; or



      (3)   An expressive, religious, or associated activity
protected by either federal or state law, including but not limited to the
free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to assembly.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 130.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A child who commits a curfew violation under this subchapter
is subject to the enforcement procedures provided in I.C. 34-28-5-1. Whenever
a complaint is filed against a child for a violation of this subchapter, the
Town of Chandler shall direct a copy of the child's parent, guardian, or
custodian, if the person is known or can be identified by reasonable inquiry.



   (B)   In addition to the imposition of fines as provided in this
subchapter, the court upon request shall order the injunctive relief as in
appropriate and necessary to prevent a child from committing further
violations of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT, GUARDIAN, OR CUSTODIAN.



   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor child
under the age of 18 years of age knowingly to allow that child to commit a
curfew violation under this subchapter.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  EFFECTIVENESS.



   This subchapter shall be in effect from and after its passage by the
Council and publication as is by law required.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)




FIREARMS




§ 130.20  REGULATIONS OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Discharge permitted.  Discharge of a firearm within the town
shall be permitted only as follows:



      (1)   By a law enforcement officer while acting in the course
of official duty;



      (2)   A member of the armed forces of the United States or of
Indiana, while acting in the course of official duty;



      (3)   A person acting with the consent of the Board of
Trustees of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, in the course of a sanctioned and
supervised public event, including but not limited to military or ceremonial
funerals, amateur or professional sporting events and shooting matches;



      (4)   On land used or zoned as agricultural property by the
owner or occupant, who resides thereon, or the immediate members of his or
her family who also reside thereon, or by a person or persons having
permission in writing from the owner of such land; and/or



      (5)   On property which contains at least five contiguous
acres.



   (B)   Definition.  For purposes of this subchapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FIREARM.  Any weapon that is capable of, designed to or that may
readily be converted to expel a projectile by means of an explosion.



   (C)   Consent of discharge.  The Board of Trustees of the Town of
Chandler, Indiana, may authorize the chief law enforcement officer of the
town to grant the consent of the Board when proper application has been made
for the discharge of a firearm for one of the events described in division
(A)(3) above.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prohibit
any person from discharging any firearm in protection of his or her person,
family, guests, or property in conformance with state and Federal law.



(Ord. 1985-1, passed 3-1-1985; Am. Ord. 2018- 06, passed 10-1-2018)




Offenses Against Public Morals5





DISORDERLY CONDUCT




§ 130.35 CIVIL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CIVIL EMERGENCY.



         (a)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the
use of actual force of violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power of execute the force by 3 or more persons acting together
without authority of law; or



         (b)   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
corporate limits of the town resulting in the death or injury of persons of
the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measure must
be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



      CURFEW.  A prohibition against any persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motor-upon any alley, street, highway, public property
or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the town during the hours
in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.



   (B)   Proclamation by the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Chandler.  When in the judgement of the Board of Trustees a civil emergency
as defined herein is deemed to exist, it may for with proclaim in writing the
existence of same.



   (C)   Imposition of curfew.  After proclamation or a civil
emergency by the Board of Trustees, it may order a general curfew applicable
to the geographical areas of the town as a whole, or it deems advisable and
applicable during the hours of the day or night as it deems necessary in the
interest of the public safety and welfare.



   (D)   Additional regulations.  After proclamation of a civil
emergency, the Board of Trustees may also in the interest of public safety
and welfare make any or all of the following orders:



      (1)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores;



      (2)   Order the closing of all taverns;



      (3)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions
thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is
permitted;



      (4)   Order the discontinuance or the sale of beer;



      (5)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or
giving away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in
any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



      (6)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other
establishments whose chief activity is the sale, distribution or dispensing
of liquid flammable or combustible products;



      (7)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing,
disposing or giving away of firearms and/or ammunition; and



      (8)   Issue the other orders as are imminently necessary for
the protection of life and property.



   (E)   Emergency powers.  During the period of a declared state of
emergency, the Board of Trustees shall have the power to invoke any or all of
the following provisions.



      (1)   Alcoholic beverages.  No person shall consume any
alcoholic beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned, or
in any motor vehicle driven or parked thereon which is within a duly
designated restricted area.



      (2)   Weapons.  No person shall carry or possess any rock,
bottle, club, brick or weapon, when using or intending to use the same
unlawfully against the person or property of another.



      (3)   Incendiary missiles.  No person shall make, carry,
posses or use any type of Molotov Cocktail, gasoline or petroleum base
firebomb or other incendiary missile.



      (4)   Restricted areas.  No person shall enter any area
designated by the Board of Trustees as a restricted area unless in the
performance of official duties or with written permission from the Board of
Trustees or its duly designated representative or the person shall prove
residence therein.



(Ord. 5-1969, passed 1-5-1970)



§ 130.36  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Disorderly conduct.  It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to disturb the peace and quiet of the Town of Chandler, Indiana or of
its inhabitants by loud talking or by the making of unusual noises, or by the
crying of any alarm without good cause, or by threatening any person or
challenging him or her to fight or menacing him or her with physical injury
or pecuniary loss, or by accosting or approaching any person of the opposite
sex unknown to the person and by word, sign or gesture attempting to speak to
or become acquainted with the person against his or her will except in the
transaction of legitimate business.



   (B)   Congregating in public places.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to congregate or cause: to be congregated a crowd of 3 or more persons
upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, school or school
grounds, building, or any other public place within the town as to obstruct
the or as to hinder or annoy passers-by or occupants of adjacent premises, or
as to interfere with the activities normally carried on the premises.



   (C)   Disturbing place of worship meetings. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons within the town by any loud or unnecessary talking or
shouting or by any threatening, abusive, profane or obscene language or
violent notion, or by any other rude behavior, to interrupt, molest, annoy or
disturb any group of persons convened for the purpose of worship, or in like
manner to interrupt, molest, annoy or disturb any meeting of persons met
together for any lawful purpose.



   (D)   Minor curfew. It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of 16 years to be upon the public streets, alleys, public places, public
grounds, or public thoroughfares of the town between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
to 5:00 a.m. during the time officially proscribed for the town. It shall
also be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care or custody of any person under the age of 16 years knowingly to permit
the minor person to be upon the streets, alleys, public places, public
grounds, or public thoroughfares of the town during the above mentioned
hours. The provisions of this section shall not apply when the minor person
is accompanied by parent, guardian, or other adult person having care or
custody of the person, or while the minor is engaged in some necessary
business.



   (E)   Interference with officials.  It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to intentionally impede or interfere, or attempt to impede
or interfere with any police officer, firefighter or any other official of
the town in the performance of his or her duty or emergency functions as a
firefighter, police officer, or official of the town.



(Ord. 5-1969, passed 1-5-1970)  Penalty, see § 130.99



ALCOHOL



§ 130.50  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER.



   (A)   No person shall consume an alcoholic beverage, or have in his
or her possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any
alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or which has a seal broken, or the
contents of which have been partially removed, upon any public street, alley,
sidewalk, parking lot, park, recreation facility, or beach, in or immediately
adjacent to a public restroom, or other public place within the town except:



      (1)   Within those public parks, beaches, or recreational
facilities designated by resolution of the Town Council as permitting the
consumption of alcoholic beverages;



      (2)   In or on the property of an establishment, business
place, or other location properly licensed for the sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages by the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; or



      (3)   During a community special event, provided the Board of
Parks and Recreation ("Board"), after consultation with the Chief of Police,
has permitted the consumption of alcoholic beverages in connection with the
special event use of any park or recreation facility (or any portion thereof)
and the event has been issued a special event permit by the Board. The
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall only be permitted within those areas
of the park or recreation facility so designated by the Board and subject to
any additional constraints imposed by the Superintendent of the Board and the
Chief of Police in connection with the issuance of the Special Events Permit.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to relieve any applicant or event
organizer from full compliance with all alcohol beverage control laws and
regulations of the State of Indiana.



   (B)   Warning signs. The Board of Parks and Recreation shall post
appropriate signs advising the public that the consumption of alcohol or the
possession of open containers of alcohol is not permitted in parks and
recreation facilities.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 3-21-2016)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   A minor child who violates §§ 130.01, 130.02,
130.03 and 130.04 of this chapter may be subject to a fine of not more than
$100.



      (2)   A parent, guardian, or custodian who violates § 130.05
of this chapter shall, for the first offense, be subject to a fine of $50;
for a second violation of § 130.05 of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of $100; and for a third and subsequent violation of § 130.05 of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of $500.



      (3)   In all instances the person found in violation of this
chapter shall be responsible for all court costs incurred.



(Ord. 2000-18, passed 10-2-2000)



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a
firearm, as herein above defined, within the corporate limits of the Town of
Chandler, Indiana, except as permitted herein.



      (2)   Violation of § 130.20 shall be punishable in the same
manner as violations of other municipal ordinances in any court of competent
jurisdiction within Warrick County, Indiana. A person shall be penalized in
the sum of $200 plus costs for the first violation of this provision and a
sum of $500 for each subsequent violation.



(Ord. 1985-1, passed 3-1-1985)



   (D)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any
order made by the Board of Trustees of the town in accordance with the terms
of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500, and/or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 6 months.



(Ord. 5-1969, passed 1-5-1970)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   RESERVED



      152.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



      153.   SUBDIVISIONS



      154.   RESERVED



      155.   FAIR HOUSING



CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Building standards; processing expenses for enforcement




Fire and Code Enforcement




   150.10   Title; purpose



   150.11   Definitions



   150.12   Scope; authority



   150.13   Building permits



   150.14   Investigations and inspections of construction activities



   150.15   Enforcement and penalties



   150.16   Minimum construction standards



   150.17   Use of engineered roof trusses and floor joists



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  BUILDING STANDARDS; PROCESSING EXPENSES FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Adoption of average processing expense.  The following
schedule be and the same is hereby adopted as the average processing expenses
for the enforcement of the Building Standards Ordinance of the Town of
Chandler:



 


Title search

 

$150




Notices and orders

 

$40




Cost of salary and employee time

 

$360




Cost of supplies and equipment

 

$30



                              Total
 
$580



 



   (B)   Imposition of the averaging processing fees. The average
processing fees as herein above established shall be in addition to all
actual costs of the work performed by the Town of Chandler under I.C. 36-7-9
and shall be added to the cost of the lien imposed thereon and shall be
assessed against the person or persons holding a fee interest, life estate
interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser or mortgage holder in
the unsafe premises pursuant to law and included as part of the lien against
the property as provided for by law.



   (C)   Effective date.  This section shall be in full force and
effect from and after its passage.



(Ord. 2006-4, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 2012-11, passed 8-20-2012)



FIRE AND CODE ENFORCEMENT



§ 150.10  TITLE; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Title.  This subchapter and all material included herein by
reference shall be known as the “Building Code of Chandler, Indiana.”



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the
life, public safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of the town,
and shall be construed to such a manner as to effectuate this purpose.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.11  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-4.



   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-5.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-7.



   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.  Includes individuals employed by the Town
Planning Commission that are authorized to represent the Executive Director.



   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in
I.C. 22-12-1-14.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C.
22-12-1-16.



   MOBILE STRUCTURE.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-17.



   PERSON.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-18.



   STRUCTURE.  Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically
stated otherwise.



   VEHICULAR BRIDGE.  Has the meaning ascribed thereto in I.C. 22-12-1-26.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.12  SCOPE; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Scope.



      (1)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this subchapter shall not
apply to industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under
I.C. 22-15-4; however, the provisions of this subchapter and the rules
promulgated by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to
any construction related to an industrialized building system or mobile
structure not certified under I.C. 22-15-4.



      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this subchapter is not
applicable to regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated
pressure vessels, or regulated lifting devices.



   (B)   Authority.  The Executive Director is hereby authorized and
directed to administer and enforce the following:



      (1)   All of the provisions of this subchapter.



      (2)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11.



      (3)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.13  BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   Building permit required.  Construction is prohibited unless
in conformity with a valid building permit obtained from the Executive
Director prior to commencement of construction.



   (B)   Application for building permit.



      (1)   Any person required to have a building permit shall
submit a complete application to the Executive Director.



      (2)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared
by the Executive Director, and shall contain the following:



         (a)   Information that the Executive Director determines
to be necessary to locate and contact the applicant.



         (b)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans
and specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the
nature and location of all construction to be accomplished.



         (c)   A plot plan drawn to scale; provided, however, the
plot plan shall not be required in the instance where all such construction
is to occur entirely within an existing structure.  This plot plan shall
reflect the location, of the structure in relation to existing property lines
and shall show streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions
to such streets, curbs and sidewalks.



         (d)   If required by Indiana law or any rule of the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, a copy of a Construction Design
Release for the construction to be done that has been issued by the Building
Law Compliance Officer pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3.



         (e)   Any additional information that the Executive
Director finds to be necessary to determine that the construction will
conform to all applicable building and fire safety laws and will not violate
any other applicable ordinances or laws.



         (f)   The fee established by Town Planning Commission.



      (3)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the
person entitled to obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that
person. The Executive Director may require that such an employee or agent
provide written authority to apply for a permit.



   (C)   Issuance of building permit.  The Executive Director shall
issue a building permit to a person after the person has submitted a complete
application, including any applicable fee, provided that the proposed
construction will conform to all applicable building and fire safety laws and
will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.



   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for any
structure under the jurisdiction of this subchapter shall be issued unless
the structure was constructed in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.  It shall be unlawful to occupy any structure unless a full,
partial, or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Executive Director.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.14  INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   General authority to make inspections and investigations.



      (1)   All construction shall be subject to periodic
inspections by the Executive Director irrespective of whether a building
permit has been or is required to be obtained.



      (2)   The Executive Director may at any reasonable time go in,
upon, around or about the premises where any structure subject to the
provisions of this subchapter or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission is located for the purposes of inspection and
investigation of such structure.  The inspection and investigation may be
made before and/or after construction on the project is completed for the
purposes of determining whether the structure meets building standards and
procedures, and ascertaining whether the construction and procedures have
been accomplished in a manner consistent with this subchapter and the rules
of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



   (B)   Inspections by Fire Department. The Executive Director and the
Fire Department shall work cooperatively to conduct inspections and
investigations to promote compliance with fire safety laws (The Fire
Department has independent authority to conduct inspections and take
enforcement actions under I.C. 36-8-17).



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.15  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES



   (A)   Withhold issuance of permits.



      (1)   Whenever a person which is either an applicant for a
building permit or an obtainer of a building permit owes fees, including
checks returned for insufficient funds, permit fees owed pursuant to this
subchapter, or inspection fees owed pursuant to this subchapter, to the
Executive Director, the Executive Director may withhold the issuance of
subsequently requested permits until such time that the debt is satisfied.



      (2)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a
structure that is not being used or constructed in conformance with
applicable provisions of an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance
relating to land use, the Executive Director is authorized to withhold, the
issuance of requested permit(s) until such time that the property is brought
into conformance with applicable ordinances.



   (B)   Permit revocation. The Executive Director may revoke a
building permit when any of the following are applicable:



      (1)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a
false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact.



      (2)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a
lack of compliance with building standards and procedures.



      (3)   There is failure to comply with this subchapter.



      (4)   The structure for which the building permit has been
issued is not being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable
zoning ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use.



   (C)   Stop work order.



      (1)   The Executive Director may issue an order requiring
suspension of the pertinent construction (stop work order) in accordance with
this section.



      (2)   The stop work order shall:



         (a)   Be in writing.



         (b)   State with specificity the construction to which
it is applicable and the reason for its issuance.



         (c)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place.



         (d)   If practicable, be given to:



            1.   The person doing the construction; and



            2.   To the owner of the property or the owner's
agent.



         (e)   The stop work order shall state the conditions
under which construction may be resumed.



      (3)   The Executive Director may issue a stop work order if:



         (a)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner,
including, but not limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this
subchapter or any state law pertaining to safety during construction.



         (b)   Construction is occurring in violation of this
subchapter or in such a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed,
there is a reasonable probability that it will substantially difficult to
correct the violation.



         (c)   Construction for which a building permit is
required, is proceeding without a building permit being in force.



      (4)   The issuance of a stop work order shall in no way limit
the operation of penalties provided elsewhere in this subchapter.



   (D)   Civil action.  Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4, the town may
initiate a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any
person from violating a provision of this subchapter.



   (E)   Monetary penalty.  Any person violating any provision of this
subchapter may be subject to a fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500.  The
assessment of a monetary penalty shall in no way limit the operation of the
penalties provided elsewhere in this subchapter.



   (F)   Right of appeal.  Any person aggrieved by an order issued
under this subchapter shall have the right to petition for review of any
order of the Executive Director.  Such a person may file a petition using
either, or both, of the following procedures:



      (1)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission.



         (a)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this
subchapter may appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission,
in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7.



         (b)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order
issued by the municipality that covers a subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C.
22-13, I.C. 22-14, I.C. 22-15, a fire safety or a building rule.



         (c)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
must review orders that concern a Class 2 structure if the person aggrieved
by the order petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after
the issuance of the order.



         (d)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
may review all other orders issued under this subchapter.



         (e)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission does not suspend the running of the time period
under any statute in which a person must petition a court for judicial review
of the order.



      (2)   Appeal to an established local administrative body or
court.  Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-8-9, a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Building Department may appeal as in other civil actions.  The appellant
must, by registered mail, give the Municipality Executive a 15 day written
notice of his or her intention to appeal. This notice must concisely state
the appellant's grievance.  If, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the municipality
has established by ordinance to hear appeals of orders issued under
ordinances, then a person aggrieved by an order may petition for review with
this administrative body in accordance with the ordinance. If no such
administrative body exists, then the person may petition a court for judicial
review of the order.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.16  MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Adoption of rules by reference.



      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b), the rules of the Indiana
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following
Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby
incorporated by reference in this code and shall include any later amendments
to those rules.



         (a)   Article 13: Building Codes.



         (b)   Article 14: Indiana Residential Code.



         (c)   Article 16: Indiana Plumbing Code.



         (d)   Article 17: Indiana Electrical Code.



         (e)   Article 18: Indiana Mechanical Code.



         (f)   Article 19: Indiana Energy Conservation Code.



         (g)   Article 20:  Indiana Swimming Pool Code.



         (h)   Article 22:  Indiana Fire Code.



         (i)   Article 25: Indiana Fuel Gas Code.



         (j)   Article 28: NFPA Standards.



      (2)   Two copies of the above rules incorporated by reference
are on file in the office of the clerk for the legislative body for public
inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



      (3)   The Executive Director and the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and
building laws adopted in this subchapter. Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a
variance granted by the Executive Director is not effective until it has been
approved by Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



   (B)   Lifting devices located within a private residence.



      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices,
such as elevators and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence
are not regulated lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards
applicable to lifting devices located within a private residence are
incorporated by reference:



         (a)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME
A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New
York, 10016.



         (b)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators,
ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York,
New York, 10016.



         (c)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform
Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for
Platform and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



         (d)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform
Lifts, ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for
Platform and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



         (e)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME
A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and
Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



      (2)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards
incorporated by reference are on file in the office of the clerk for the
legislative body for public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



§ 150.17  USE OF ENGINEERED ROOF TRUSSES AND FLOOR JOISTS.



   (A)   This subchapter applies only to new construction of a Class 1
structure and a Class 2 structure.



   (B)   (1)   As used in this subchapter, "engineered lumber roof
trusses and/or floor joists" refers to a structural assembly that:



         (a)   Is fabricated from:



         1.   Wood;



         2.   Light gauge metal;



         3.   Other component materials; or



         4.   Any combination of materials described in divisions
1. through 3.;



         (b)   Has less mass cross sectional area than sawn
lumber members that would be used in an equivalent application;



         (c)   Is assembled from combustible or noncombustible
materials, or both; and



         (d)   Is not a vertical member and supports a roof or
floor, or both.



      (2)   The term does not include a structural assembly that
provides a minimum of 1 hour fire resistance when tested in accordance with
ASTM Standard E119.



      (3)   As used in this subchapter, OWNER means a person having
control or custody of any structure to which this subchapter applies.



   (C)   (1)   A structure that contains engineered lumber roof
trusses and/or floor joists must have a placard affixed to the structure that
meets the requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   The placard shall use black coding and lettering that
identifies both of the following:



         (a)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and
floor joists used in the structure, including truss or engineered lumber.



         (b)   The location of engineered lumber roof trusses
and/or floor joists used in the structure including floor joists or truss
roof systems.



      (3)   The placard may not be:



         (a)   Smaller than 3-1/2 inches by 4-1/2 inches; and



         (b)   Larger than 5 inches by 5-1/2 inches.



   (D)   The placard must be permanently affixed:



      (1)   Below the structure's electrical meter, if the structure
has electrical service; or



      (2)   On the left side of the front entrance 4 to 6 feet above
the ground, if the structure does not have electrical service.



   (E)   (1)   An applicant for a building permit must indicate on
the application:



         (a)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or
floor joists used in the structure:



         (b)   The location of the engineered lumber roof trusses
and/or floor joists used in the structure.



      (2)   The application form for a building permit must include
a place on the form for providing the information under division (a).



   (F)   (1)   An applicant for a building permit shall not be
issued a building permit unless the individual at the time of the application
is issued a placard by the Executive Director.



      (2)   A fee, not to exceed $5, shall be charged for each
placard issued.



   (G)   The Executive Director shall not



      (1)   Approve a structure on final inspection; or



      (2)   Issue a certificate of occupancy for a structure; unless
a placard is affixed to the structure that meets the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (H)   (1)   Not later than 10 business days after issuing a
building permit, the Executive Director shall send written notification to
the local Fire Department and the 911 telephone call center that has
jurisdiction in the area where the structure is located. The notification
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.



      (2)   The notification must include the following information:



         (a)   The street address of the property.



         (b)   The name of the municipality and county in which
the structure is located.



         (c)   The types of engineered lumber roof trusses and/or
floor joists used in the structure.



         (d)   The location of the engineered lumber roof trusses
and/or floor joists by area within the structure.



   (I)   Upon receiving a copy of the notification under division (H)
of this section, the Chief of the Fire Department or the Chief’s designee
shall:



      (1)   Post the information in a conspicuous place for all
emergency personnel;



      (2)   Provide the information to any Fire Department providing
mutual aid; and



      (3)   For Class 1 structures only, add the structure to the
inspection file for follow up on a timely basis for inspection.



   (J)   Upon receiving a notification under division (H) of this
section, the 911 telephone call center shall maintain the information on each
property, by the address of the property, that uses engineered lumber roof
trusses and/or floor joists.  When dispatching to the listed address, the
dispatcher shall notify the responding units of the information.



   (K)   An owner of a structure shall ensure that the placard remains
affixed to the structure during the life of the structure.



   (L)   If the Executive Director provides written notice to an owner
that the owner has failed to install or maintain a placard on the structure
in violation of this subchapter; and the owner fails to correct the violation
not later than 10 business days after receiving the written notice, the owner
is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $100 per day during the period
beginning 10 business days after the owner receives written notice of the
violation from the unit and until the date the violation is corrected.  A
penalty imposed under this ordinance may not exceed $2,500 per structure per
year.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-19-2013)



CHAPTER 151: RESERVED



CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



Section



   152.01   Statutory authorization



   152.02   Findings of fact



   152.03   Statement of purpose



   152.04   Objectives



   152.05   Definitions



   152.06   General provisions



   152.07   Administration



   152.08   Provisions for flood hazard reduction



   152.09   Variance procedures



   152.10   Severability



 



   152.99   Penalty



§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore,
the Town Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management
regulations.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Chandler, Indiana are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expend for flood protection and relief, and impairment
of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in flood plains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwater;



   (D)   Control filling, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands; and



   (F)   Make federally-subsidized flood insurance available for
structures and their contents in the town by fulfilling the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaking at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable, and sewer lines, streets,
and bridges located in floodplains;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that
property is in a flood area.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.05  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both.  In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings.  These areas are labeled as ZONE A, ZONE
AE, ZONES A1-A30, ZONE AO, ZONE AH, ZONE AR and ZONE A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. 
The definitions are presented below:



      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.  Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (2)   ZONES AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the
1% annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)



      (3)   ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between 1 and 3 feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.  Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.



      (4)   ZONE AH.  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between 1 and 3 feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.



      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system.  These are the areas
of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the
construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to
consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used
when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress
toward completion.  No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory
flood insurance purchase requirements apply.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). This term applies to a
building, or structure or use which is incidental or subordinate to the
principal building or use, and which is located on the same lot, or an
adjacent lot, with such principal building or use, and which cannot be
greater in size than the principal building or use.  ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human
habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES can be but are not limited to: detached garages,
carports, storage sheds, post-frame structures, in ground and above ground
pools.



   ADDITION. An addition to an existing structure means any walled and
roofed expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is
connected by a common load-bearing wall or non-load bearing wall other than a
firewall. Any walled and roofed ADDITION which is connected by a firewall or
is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing wall or non-load bearing
wall is new construction.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from 1
and 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and in determinate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATED SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.



      (1)   A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great.



      (2)   CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials;



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or
the construction of permanent structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP.  It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for serving the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including,
at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 0.2%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA.  The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, FLOODPLAIN
ORDINANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE, and FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REQUIREMENTS.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPF). The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus 2 feet at given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with



attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the
floodproofed design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable
to the passage of water.  All structural components of these walls are
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the
effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG.  This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management.  It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   HARDSHIP. (Related to variances of this chapter.) The exceptional
HARDSHIP that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance.
The Town Council requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and
peculiar to the property involved.  Mere economic or financial hardship
alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical
handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional HARDSHIP. All of these
problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance,
even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to
build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the Register
of Historic Places of the Indiana State Survey of Historic Architectural,
Archaeological and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts, and Objects.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required
to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local
flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal
and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after
June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective
FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the first floor of a structure constructed
with a crawl space, provided that the lowest point of the interior grade is
at or above the BFE and construction meets requirements of division (6)(a) of
this definition; or



      (6)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of floodwaters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters, by providing a minimum of 2 openings (in addition to doorways
and windows) having a total net area of 1 square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall
be no higher than 1 foot above grade; and



         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site,
bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code or I.C. 22 et
seq., as promulgated by the Indiana Administrative Building Council. A
MODULAR HOUSING UNIT is constructed in part or in whole at a place other than
the foundation site, transported to the foundation site, and assembled on
site to create 1 whole structure. The MANUFACTURED HOME or MODULAR HOUSING
UNIT should include but not be limited to these features: asphalt roof, roof
pitch of at least 2.5:12, house-type windows, doors and siding, and must be
placed on a permanent foundation. MODULAR HOMES, PREFABRICATED HOMES, and
other such implied terms shall be deemed to be the same as MANUFACTURED
HOMES. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational
vehicle.”



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (NEW OR EXISTING). An area of land operated as a
private business on which at least 2 mobile homes are harbored on temporary
supports to be occupied as principal residences. The term includes the
following: All real and personal property used in the operation of the mobile
home park. An area of land that is subdivided and contains individual lots
that are leased or otherwise rented if at least 2 mobile homes are harbored
on temporary supports there for the purpose of being occupied as principal
residences.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION (NEW OR EXISTING). An area of land on
which at least 2 mobile homes are harbored on temporary supports or permanent
foundation for the purpose of being purchased and occupied as principal
residences. The term includes the following:



      (1)   All real and personal property used in the operation of
the mobile home subdivision; and



      (2)   An area of land that is subdivided and contains
individual lots that are purchased if at least 2 mobile homes are harbored on
temporary supports there for the purpose of being occupied as principal
residences.



   MAP AMENDMENT. A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alteration of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The 4-digit number followed by a letter suffix
assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first 4 digits represent the map panel,
and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been
revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the
first revision).



   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by an independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION:  Means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate
long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects.  The
purpose of MITIGATION is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to
minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced after the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but not limited to, any dam, wharf, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction
and/or velocity of flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to
snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of
bring carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins
with the letter A is subject to the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. See REGULATORY
FLOOD.



   ONE-PERCENT (1%) ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistence with the standards of the NFIP.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features.  These changed typically occur as a result of
structural works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood
hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle with the following features:



      (1)   Is built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The REGULATORY FLOOD elevation at
any location is as defined in § 152.06(B), Basis for Establishing Regulatory
Flood Data. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the terms: BASE FLOOD, 1%
ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on 2
separate occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of the event
for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% or the market value of the
structure at the time of each such flood event.



   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  Those lands within the
jurisdictions (including extraterritorial jurisdictions) of the town subject
to inundation by the regulatory flood. Thru SFHAs of the town are generally
identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Warrick County, Indiana
and Incorporated Areas dated September 28, 1979, as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date.  (These areas are shown on a
FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1–A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO.)



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof.  The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or prefabricated building.  The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.  This term includes structures that have incurred substantial
damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or
any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a “historic structure.”



   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE. A grant or relief from the requirements of this chapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.  A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum where  specified) of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). UNSHADED  X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity of type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. 
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONES B AND
C).



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply
to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Chandler, Indiana.



   (B)   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data. This chapter’s
protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available data is
listed below.  Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the
party submitting the detailed engineering study needs to replace existing
data with better data and submit it to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review and approval.



      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe
limits for the studied SFHAs of the Town of Chandler, Warrick County,
Indiana, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Warrick County and Incorporated Areas, dated February 3,
1993, and the corresponding FIRM dated September 28, 1979, as well as any
future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date. (Include only if the community
has a Flood Insurance Study).



      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation for each of the SFHAs of
the Town of Chandler, Warrick County, Indiana delineated as an “AO Zone”
(in fringe) shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the FIRM of
Warrick County and Incorporated Areas dated September 28, 1979. (Include only
if the community’s mapping contains areas identified as “AO Zone”).



      (3)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe
limits for each of the unstudied SFHAs of the Town of Chandler, Warrick
County, Indiana delineated as an “A Zone” on the FIRM of Warrick County
and Incorporated Areas shall be according to the best data available as
provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.  (Include  only if
the community’s mapping contains areas identified as “A Zone”).



   (C)   Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain
development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas
of special flood hazard.



   (D)   Compliance. No structure shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.  No land or
stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   (F)   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations.



      (1)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



      (2)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the
base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



      (3)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question
is above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the
SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner
should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



   (G)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
chapter all provisions shall be:



      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;



      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statues.



   (H)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and
scientific methods of study.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions.  Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability on the
part of the town, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State
of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.07  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Designation of Administrator. The Town Council hereby appoints
the Planning Commission Executive Director to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (B)   Permit procedures. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by
the Administrator prior to any development activities, and may include, but
not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and grade elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials
or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. 
Specifically the following information is required:



      (1)   Application stage.



         (a)   A description of the proposed development;



         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



         (c)   A legal description of the property site;



         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



         (e)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD);



         (f)   Elevation (in NGVD) to which any non-residential
structure will be flood-proofed;



         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or related as a result of proposed development; and



      (2)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor;
or flood-proofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to summit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NGVD elevation of the lowest
floor or flood-proofed elevation, as built.  The certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same.  When flood-proofing is
utilized for a particular structure the certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and
certified by the same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holders’ risk. (The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood-proofing elevation
survey data submitted.)  The permit holder shall correct deficiencies
detected by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required
hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Administrator is
further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are
consistent with its sprit and purpose. Duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator (Advisory Planning Commission Executive Director)
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damage structures in SHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to § 152.08(E) and (G)(1), and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit of floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment);



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;



      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damage structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment
(LOMA), Letters of Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and “as-built” elevation and flood-proofing data for
all buildings constructed subject to this chapter;



      (7)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Revision (LOMR)
or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective
SFHA maps of the community;



      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished;



      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with division (B) above;



      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed in accordance
division (B) above;



      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



      (12)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed;



      (13)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval issued under the provisions of the chapter in a case where there
has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018) Penalty, see  § 152.99



§ 152.08  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   (A)   General standards. In all SFHAs the following provisions are
required:



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;



      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below FPG;



      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;



      (6)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this
chapter; and



      (10)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement
to a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or
replaced.



      (11)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an
equivalent volume of excavation taken below the BFE.  The excavation volume
shall be at least equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ration of
1 to 1) due to the fill or structure.



         (a)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain
and in the same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure
is located;



         (b)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be
allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that
the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in
the same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure is
located, will be accessible to the regulatory floodwater, will not be subject
to ponding when not inundated by floodwater, and that it shall not be
refilled;



         (c)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a
drainage way leading to the floodplain;



         (d)   The fill or structure shall be of a material
deemed stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding
and shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement; and



         (e)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and
filled shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any
site work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this section.



   (B)   Specific standards. In all SFHAs, the following provisions are
required:



      (1)   In addition to the requirements of division (A) above,
all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage
below the FPG.  This building protection requirement applies to the
following  situations:



         (a)   Construction or placement of any new structure
having a floor area greater than 400 square feet;



         (b)   Structural alterations made to:



            1.   An existing (previously unaltered structure),
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the pre-altered
structure (excluding the value of the land);



            2.   Any previously altered structure.



         (c)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged
structure that are valued at more than 50% of the market value of the
structure (excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred;



         (d)   Installing a travel trailer or recreation vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (e)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a
new manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to
returning the  existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



         (f)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive
loss structure.



      (2)   Residential construction. New construction or
substantial improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home)
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, at or above the FPG (2 feet
above the base flood elevation).  Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of division (B)(4) below.



      (3)   Non-residential construction.  New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential
structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the FPG (2 feet above the base flood
elevation).  Structures located in all A Zones may be flood-proofed in lieu
of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:



         (a)   A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 152.07(C)(10).



         (b)   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



      (4)   Elevated structures.  New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures that include fully enclosed areas formed
by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevations shall
be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.



         (a)   Designs for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:



            1.   Provide a minimum of 2 openings having a
total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every 1 square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;



            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than 1 foot  above the foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in
elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade);



            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions;



            4.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the
minimum necessary to allow  for parking for vehicles (garage door) or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(stairway or elevator);



            5.   The interior portion of such enclosed area
shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and



            6.   Where elevation requirements exceed 6 feet
above the  highest adjacent grade, a copy of the legally recorded deed
restriction prohibiting the conversion of the area below the lowest floor to
a use or dimension contrary to the structure’s originally approved design,
shall be present as a condition of issuance of the final certificate of
occupancy.



      (5)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
non-residential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
1 foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
the Standard Proctor Test method.



         (b)   The fill should extend at least 10 feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG.



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding vegetative cover, riprap, or bulk-heading.  If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to
1 vertical.



         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



         (e)   The top of the lowest floor including basements
shall be at or above the FPG.



      (6)   Standards for structures constructed with a crawlspace.
A residential or non-residential structure may be constructed with a
crawlspace located below the flood protection grade provided that the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure
resulting for hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;



         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection grade
shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of 1 opening on each wall
having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every 1 square
foot of enclosed area.  The bottom of the openings shall be no more than 1
foot above grade;



         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace must be at or
above the base flood elevation;



         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured
from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall
must not exceed 4 feet at any point;



         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to
remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event;



         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood
protection grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; and



         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be
elevated above the flood protection grade.



      (7)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreation
vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreation vehicles to be installed or
substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet 1 of the
following requirements:



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.  This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



            1.   Outside a manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            2.   In a new manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            3.   In an expansion of an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision; or



            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood.



         (b)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This
requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.



         (c)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall
either:



            1.   Be on site for less than 180 days; and



            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            3.   Meet the requirements for “manufactured
homes” as stated earlier in this section.



   (C)   Standards for subdivision proposals.



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or
5 acres.



   (D)   Critical facility. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. 
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA
if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed
within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at
the site.  Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Access route elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



   (E)   Standards for identified floodways. Located within SFHAs,
established in § 152.06(B), are areas designated as floodways. The floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which
carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential.  If the site
is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the
applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and
specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for
a permit for construction in a floodway.  Under the provisions of I.C.
14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building
permit for any excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity
located in the floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as
filling, grading, clearing and paving, and the like, undertaken before the
actual start of construction of the structure. However, it does include
non-substantial addition/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a
non-boundary river floodway.  I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of
non-substantial addition/improvements to residences in a non-boundary river
floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in a floodway from the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources.  Please note that if fill is needed
to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction
in a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.  No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources granting approval for construction in a floodway. Once a
permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
this section have been met.  The floodplain development permit cannot be
less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources.  However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence. No development shall
be allowed which acting alone or in combination with existing or future
development, will increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of 1 foot; and
for all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees)
the Town of Chandler, Warrick County, Indiana shall submit the data and
request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory
flood data.



   (F)   Standards for identified fringe. If the site is located in an
identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit provided the provisions contained in this
section have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor
of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



   (G)   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation
and/or floodway/fringes.



      (1)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than 1
square mile.



         (a)   If the site in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than 1 square mile, the



Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



         (b)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain
Administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway
analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 100-year flood elevation and the
recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



         (c)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, the
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in this section have been met.



      (2)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than 1 square
mile.



         (a)   If the site in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than 1 square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis
showing the limits of the floodway, fringe and 100-year flood elevation for
the site.



         (b)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions
contained this section have been met.



      (3)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of 1 foot and will not increase
flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018) Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.09  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board. The Planning
Commission as established by the Town Council shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board may appeal such decision to the appropriate Warrick County Court of
jurisdiction, as provided in applicable Indiana Statues.



   (C)   Variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Planning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The damage of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility  and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (4)   The necessity to facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



      (10)   The cost of providing government services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, cable, telephone, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.



   (D)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



      (2)   No variance for residential use within a floodway
subject to § 152.08(E) or (G)(1) may be granted.



      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §
152.08(E) or (G)(1) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources. 



      (4)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction
of § 152.08(B) may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on
a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration of any structure individually listed on the Register of Historic
Places of the Indiana State Survey of Historic Architectural, Archaeological
and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts, and Objects.



      (7)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and
stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation. (See division (E)
of this section.)



      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon
request. (See division (E) of this section.)



   (E)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is
granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance,
and report such variances issued in the community's biennial report
submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (F)   Historic structure. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as an “historic structure” and the variance is the minimum to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



   (G)   Special conditions. Upon the consideration of the factors
listed in § 152.06 and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Commission
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018) Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.09  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, paragraph, sentence, or phrase of this chapter
is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with the
provisions of this title.  All violations shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $200.



   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   (B)   The Town of Chandler Planning Commission or Executive Director
shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to
increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood
insurance policy to be suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violation. All cost connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   153.01   Adoption by reference



§ 153.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Town of Chandler, Indiana’s subdivision regulations are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



CHAPTER 154: RESERVED



CHAPTER 155: FAIR HOUSING



Section



   155.01   Policy statement



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   Unlawful practice



   155.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   155.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   155.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   155.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   155.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   155.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs



   155.10   Exemptions



   155.11   Administrative enforcement



§ 155.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974,  as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions set forth in this section shall apply throughout this
chapter.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  Any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that the person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.  (See also I.C.
22-9.5-2-2)



   COMMISSION.  The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to
I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.



   (See also I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)



   COMPLAINANT.  A person, including the Commission, who files a
complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.  (See also I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.  An act that is unlawful under §§
155.04 through 155.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by
1 or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building
or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by 1 or more families.  (See also I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)



   FAMILIAL STATUS.  One or more individuals who have not attained the
age of 18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal
custody of the individual or the written permission of the parent or other
person.  The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the
age of 18 years.



   FAMILY.   Includes a single individual, with the status of such family
being further defined in FAMILIAL STATUS above.  (See also § 155.09 and
I.C. 22-9.5-2-9)



   HANDICAP.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of the person’s major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment; or



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990;



         (e)   Any other impairment defined under 910 IAC 2-3.



      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use
of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802; nor
does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because that individual
is a transvestite.  (See also 910 IAC 2-3-2(14)).



   PERSON.   Includes 1 or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries.



(See also I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



   TO RENT.   To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises not owned by the occupant. 
(See also I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, § 155.09 and I.C.
22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of
housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 155.04 shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) and I.C.
22-9.5-3.



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
155.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than 3 single-family houses at
any one time, provided that in the sale of a single-family house by a private
individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or exemption
shall apply only to 1 sale within any 24-month period.  The private
individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or reserved on
his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of more than 3 single-family houses at any one
time.  The sale or rental of any such  single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if the house is sold or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or of any employee or agent of any broker, agent or salesperson, or person;
and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 155.04(C), but
nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstracters, title companies and other professional assistance as necessary
to perfect or transfer this title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than 4 families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies 1
of the living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as principal in 3 or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as agent, other than in the sale of their own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in 2 or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or



      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, 5 or more families.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 155.03 and except as exempted by §§
155.03(B) and 155.09, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;



   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale
or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any preference, limitation or
discrimination;



   (D)   To represent to any person, because of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is in fact so
available;



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin; and



   (F)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:



      (1)   The buyer or renter;



      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that
dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



      (3)   Any person associated with that person.



   (G)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection with that dwelling, because of a handicap of:



      (1)   That person; or



      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that
dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or



      (3)   Any person associated with that person.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:



      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped
person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by that person, if the modifications may be necessary to afford that
person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental,
the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises
to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and
tear excepted;



      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to
afford that person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or



      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in a manner that:



         (a)   The public use and common use portions of the
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and
within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



         (c)   All premises within the dwellings contain the
following features of adaptive design:



            1.   An accessible route into and through the
dwelling;



            2.   Light, switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; and



            3.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an
individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard
for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for
physically handicapped people (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices
to satisfy the requirements of division (H)(3)(c)3. above.



      (5)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals, or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available a transaction, or in the
terms or conditions of a transaction, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIALREAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing
or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or
familial status.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by §§ 155.03 through 155.06.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force, willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin, and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate the person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in
any activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division
(A) above; or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate; or



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage the citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate; shall be fined
according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results,
shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or
both; and if death results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of
years or for life.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.09  EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.



   Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. pt. 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. pt. 574.3, the definition
of FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the actual or
perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or marital status of its
members.



(Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.10  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, including those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in the religion is restricted
on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this
chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of the lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.  As used in this section, HOUSING
FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:



      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the
Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the
State Civil



Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program);



      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years
of age or older; or



      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least 1 person
55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



§ 155.11  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter, and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commission as set
forth in division (B) below, shall be vested in the Chief Elected Official of
the town.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town,
because of a lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
provisions of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6,
and the Chief Elected Official of the town shall refer all the complaints, as
provided for under division (A) above, to the Commission for purposes of
investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C.
22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall
administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter, and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected Officer and the
Commission to further those purposes.



   (D)   The Chief Elected Official of the town, or the Chief Elected
Official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.



(Ord. 2012-23, passed 2-19-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-34, passed 8-26-2014)



TITLE XVII: ZONING



   Chapter



      170.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      171.   ZONING DISTRICTS



      172.   AREA, YARD, HEIGHT, FENCE, AND PARKING REGULATIONS



      173.   NON-CONFORMING SITUATIONS



      174.   SIGNS



      175.   ADMINISTRATIVE AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 170: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   170.01   Title, purposes, and methods



   170.02   Miscellaneous provisions



   170.03   Definitions



   170.04   Conflicting regulations



   170.05   Scope



   170.06   Building under construction



   170.07   Time limit



   170.08   Unplatted land



   170.09   Platting of unplatted land



   170.10   Nuisances



   170.11   Airport restrictions



§ 170.01  TITLE, PURPOSES, AND METHODS.



   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Chandler, Indiana, and
hereinafter referred to as “this title.”



   (B)   Purposes. This title is enacted for the purposes of protecting
and promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the town,
preventing undue concentration of land, encouraging the most appropriate use
of land, regulating land use in the town while preserving the rights of
individual property owners to use and enjoy their land, and promoting the
development of the town in accordance with the most current adopted edition
of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Chandler.



   (C)   Methods. In order to effectively accomplish the purposes of
this title, the town is divided into districts. Districts are of such number,
shape, and area, and of such common unity of purpose, adaptability or use
deemed most suitable to provide for the best general use, to protect the
common rights and interests within each district, to preserve the general
rights and interests of all, and to promote improved, wholesome, harmonious,
and economic results in town operations. Furthermore, district regulations
shall prescribe minimum standards for the:



      (1)   Location, uses and occupancy of buildings, structures,
and land to be used for trade, industry, residence or other purposes, and



      (2)   The location, height, bulk, occupancy and uses of
buildings and other structures, including the percentage of lot occupancy and
coverage, street setback lines, sizes of yards, and other open spaces.



   (D)   Interpretation. The singular shall include the plural and the
plural shall include the singular. The future tense shall include the present
tense and the present tense shall include the future tense. Other terms may
be defined elsewhere within this title.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 170.02  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Interpretation, purpose and conflict. In interpreting and
applying the provisions of this title they shall be held to be a minimum
requirement for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community. It is not intended by this title to interfere with,
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or agreements between parties,
provided however, that where the regulations of this title are more
restrictive than regulations on the same point, as contained in any other law
or ordinance, or restrictions by deed or subdivision in “R” (Residential)
Districts the provisions of this title shall govern.



   (B)   Validity. Should any chapter, section, paragraph, sentence,
clause, phrase or other part of this title be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decisions shall not affect the
validity of the title as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so
declared to be invalid.



   (C)   Savings clause. Any prosecution arising from violations of any
ordinance repealed by this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, which prosecution
may be pending at the time this title becomes effective or any prosecution
which may be started within 1 year after the effective date of this title in
consequence of any violation of any ordinance repealed herein, which
violation was committed prior to the effective date of this title, shall be
tried and determined exactly as if such ordinance had not been repealed.



   (D)   Repeals. All other ordinances or laws in conflict with the
provisions of this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance or inconsistent with the
provisions of this title, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give
this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance full force and effect.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 170.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS. Official owners of record title whose
property is contiguous to the subject property, including any property that
would touch at any point the subject property, ignoring all rights-of-way,
easements, alleys and the like. For purposes of notifying ABUTTING PROPERTY
OWNERS, if only a portion of a parcel of real estate is being considered at a
public hearing, and with the remaining portion owned by the same property
owner, then the ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER to the entire parcel shall be
notified except that when the ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER’S real estate is
1,000 feet or more distant from the part of the real estate being considered,
no notification shall be required.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A building, or structure
or use which is incidental or subordinate to the principal building or use,
and which is located on the same lot, or an adjacent lot, with such principal
building or use, and which cannot be greater in size than the principal
building or use. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE should constitute a minimal initial
investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential.  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES can include, but not
be limited to: detached garages, carports, storage sheds, post-frame
structures, in ground and above ground pools. The following structures are
not considered ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, but not limited to: over-the-road
semi-trailers, shipping containers, enclosed truck boxes from a straight body
truck.  Exception: PODS and MINI storage and similar units are allowed for
storage when used in conjunction with a home remodel or rebuild and is only
as good as long as the building permit.



   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry,
horticulture and gardening, keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl,
riding horses, and any agricultural industry or business such as dairy farms,
greenhouses or similar uses; excluding slaughterhouses.



   ALLEY. A permanent public right-of-way other than a street, road,
crosswalk, easement, or utility easement which is not intended for general
traffic circulation.



   ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. Any change, removal, replacement, reinforcement
or addition of beams, ceiling and floor joist, reinforced concrete floor
slabs, load-bearing partitions, columns, exterior walls, stairways, roofs,
corridors or other structural materials used in a building that supports the
said beams, ceiling and floor joists, load-bearing partitions, columns,
exterior walls, stairways, roofs, or structural materials used in the
building or structure. The above defined STRUCTURAL ALTERATION is applicable
to any building or structure or any part thereof, whether or not permanent or
temporary shoring is used during construction and whether or not additions to
or rebuilding the major portion of an existing building is being accomplished.



   APARTMENT BUILDING. A building which is used as a residence for 3 or
more families living in separate dwelling units.



   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street,
used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers
in operable condition and where no repair work is done.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of
automobiles including auto body repair and painting, upholstering,
replacement of parts, and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not
exceeding 1.5 tons hauling capacity.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE OR FILLING STATION. A retail place of business
engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuel which could also be engaged in
supplying goods and services generally required in operation and maintenance
of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist needs such as sale of
petroleum products; sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive
accessories and replacement items; washing and lubrication services; the
performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair; and the supplying of
other incidental customer services and products. Major automotive repairs as
the Plan Commission may designate including body repair and painting of body
are excluded.



   BAR. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises, or any place where any sign is exhibited or
displayed indicating that alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
finish grade. A BASEMENT shall not be considered as a story for the purpose
of height measurements unless the distance from the top of the floor above
the basement is 6 feet or more to the finished grade for 50% or more of the
building perimeter.



   BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION. The incorporation of labor and material in
the foundation of a building or buildings.



   BLOCK FRONTAGE or FRONTAGE. All of the property fronting on 1 side of
the street between corner lots or intersecting streets or between a street
and right-of-way, end of dead-end street or town boundary measured along the
street line.



   BLOCK, RESIDENTIAL. A block in which commercial, industrial, and other
non-residential uses are not permitted.



   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. Board of Zoning Appeals shall mean the Town of
Chandler Board of Zoning Appeals.



   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
or property.



   BUILDING AREA TOTAL. The gross horizontal area included within the
exterior face of surrounding exterior walls for all floors or from the center
line of party walls separating 2 or more units.  Basements are considered a
floor for the purposes of BUILDING AREA.  The maximum horizontal projected
area of the principal building or accessory building not including open (no
roof) stoops, steps, decks, patios, and terraces.



   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and required entrance or exit doors.



   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no party wall in common with
another building.



   BUILDING FOOTPRINT.  The area included within the exterior face of
surrounding exterior walls for the first floor including attached garages,
and/or carports, porches, steps, decks, patios, and terraces.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the mean (average)
elevation at the ground level of the front of the building to the highest
part of the roof.



   BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front property line and across a
lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front
property line on intermediate lots, and between the front property line and
side property line of a corner lot and the buildings and/or structures. 



   BUILDING, MAIN. See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the building site on which it is situated. In any Residential District any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building of the building site on which
the same is located. Where a garage, carport, porch, or other structure is
attached to the principal building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such
structure shall be deemed to be part of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



   BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL. The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or
exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or services, the maintenance or
operation of offices, or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.



   CARPORT. An open accessory structure that is open on at least 2 sides
and designed or used for the parking of self-propelled private passenger
vehicles, boats, camping trailers, utility trailers, and the like by the
occupant of the principal building. CARPORTS may be freestanding or attached
to the principal structure or another accessory structure.



   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including crematoria, mausoleum, and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with, and within, the boundary of such CEMETERY.



   CERTIFIED SURVEY. A survey, sketch, plan, map, or other exhibit is said
to be certified with a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity
to specified standards, signed by a registered engineer or registered
surveyor, and showing property corner stakes; property line dimensions;
interior property line angles; existing structures, their dimensions and
relation to property lines; general elevation of property; all existing
utilities and related data; existing right-of-way; easements of record;
existing sidewalks; street zoning of record; building setbacks required by
law; general block plan; and other pertinent survey data.



   CLINIC. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight,
are admitted for examination and treatment by 1 person or a group of persons
practicing any form of healing or health building services to individuals,
whether such persons by medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths,
chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists, or any such profession the
practice of which is lawful in the State of Indiana.



   CLUB, PRIVATE. Those associations and organizations of a fraternal or
social character, not operated or maintained for profit, but not casinos,
night clubs, or other institutions operated as a business.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle designed, intended, or used for
transportation of people, goods, or things, other than private passenger
vehicles and trailers for private nonprofit transport of goods and/or boats.



   COMMISSION. The Advisory Planning Commission (“APC”) of Chandler,
Indiana.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan duly approved by the
Advisory Planning Commission on February 11, 2013 and the Town Council on
February 11, 2013.



   DIRECTOR. The Executive Director of the Advisory Plan Commission.



   DISTANCE BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES. The shortest horizontal
distance between the vertical walls of two residential structures as herein
defined measured perpendicular to an axis, all points along which are midway
between said walls.



   DISTRICT. A portion of the territory of the Town of Chandler within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of this title. Includes ZONE and ZONING
DISTRICT.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family
dwellings. Hotels, lodging, or boarding houses or tourist homes are not
included as DWELLINGS.



   DWELLING, 1-FAMILY. A dwelling containing 1 dwelling unit.



   DWELLING, 2-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A building designed for or used
exclusively for residence purposes by 2 dwelling units or families living
independently of each other.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof used or
designed as a residence for 3 or more families living independently of each
other (and doing their own cooking in said building), including apartments
and apartment hotels.



   DWELLING ROW. A building having a party wall on each side in common
with an adjoining building except for exterior end wall.



   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for 1 or more persons (1 family) including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   EASEMENT. A strip or parcel of land dedicated for public utility
purposes or other necessary public uses in conformity with the Town of
Chandler Public Works Design Standards, which may not be used for non-utility
permanent or temporary structures unless otherwise required by Indiana law.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. Preprimary, primary, or grammar, public,
parochial or private school; high school; preparatory school or academy,
public or founded or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a
religious or charitable organization; private preparatory school or academy
furnishing courses of instruction substantially equivalent to the courses
offered by public high schools for preparation of admission to colleges or
universities which award B.A. or B.S. degree; junior college, college or
university, public or founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a
religious or charitable organization; or private when not conducted as a
commercial enterprise for the profit of individual owners or stockholders.
This definition shall not be deemed to include trade or business school as
defined in this chapter.



   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The Executive Director of the Advisory Plan or
Planning Commission.



   FAMILY. Any number of individuals occupying a single unit not herein
defined as a boarding house, lodging house, motel or hotel.



   FLOOR AREA. See BUILDING AREA TOTAL definition.



   FRONTAGE. See BLOCK FRONTAGE.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building that has 3 or more sides with or without a garage door, used for the
storage of vehicles where the capacity does not exceed 3 vehicles, and no
more than 1 vehicle stored in such garage may be a commercial vehicle not
exceeding 1.5-ton hauling capacity.



   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building, or part thereof, where automobiles are
received and a charge is made for repairs to any part thereof, but does not
include automotive overhauling, wholesale rebuilding of automotive parts, or
paint and body works.



   GROUND COVERAGE. The percentage of the total lot area that is covered
by a principal building and all accessory structure(s).  Formula = Total
square feet of all structures on the lot divided by the total lot square
footage equals the lot coverage percentage.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any non-residential occupation or activity conducted
entirely within a dwelling and in which the person in charge of conducting
same is an occupant of such dwelling, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and occupying not
over 25% of the first floor of such dwelling and does not change the
character thereof and in connection with which there is not display of goods
and outside storage of goods or equipment nor commodity sold on the premises
except that which is produced by the persons engaged in such HOME OCCUPATION,
and provided not more than 1 professional person and 2 non-professional
assistants are engaged in such occupation.



   HOSPITAL. An establishment where patients may be lodged overnight and
are admitted for examination and treatment by a person or group of persons
practicing health services.



   HOSPITAL, ANIMAL. A building or premises used for the care of sick or
injured animals, or veterinarian’s hospital.



   HOTEL. A building or part thereof, in which rental sleeping units are
offered to the public and which maintains an inner lobby through which all
occupants must be provided means in which to pass to gain access, catering
for transient and permanent occupancy, with no kitchen facilities (except for
small refrigerators or microwave ovens) for use by the occupants.



   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A document issued by the Plan Commission
of the Town of Chandler authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent
with the terms of this title and for the purpose of carrying out and
enforcing its provisions.



   JUNK – SALVAGE YARD. A place (usually outdoors) where various
discarded, used, unlicensed, or inoperable items, including motor vehicles,
and any other item or items so deemed by the Plan Commission, which are
accumulated and/or stored and is or may be salvaged for reuse or resale
wholly or as parts.



   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which 4 or more dogs or small animals,
at least 4 months of age, are kept.



   KITCHEN FACILITIES. An area of a building used for the preparation of
food which area shall include a kitchen sink.



   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. A traffic way in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right
of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such a
manner as may be determined by the Indiana Department of Transportation.



   LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS. The off-street area for the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise which, in this title, is
held to be 12 feet by 35 feet loading space with a 14-foot height clearance
exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.



   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building, together with accessory buildings or structures, or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open spaces as required by this title, and having frontage on an improved and
accepted public street or dedicated right-of-way which meets the standards of
width and improvements specified for the street in question. It may be a
single parcel separately described in a deed which is recorded in the office
of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of, or a combination of such
parcels when adjacent to 1 another and used as 1 lot. Any tract not meeting
the minimum width and area requirements of the district in which it is
located, and not of record on the effective date of this title shall not be
considered a LOT. Nor shall a LOT be created by making another lot on which
there is an existing building substandard under the terms of this title. In
determining LOT area and boundary lines no part thereof within the limits of
a street or dedicated right-of-way shall be included.



   LOT AREA. The computed horizontal area contained within the lot lines
of a lot.



   LOT AREA, PERCENTAGE OF. Lot coverage of the principal building and all
accessory structure(s) in square feet divided by the lot area in square feet.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon 2 or more streets at their
intersection or upon 2 parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the
same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of
intersection of the street right-of-way lines is the CORNER.



   LOT COVERAGE. The combined area occupied by the building area footprint
of the principal and accessory buildings or structures.



   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear
lot lines, or between the front lot line and the intersection of the 2 side
lines if there should be no rear lot line.



   LOT, LINE.  In general a line dividing 1 lot from another lot, or
parcel, or tract of land, or from a street or any other public place.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from the street. In the
case of a corner lot, the owner may select either street lot line as the
FRONT LOT LINE.



   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is called a SIDE STREET LOT LINE.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, or a parcel or tract of land described by
metes and bounds which has been so recorded in the office of the County
Recorder



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on 2 parallel or approximately
parallel streets.



   LOT WIDTH. The distance measured between side lot lines. The minimum
LOT WIDTH requirements are measured at the building setback line. The
principal structure and side yard requirements are measured at the building
setback line when side lines are not parallel.  See also the definition of
BUILDING LINE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.



      (1)   A dwelling unit consisting of 2 or more sections
fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly
at the building site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Code or I.C. 22 et seq., as promulgated by the Indiana
Administrative Building Council. The manufactured home should include but not
be limited to these features:



         (a)   Homes are built and must conform to a federal
building code, called HUD Code, rather than to state or local building codes;



         (b)   Homes are built in a factory in a controlled
environment;



         (c)   Homes are built on a non-removable steel beam
chassis;



         (d)   Sections are transported to the building site on
their own wheels and towing frame work;



         (e)   Multi-part manufactured sections (units) are
joined together at their destination;



         (f)   Local building inspectors check the work done
locally, e.g., electric hook up, gas connections, and the like, but are not
required to approve the structure unless an on-site structural change was
performed;



         (g)   Asphalt shingle roof, metal roof, wood shingle
roof, other acceptable residential roof material as approved;



         (h)   Roof pitch of at least 2.5:12;



         (i)   House-type windows, doors and siding; and



         (j)   A permanent foundation and anchored in accordance
with the State of Indiana regulations.



      (2)   MODULAR HOMES, PREFABRICATED HOMES, and other such
implied terms shall be deemed to be the same as MANUFACTURED HOMES. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”



   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN or COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A duly approved
development plan of the comprehensive nature that designates the uses of land
and the facilities that serve them.



   MOBILE HOME. A dwelling unit consisting of a single wide section
factory-constructed, transportable structure designed for permanent
residential use when placed on a lot with a permanent or temporary supports
and connected to utilities. MOBILE HOMES are only allowed in Mobile Home
Zoning Districts R-MH1 (Residential Mobile Home Park District) or R-MH2
(Residential Mobile Home Subdivision District). The MOBILE HOME should
include but not be limited to these features:



      (1)   Homes are built and must conform to a federal building
code, called HUD Code, rather than to state or local building codes;



      (2)   Homes are built in a factory in a controlled environment;



      (3)   Homes are built on a non-removable steel beam chassis;



      (4)   Home is transported to the site location on their own
wheels and towing frame work;



      (5)   Local building inspectors check the work done locally,
e.g., electric hook up, gas connections, and the like, but are not required
to approve the structure unless an on-site structural change was performed;



      (6)   Asphalt shingle roof, metal roof, wood shingle roof,
other acceptable residential roof material as approved;



      (7)   May or may not have house-type windows, doors and
siding; and



      (8)   Must be secured with tie-down straps in accordance with
the State of Indiana regulations.



   MOBILE HOME – FRONT. The longest side intended by design to be the
front of the mobile home.



   MOBILE HOME – BACK. The longest side intended by design to be the
back of the mobile home.



   MOBILE HOME – END. The 2 sides of a mobile home having the narrowest
dimensions.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land operated as a private business on
which at least 2 mobile homes are harbored on temporary supports to be
occupied as principal residences. The term includes the following:



      (1)   All real and personal property used in the operation of
the MOBILE HOME PARK; and



      (2)   An area of land that is subdivided and contains
individual lots that are leased or otherwise rented if at least 2 mobile
homes are harbored on temporary supports there for the purpose of being
occupied as principal residences.



   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. An area of land on which at least 2 mobile
homes are harbored on temporary supports or permanent foundation for the
purpose of being purchased and occupied as principal residences. The term
includes the following:



      (1)   All real and personal property used in the operation of
the MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION; and



      (2)   An area of land that is subdivided and contains
individual lots that are purchased if at least 2 mobile homes are harbored on
temporary supports there for the purpose of being occupied as principal
residences.



   MOBILE HOME TIE DOWNS. Sufficient anchorage to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of any mobile home. The TIE DOWNS shall meet any
and all state specifications.



   MODULAR HOME.  A dwelling unit consisting of 2 or more sections
fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly
at the building site.  The MODULAR HOME should include but not be limited to
these features:



      (1)   Must conform to all state and local codes where home
will be placed.



      (2)   Homes are built in sections in a factory in a controlled
environment.



      (3)   Homes are transported to the home site on truck beds
then joined together by the local contractor.



      (4)   Local building inspectors check to make sure a modular
home’s structure meets requirements and that all finish work is done in
accordance with the building codes.



      (5)   Must be placed on a permanent foundation and anchored in
accordance with the State of Indiana regulations.



   MORTUARY. A building or portion thereof which is designed or used for a
funeral parlor or undertaking establishment for human body preparation for
viewing, cremation, burial, and the like.



   MOTEL. A building or a series of buildings, being attached,
semi-detached, or detached, containing rental sleeping units, and where each
unit has convenient access to a parking space for the use of the unit’s
occupants. The rental sleeping units, with the exception of a dwelling unit
for the manager or caretaker, are devoted to the use of automobile transients
and no kitchen facilities are offered.  Exception: A small room refrigerator
and microwave oven are acceptable.



   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building or structure or
portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this title, or any
amendment thereto, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered in
such a manner that characteristics of the building or structure other than
use regulations, do not meet the provisions of this title.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. The lawful use of a building, structure, land or
portions thereof which use does not conform with the use regulations of the
district in which it is located.



   NURSING HOME. Any facility in which persons are lodged and furnished
with meals and nursing care.



   PARKING AREA/LOT. An off-street, private or public open area the
principal use of which is for the parking of automobiles by the public,
whether for compensation or not, or as an accommodation to the clients or
customers. All PARKING AREAS OR LOTS shall have a paved surface area of
portland cement concrete (PCC) or asphaltic concrete. See Town of Chandler,
Public Works Design Standards, Chapter 6 Streets, applicable sections
regarding parking.



   PARKING SPACE. A permanently paved area of not less than 9 feet in
width by 18 feet in length, either within a structure or in the open,
excluding paved area necessary for access under the provisions of this title,
for the parking of a motor vehicle. When a garage or carport is provided for
the sole use of an occupant of a single-family or duplex residence, the
driveway leading to said garage or carport may be considered an additional
PARKING SPACE if it is suitable for the purpose.



   PERMITTED USE. For purpose of this title, a PERMITTED USE in any
district shall include any use listed as such in the portions of this title
delineating same for districts, and shall further include conditional uses
provided a conditional permission is obtained.



   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or
any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.



   PLANNING OR PLAN COMMISSION. The Advisory Planning Commission
(“APC”) of the Town of Chandler, Indiana.



   PLAT. A map or drawing of a city, town, section or subdivision
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.



   PREMISES. A lot or tract of land including buildings or structures
thereon, if any.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL. Private preprimary, primary, grade, high, or
preparatory school or academy.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Office of members of recognized professions, such
as an architect, artist, attorney, dentist, engineer, musician, physician,
surgeon, or other professional person.



   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. Recreation facilities operated as a business
and open to the general public for a fee.



   RESIDENTIAL DENSITY. The average number of families living on 1 acre of
land in the given area.



      (1)   NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY is determined by dividing the
total number of families in a defined area by the total acreage of all
parcels of land within the areas that are used for residential purposes.



      (2)   GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY is determined by dividing the
total number of families in a defined area by the total acreage of land used
for residences, street, local schools and local parks.



   RESTAURANT. A facility, other than 1 operated as a dining room in
connection with a hotel, where food is prepared and served for a fee.



   SETBACK. The minimum distance between the street right-of-way line
(front property line), rear or side lot lines, and the front line, rear line,
or side line of the building or any projection thereof, excluding projections
specifically permitted.



   SIGN. Any advertisement, announcement, direction or communication
affixed or placed on a structure or on any land produced by painting on,
posting or placing printed, lettered, pictured, figured or colored material
on any building structure or surface.



   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.



   STORY, HALF. A story with at least 2 of its opposite sides situated on
a sloping roof, and the floor area of which does not exceed 2/3 or 66.6% of
the floor area immediately below it.



   STREET. A public way established by or maintained under public
authority, or a right-of-way dedicated to public use, whether constructed or
not. Such public way or dedicated right-of-way shall be designated to meet
the requirements for acceptance by the Town of Chandler, but shall in no case
be less that 50 feet in width, except that a width of 40 feet for any
cul-de-sac with a turnaround of at least 80 feet in width shall be sufficient.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground.



   STRUCTURAL, ALTERATIONS. Any change in the floors, walls, columns,
beams or girders of a building.



   SUNROOM ADDITION. A 1-story structure added to an existing dwelling
with a glazing area in excess of 40% of the gross area of the structure’s
exterior walls and roof.



   SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE. The Subdivision Control Ordinance of the
Town of Chandler. (See Chapter 153.)



   TOWN. The Town of Chandler, Indiana.



   TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the Town of Chandler, Indiana.



   TOWNHOUSE. A building or buildings each containing a single-family
dwelling unit and each located or capable of being located on a separate
lot.  Two or more TOWNHOUSES shall extend from foundation to roof and with
open space on at least 2 sides. The center of the common wall shall be
considered the property line.



   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. Secretarial school or college; business
school or college when not public and not owned or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization, school conducted as
commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering or
hair-dressing or for teaching industrial skills in which machinery is
employed as a means of instruction. This definition shall not be deemed to
include educational institutions as defined in this section.



   USE. The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged,
designed or intended or for which either land or a building is or may be
occupied, maintained, let, or leased.



   USE, OPEN (PARKING LOT). The use of a lot without a building or
including a building incidental to the open use with a ground floor area
equal to 5% or less of the area of the lot.



   VARIANCE. A modification of, or deviation from, any regulation, except
a use regulation, for a specified zone district of this title which is
authorized and approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals after it finds that
the facts and conditions exist as specified herein.



   YARD. A space on the same lot with a structure or use, open and
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except by encroachments specifically
permitted by the provisions of this title.



   YARD, CORNER SIDE.  A yard, extending across the full side of the lot,
the depth of which shall be the least distance between the side lot line and
the side of the main building.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard, extending across the full width of the lot, the
depth of which shall be the least distance between the front lot line and the
building setback line of the main building.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the foundation line of any part of the
building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard.



   ZONING ORDINANCE. Referred to throughout as “this title” and
meaning Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Chandler, Indiana.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



Editor’s note:



   See § 175.06 for additional definitions.



§ 170.04  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Wherever any provisions of this title impose more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions
of this title shall govern.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 170.05  SCOPE.



   No building or structure or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed or altered, and maintained, and no existing use,
new use or change of use of any building, structure or land, or part thereof
shall be made or continued, except in conformity with the provisions of this
title.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 170.06  BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION.



   Any building or structure the construction of which has been started
prior to the effective date of this title, may be completed and used in
accordance with the plans and specifications provided such construction is
completed within 1 year after the effective date of this title.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 170.07  TIME LIMIT.



   Where the Town Council has given or granted an approval, special
exception, permit, or variance pursuant to the provisions of this title, such
approval or grant, and any permit pursuant thereto, shall become null and
void unless construction or use thereon is underway within 6 months of the
effective date of such action, unless an extension of time has been obtained
as set forth herein.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 170.08  UNPLATTED LAND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, or
cause to be erected, any building upon any unplatted land in the Town of
Chandler, and no permit shall be issued for the erection or construction of
any building on any unplatted land.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 170.09  PLATTING OF UNPLATTED LAND.



   Any landowner who wishes to divide a tract of land into lots, blocks,
parcels, or other portions, however designated, must do so in conformity with
this title and the Town of Chandler Subdivision Control Ordinance (Chapter
153).



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 170.10  NUISANCES.



   Nothing shall be allowable on the premises in any district, provided
for in this title, that shall in any way be offensive or noxious by reason of
the emission of odors, gases, dust, smoke, light, vibration, or noise. Nor
shall anything be constructed or maintained that would in any way constitute
an eyesore or nuisance to adjacent property owners or residents or to the
community.  Also see Chandler Municipal Code Chapter 94 (Nuisances).



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 170.11  AIRPORT RESTRICTIONS.



   The issuance of all permits shall be subject to any restrictions of any
other federal, state or local government agency regulating development in
areas affected by airport or aeronautic restrictions.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



CHAPTER 171: ZONING DISTRICTS



Section



   171.01   General



   171.02   Official zoning district maps



   171.03   Replacement of official zoning district maps



   171.04   Annexed areas



   171.05   Water areas



   171.06   Districting of vacated ways and railroad right-of-way



   171.07   Boundaries of districts



   171.08   Table of Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual
Lots



   171.09   Special exemptions



   171.10   One-Family Dwelling (R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-1D)
Districts



   171.11   Manufactured housing used as a 1-family dwelling in R-1,
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-1D Districts



   171.12   Multiple-Family (R-2) Districts



   171.13   Single Apartment Building (R-3) District



   171.14   Apartment Building Complex (R-4) District



   171.15   Residential Office (R-O) District



   171.16   Residential Mobile Home Park (R-MH1) District



   171.17   Residential Mobile Home Subdivision (R-MH2) District



   171.18   Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) District



   171.19   Planned Shopping Center (C-2) District



   171.20   Highway Commercial (C-3) District



   171.21   General Commercial (C-4) District



   171.22   Light Industrial (M-1) District



   171.23   General Industrial (M-2) District



   171.24   Solid Waste Disposal Facility and Salvage Yards (M-3)
District



§ 171.01  GENERAL.



   (A)   For purposes of this title, the Town of Chandler shall be
divided into districts. Only those uses that are specifically authorized in
the respective districts shall be permitted. The use of districts is intended
to further the purposes of regulating use of land, water, buildings, building
heights, population density and open space.



   (B)   The districts shall be designated as follows:



 


DISTRICT TYPE

 

SYMBOL





Residential Districts


One-Family Dwelling
 

R-1



One-Family Dwelling
 

R-1A



One-Family Dwelling
 

R- I B



One-Family Dwelling
 

R-1C



One-Family Dwelling
 

R-1



Multiple-Family Dwelling (Duplexes)
 

R-2



Single Building of Apartment, Multiple, or Condominium Dwelling Units of 4 or
more
 

R-3



Building Complex of 2 or more Buildings of Apartment, Multiple, or
Condominium Dwelling Units of 4 or more
 

R-4



Residential Office
 

R-O



Mobile Home Park
 

R-MH 1



Mobile Home Subdivision
 

R-MH2



Commercial Districts


Neighborhood Commercial
 

C-1



Shopping Center
 

C-2



Highway Commercial
 

C-3



General Commercial
 

C-4



Industrial


Light Industrial
 

M-I



General Industrial
 

M-2



Solid Waste Disposal Facility and Salvage Yard
 

M-3





 



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.02  OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAPS.



   The zoning district maps attached to Ordinance No. 2017-02 are hereby
made a part of this title. The zoning district maps shall show the areas of
the town assigned to each district along with notations, references and the
like. Official zoning district maps shall bear the signatures of the Town
Council members (together with the number of the ordinance and its effective
date.). Each district shall be subject to the stipulations and requirements
set forth in this title.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.03  REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAPS.



   In the event that the official zoning district maps become damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret due to modifications, the Town
Council may by resolution adopt a replacement. The replacement may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions, but may not have the effect of
amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.04  ANNEXED AREAS.



   All areas zoned Agricultural before annexation will be zoned R-1A in
the town after annexation. The zoning classification of all other areas
annexed will become R-1A with any use that would not be allowed in an R-1A
District be deemed as a legal non-conforming use.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.05  WATER AREAS.



   (A)   The water surface and the land under the water surface of all
canals, creeks, rivers, waterways, ponds, lakes and other water areas in the
town are hereby placed in the same zoning district as the land which it abuts
as shown on the zoning district maps. Where the zoning districts shown on the
zoning district maps are different on opposite sides of the water area, then
the kind of zoning district on each side shall extend to the center line or
midpoint of the water area.



   (B)   For convenience of mapping and clarity, the zoning of water
areas is not shown on the zoning district maps, but is determined by the
provisions of this section.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.06  DISTRICTING OF VACATED WAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Where a street or alley shown on the zoning district map is
hereafter officially vacated by re-platting or otherwise, the land formerly
in such street or alley right-of-way shall be included within the zoning
district of adjoining property on either side of said vacated street or alley.



   (B)   Railroad right-of-way in the town is hereby placed in the same
zoning district as the land which it abuts as shown on the zoning district
maps. Where the zoning districts shown on the zoning district maps are
different on opposite sides of the railroad right-of-way, the kind of zoning
district on each side shall extend to the center line or midpoint of said
right-of-way.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.07  BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries are street
lines, alley lines, or the subdividing or boundary lines of recorded plats,
or the extensions thereof, and where the districts designated on maps
accompanying and made a part of this title are approximately bounded by
street lines, alley lines or the extensions thereof shall be considered to be
district boundaries.



   (B)   Where, due to the scale or illegibility of the district map or
due to the absence of a street, alley, or recorded subdividing or plat lines,
there is an uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to intended location of
a district boundary, the Plan Commission shall interpret and recommend to the
Town Council the intent of the district maps so as to determine and designate
the proper location for such district boundary in accordance with the spirit
and purpose of this title.



   (C)   Where the boundary line of a district divides a lot having
frontage on a street in a less restricted zone, the provisions of this title
covering the less restricted portion of such lot shall apply to the entire
lot. Where the boundary line of a district divided a lot having frontage only
on a street in a mortgage restricted district, the provisions of this title
covering the more restricted portion of such lot shall apply to the entire
lot.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.08  TABLE OF STANDARDS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.



 


District

 

Max Height

 

Min. Lot Area

 

Min. Width (Feet)

 

Min. Front Yard (Feet)

 

Minimum Side Yard

 

Min. Side Yard Street Side Corner Lot (Feet)

 

Min. Rear Yard (Feet)

 

Lot Coverage





R1, R
 
2.5 stories not to exceed 35 ft.
 
7,500 sq. ft
 
75
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

30%



R1-A
 
2.5 stories not to exceed 35 ft.
 
10,000 sq. ft
 
75
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

30%



R1-B
 
2.5 stories not to exceed 35 ft.
 
12,000 sq. ft
 
80
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

30%



R1-C
 
2.5 stories not to exceed 35 ft.
 
15,000 sq. ft
 
80
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

30%



R1-D
 
2.5 stories not to exceed 35 ft.
 
21,780 sq. ft
 
100
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

20%



R-2 *4
 
2.5 stories not to exceed 3 5ft.
 
6,000 sq. ft
 
75
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

40%



R-3
 
3 stories not to exceed 45 ft.
 
None
 
None
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 

None



R-4
 
3 stories not to exceed 45 ft.
 
None
 
None
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 

None



R-O
 
3 stories not to exceed 45 ft.
 
6,000 sq. ft
 
75
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

40%



R-MH1 *5
 
1 story not to exceed 20 ft. *2
 
5,000 sq. ft
 
50
 
15
 
10 ft. each side
 
10
 
15
 

30%



R-MH2
 
1 story not to exceed 20 ft. *2
 
7,500 sq. ft
 
75
 
25
 
10% *
 
25
 
25
 

30%



C-1
 
3 stories not to exceed 45 ft.
 
None *6
 
None *7
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 

None



C-2
 
3 stories not to exceed 4 5ft.
 
None *6
 
None *7
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 

None



C-3
 
3 stories not to exceed 45 ft.
 
None *6
 
None *7
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 

None



C-4
 
3 stories not to exceed 45 ft.
 
None *6
 
None *7
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 10 ft.
 

None



M-1 *3
 
No limit
 
None *6
 
None *7
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 20 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 20 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 20 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 20 ft.
 

None



M-2 *3
 
No limit
 
None *6
 
None *7
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 30 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 30 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 30 ft.
 
5 ft. unless abuts an "R" then 30 ft.
 

None



M-3
 
No limit
 
None
 
None
 
None unless abuts an "R" then 50 ft.
 
None unless abuts an "R" then 50 ft.
 
None unless abuts an "R" then 50 ft.
 
None unless abuts an "R" then 50 ft.
 

None



*   Total lot side yard requirement are 25% except a corner lot.

*2   A basement will not be counted as a story for manufactured homes.

*3   A 45-foot height limit shall exist within 150 feet of an "R" Zone.

*4   or 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit – whichever is the greatest.

*5   See § 171.16(K) for additional yard requirements.

*6   Total area of buildings and/or structures plus all yard requirement
areas.

*7   Total width of buildings and/or structures plus all side yard
required widths.




 



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 171.09  SPECIAL EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following special exemptions to the district regulations
in the particular situations specified in this title may be granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals following a public hearing where such uses are deemed
essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. In granting
permission for a special exemption the Board shall make a finding following
the public hearing that such special exemption is in harmony with the various
elements or objectives of this title. In granting a special exemption, the
Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such conditions and safeguards it deems
appropriate in order to achieve the intent of this title. Failure to comply
with such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the approval under
which an exception is granted, shall void the exception granted and shall be
a violation of this title.



      (1)   Airport or aircraft landing field.



      (2)   Cemetery or crematory.



      (3)   Local government enterprises.



      (4)   Hospital.



      (5)   Public utilities. Structures or uses required for such
public utilities (privately owned and operated) as gas, water, electric, and
telephone can be located within any district where not specifically
prescribed and listed upon recommendation and approved of the Board of Zoning
Appeals. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by municipal
or other government utilities of underground or overhead gas, electrical,
steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communication supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, public telephone
booths, police call boxes, hydrants and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such municipal or governmental utilities for the
public health or safety or general welfare are permitted.



      (6)   Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas.



      (7)   Radio or television transmitter, tower and studio.



      (8)   Public, private or parochial schools. Private and
parochial schools shall offer curricula substantially equivalent to public
schools of comparable grades and shall be approved by the Indiana State
Department of Education.



      (9)   Public kindergarten or day nursery.



      (10)   Police station or fire station.



      (11)   Public library or museum.



      (12)   University or college.



      (13)   Post office.



      (14)   Municipal stadium or coliseum.



      (15)   Penal or correctional institutions, sanitarium,
hospital or asylum for contagious, mental, drug or liquor addict cases.



      (16)   Group homes for the mentally ill and developmentally
disabled.



   (B)   Other special exemptions. Other exemptions or uses similar to
the above, which, in the judgment of the Board of Zoning Appeals are similar
to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than the special
exemptions listed. Other special exemptions so determined shall be regarded
as listed exemptions.



   (C)   The granting of a special exemption as defined in this chapter
for a use existing on the date this title becomes effective is unnecessary
except that major changes in layout, expansion or enlargement of a building,
structure or land area shall be subject to review and approval as required
for special exemptions.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.10  ONE-FAMILY DWELLING (R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, AND R-1D DISTRICTS.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply in all R-1,
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-1D Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered, or used, or land or water used, in whole or in
part, for other than 1 or more of the following specified permitted uses:



      (1)   One-family dwelling.



      (2)   Church.



      (3)   The following use if approved as conditional use: Beauty
or barber parlor provided the non-residential activity does not occupy more
than 20% of the first or ground floor or basement within a residential
dwelling unit. Only business related products can be sold to clients on the
premises and 1 person only shall be engaged in such occupation.



      (4)   Uses accessory to any of the above when located on the
same lot and not involved in conducting of any business, trade, occupation,
or profession.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.11  MANUFACTURED HOUSING USED AS A 1-FAMILY DWELLING IN R-1, R-1A,
R-1B, R-1C, AND R1D DISTRICTS.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply in all R-1,
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-1D Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations.  No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered, or used, or land or water used, in whole or in
part, for other than 1 or more of the following specified permitted uses:



      (1)   Manufactured homes.



      (2)   Modular homes.



      (3)   Prefabricated homes.



      (4)   The following use if approved as conditional use: Beauty
or barber parlor provided the non-residential activity does not occupy more
than 20% of the first floor or ground floor or basement within residential
dwelling unit.  No commodity shall be sold on the premises and 1 person only
shall be engaged in such occupation.



      (5)   Uses accessory to any of the above when located on the
same lot and not involving the conduct of any business, trade, occupation, or
profession.



   (C)   Limitations of use. The establishment, placement, and use of
manufactured homes, modular homes, and prefabricated homes shall meet the
following requirements and limitations:



      (1)   The home shall meet all the requirements applicable to
single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement location,
building, and certificate of occupancy permits and other certifications as
required by the town.



      (2)   The home shall be a minimum 1,000 square feet of net
occupied space and 23 feet or wider to outside face of walls and shall meet
the square footage requirements for the appropriate zone.



      (3)   The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent
foundation in conformance with the regulations of the most current edition of
the “Indiana One and Two Family Dwelling Code,” and in accordance with
the manufacturer’s written installation instructions and specifications.



      (4)   The home shall be covered with exterior material
customarily used on site built residential dwellings.



      (5)   The home shall have a roof composed of a material
customarily used on site built homes, such as but not limited to: fiberglass,
asphalt, shake, tile, concrete, or metal, which shall be installed onto a
surface appropriately pitched for the selected roof material.



      (6)   The home cannot be 10 years or older at the time of
installation as determined by the date of manufacture.



      (7)   The dwelling unit shall have been manufactured or
fabricated in off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at
the building site, and bearing a seal certifying that it is built in
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Code or I.C. 22-11-1-1 et seq., as promulgated by the Indiana
Administrative Building Council.



   (D)   Manufactured homes not meeting the above terms and mobile
homes shall be permitted within the town only after receiving a conditional
use permit from the Chandler Planning Commission or in zones which
specifically permit such homes.



   (E)   Due to the integral design of manufactured homes, modular
homes, and prefabricated homes any structural alteration or modification
after it is placed on the site must be approved by the Chandler Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.12  MULTIPLE FAMILY (R-2) DISTRICTS.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply to all R-2
Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered, or used, or land or water used, in whole or in
part, for other than 1 or more of the following specified permitted uses:



      (1)   Two-family dwellings (duplexes).



      (2)   Multiple dwellings, not to exceed 3 dwelling units.



      (3)   The following uses if approved as a conditional use:



         (a)   Day nursery or preschool.



         (b)   Private clubs, lodge, fraternity, sorority and
similar uses not operated for profit.



         (c)   Room and boarding houses.



         (d)   Doctor’s office.



         (e)   Nursing or rest home.



         (f)   Lodging and tourist homes.



         (g)   Bed and breakfast.



      (4)   Uses accessory to any of the above when located on the
same lot and not involving the conduct of any business, trade, occupation or
profession unless otherwise specified in this title.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.13  SINGLE APARTMENT BUILDING (R-3) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Uses in the R-3 District.  A building or land may not be
used, and a building may not be erected or altered, except for 1 or more of
the following uses:



      (1)   Single building of apartment dwelling units of 4 or more.



      (2)   Single building of multiple dwelling units of 4 or more.



      (3)   Single building of condominium dwelling units of 4 or
more.



   (B)   The uses permitted in the R-3 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.14  APARTMENT BUILDING COMPLEX (R-4) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Uses in the R-4 District.  A building or land may not be
used, and a building may not be erected or altered, except for 1 or more of
the following uses:



      (1)   Building complex of 2 or more apartment buildings of
apartment dwelling units of 4 or more.



      (2)   Building complex of 2 or more multiple dwelling
buildings of multiple dwelling units of 4 or more.



      (3)   Building complex of 2 or more condominium dwelling
buildings of condominium dwelling units of 4 or more.



   (B)   The uses permitted in the R-4 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.15  RESIDENTIAL OFFICE (R-O) DISTRICT.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply to all R-O
Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or in
part, for other than 1 or more of the following specified uses:



      (1)    Offices for the conduct of real estate, mortgage
financing, insurance, or offices of architects, attorneys, accountant, tax
consultants, engineers, or offices of other professions or businesses not
involving sale or handling of merchandise on the premises.



      (2)   Accessory uses and structures.



   (C)   The uses permitted in the R-O District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 172.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.16  RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME PARK (R-MH1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose of District. The R-MH1 District is intended for those
locations where there is need to regulate and control the design, use, and
intensity of use of mobile homes in mobile home parks so that the design and
arrangement of mobile homes will be compatible with surrounding areas and
traffic circulation and access controlled for the safety, convenience, and
general welfare of contiguous and nearby development.



   (B)   Use regulations. No development shall be located, altered or
used, or land or water used, in whole or in part for other than 1 or more of
the following specified permitted uses:



      (1)   One-family mobile unit.



      (2)   One-family compact or expandable mobile home unit.



      (3)   Uses accessory to any of the above uses or other uses or
enterprises similar to the above, which, in the judgment of the Planning
Commission are similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare,
than the uses listed.



   (C)   Limitations of uses. The area of a District planned for a
mobile home park shall be at least 10 acres of net development area; however,
such area may be platted and/or developed in 2 or more stages, provided that
said stages conform in all respects with the over-all mobile home park
design. Net development area shall be determined by subtracting from the
gross development area the total areas for parks, schools, streets,
rights-of-way and other related uses.



   (D)   No mobile home shall be located or altered, or land or water
used, nor shall any improvement permit be issued therefor, unless and until
the R-MH1 District and necessary mobile home park plan is officially approved
by the Plan Commission and adopted by the Town Council.



   (E)   All mobile homes shall be located and maintained in full
conformity with the mobile home park plan as approved for each R-MHI
District. The proposed mobile home park plan shall show the use(s), the
dimensions, locations and area of all use(s), streets, walkways, parks,
school sites and other open spaces. The proposed mobile home park plan shall
be prepared by and have the seal of a land surveyor duly registered to
practice in the State of Indiana.



   (F)   In recommending upon and approving mobile home parks, the Plan
Commission shall consider the location, size height, spacing extent of use of
any mobile home and their appurtenances, access and circulation for vehicles
and pedestrians, streets, parking areas, yards and open spaces and the
relationship to adjacent property. The Plan Commission shall not recommend
nor the Town Council adopt such mobile home park plan unless it finds that
such plan conforms to all applicable provisions of this title, that the
safety and convenience of the public are properly provided for and that
adequate protection and separation are provided for contiguous and nearby
residential property.



   (G)   There shall be required the recording of a final plat in such
instances where other provisions of this title or other laws or ordinance
require such recording.



   (H)   The owner of a mobile home park shall be responsible for
illegal structures built within the mobile home park.



   (I)   The owner shall be required to record with such mobile home
park plan a covenant that the owner will maintain the streets, sidewalks,
water, and sewer lines in compliance with the minimum standards as
established by the Town Council, and that should he or she fail to maintain
the standards in any of these respects, the Town Council, may after 10
days’ notice to such owner, effect all the necessary repairs or
improvements as required to maintain the minimum standards and the cost of
all the necessary repairs or improvement shall become a lien against the real
estate and enforced and recorded against the real estate, and the covenant
shall contain the following provision:




“that _________________, being the owner or owners of the real estate
contained in the above attached mobile home park plan hereby consent that if
they or their assignees, heirs or those holding or owning said land through
said owners fail to maintain the streets, sidewalks, water and sewer lines
according to and in compliance with the minimum standards for the maintenance
of streets, sidewalks, water and sewer lines as established by the Town
Council of the Town of Chandler, Indiana, and that after ten (10) days’
notice in writing to the owner of said land as shown upon the tax records in
the Clerk Treasurer’s office of the Town of Chandler and at the address
therein shown, then said owner, assignees, heirs and those holding or owning
through said owners hereby authorize the said Town Council of the Town of
Chandler, Indiana, to make all necessary repairs and perform said necessary
maintenance and further authorize said Town Council to file a lien against
said real estate and enforce said lien pursuant to laws then applicable.”




   (J)   Area.  See § 171.08, “Table of Standards for Principal
Buildings on Individual Lots.”  Every lot upon which a mobile home unit is
located within a R-MH1 District shall front onto a 35-foot street or
right-of-way and shall conform to the minimum lot area and width requirements.



   (K)   Yards. All yards shall be subject to the table in § 171.08
and the following provisions:



      (1)   Every lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 15
feet in depth; provided that no less than 25-foot yard shall be provided as
to all portions of the perimeter of the mobile home park contiguous to a
Residential District, except that the yard requirement herein shall be
reduced by 1/2 the width of any alley adjacent thereto.



      (2)  All lots adjacent to public streets on the outside of the
park or subdivision to be designated so front yard faces the streets. Where
the boundary of a mobile home park directly abuts a Residential District, a
fence, wall or hedge shall be provided along such property boundary.



   (L)   The uses permitted in the R-MH1 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



   (M)   Abandonment and expiration. Upon the abandonment of a mobile
home park or if upon the expiration of 5 years from the zoning change so
enacted, the mobile home park has not been substantially completed, the land
involved in the plan shall revert to its former zoning district
classification. The Plan Commission, upon application and public notice as
required by law, may grant one extension of 2 years upon an application being
filed with the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission’s decision shall be
final on the question of substantial completion. In the event of reversion to
former zoning as provided herein, the land and structures thereon shall be
subject to all regulations and limitations of the zoning district then
applicable.



   (N)   Other limitations. All mobile homes and mobile home parks are
subject to the requirements set forth in I.C. 16-41-27-1 et seq. and to the
standards promulgated by the Indiana Department of Health.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.17  RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION (R-MH2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose of District. The R-MH2 District is intended for those
locations where there is need to regulate and control the design, use and
intensity of use of mobile homes in mobile home subdivisions so that the
design and arrangement of mobile homes will be compatible with surrounding
areas and traffic circulation and access controlled for the safety,
convenience, and general welfare of contiguous and nearby development.



   (B)   Use regulations. No development shall be located, altered or
used, or land or water used, in whole or in part for other than 1 or more of
the following specified permitted uses:



      (1)    One-family mobile unit.



      (2)    One-family compact or expandable mobile home unit.



      (3)    Uses accessory to any of the above uses or other uses
or enterprises similar to the above, which, in the judgment of the Commission
are similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare, than the
uses listed.



   (C)   Limitation of uses. The area of a District planned for a
mobile home subdivision shall be at least 10 acres of net development area;
however, such area may be platted and/or developed in 2 or more stages,
provided that said stages conform in all respects with the overall mobile
home subdivision design. Net development area shall be determined by
subtracting from the gross development area the total areas for parks,
schools, streets, rights-of-way and other related uses.



   (D)   No mobile home shall be located or altered, or land or water
used, nor shall any improvement permit be issued therefor, unless and until
the R-MH2 District and necessary mobile home subdivision plan is officially
approved by the Plan Commission and adopted by the Town Council.



   (E)   All mobile homes shall be located and maintained in full
conformity with the mobile home subdivision plan as approved for each R-MH2
District.



   (F)   The proposed mobile home subdivision plan shall show the
use(s), the dimensions, locations and area of all use(s), streets, walkways,
parks, school sites, and other open spaces. The proposed mobile home
subdivision plan shall be prepared by and have the seal of a land surveyor
duly registered to practice in the State of Indiana. In recommending upon and
approving mobile home subdivisions, the Plan Commission shall consider the
location, size height, spacing extent of use of any mobile home and their
appurtenances, access and circulation for vehicles and pedestrians, streets,
parking areas, yards and open spaces and the relationship to adjacent
property. The Plan Commission shall not recommend nor the Town Council adopt
such mobile home subdivision plan unless it finds that such plan conforms to
all applicable provisions of this title, that the safety and convenience of
the public are properly provided for and that adequate protection and
separation are provided for contiguous and nearby residential property. There
shall be required the recording of a final plat in such instances where other
provisions of this title or other laws or ordinance require such recording.
Except as set forth herein, the Subdivision Control Ordinance (Chapter 153)
will be the guide for development of a mobile home subdivision, including but
not limited to, dedication of streets and utilities, maintenance of streets,
sidewalks, water and sewer lines.



   (G)   Area. See § 171.08, “Table of Standards for Principal
Buildings on Individual Lots.”  Every lot upon which a mobile home unit is
located within an R-MH2 District shall front onto a 35-foot street or
right-of-way and shall conform to the following minimum lot area and width
requirements.



   (H)   Yards. All yards shall be subject to the table in § 171.08
and the following provisions:



      (1)   Rear yard. Every lot shall comply with the table in §
171.08; provided that no less than 25-foot yard shall be provided as to all
portions of the perimeter of the mobile home subdivision contiguous to a
Residential District, except that the yard requirement herein shall be
reduced by 1/2 the width of any alley adjacent thereto, and, provided further
that a greater yard may be required where the Plan Commission deems it
necessary. All lots adjacent to public streets on the outside of the
subdivision to be designated so front yard faces the streets. Where the
boundary of a mobile home subdivision directly abuts a Residential District,
a fence, wall or hedge shall be provided along such property boundary.



   (I)   The uses permitted in the R-MH2 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 172.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



   (J)   Abandonment and expiration. Upon the abandonment of a mobile
home subdivision or if upon the expiration of 5 years from the zoning change
so enacted, the mobile home subdivision has not been substantially completed,
the land involved in the plan shall revert to its former zoning district
classification. The Plan Commission, upon application and public notice as
required by law, may grant 1 extension of 2 years upon an application being
filed with the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission’s decision shall be
final on the question of substantial completion. In the event of reversion to
former zoning as provided herein, the land and structures thereon shall be
subject to all regulations and limitations of the zoning district then
applicable.



   (K)   Other limitations. All mobile homes and mobile home
subdivisions are subject to the requirements set forth in I.C. 16-41-27-1 et
seq. and to the standards promulgated by the Indiana Department of Health.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.18  NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply in all C-1
Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or in part
for other than 1 or more of the following specified uses in accordance with
the limitations hereinafter specified:



      (1)   Apartment building(s).



      (2)   The following kinds of retail stores: book and
stationary; confectionery or ice cream; drugs; newsstand or sundry; florists;
fruit or vegetable; liquor package; meat market or delicatessen; music; film
exchange and photographic supplies; shoes; clothing; china and crockery;
variety.



      (3)   Art supplies.



      (4)   Bakery goods shop.



      (5)   Banks and finance offices.



      (6)   Personal service shops such as barber shops, beauty
parlors, and shoe polishing stands.



      (7)   Dry cleaning agencies or pressing establishments.



      (8)   Clubs or lodges, fraternal or religious associations.



      (9)   Custom dressmaking or millinery shops.



      (10)   Laundry agencies.



      (11)   Leather goods.



      (12)   Convalescent homes and nursing homes.



      (13)   Mortuary, undertaker or embalming establishment and
funeral homes.



      (14)   Offices — professional or business.



      (15)   Optical stores.



      (16)   Photographers.



      (17)   Radio, television and phonograph sales.



      (18)   Restaurants, tea rooms or cafes (excluding dancing or
entertainment).



      (19)   Shoe repair shop.



      (20)   Sporting goods.



      (21)   Tailor shops.



      (22)   Parking lots and parking garages.



      (23)   Watch and jewelry repair.



      (24)   Furniture store.



      (25)   Office furniture and equipment



      (26)   Interior decorating.



      (27)   Automobile service station.



      (28)   Broadcasting stations (excluding transmitter or tower).



      (29)   Ticket agency.



      (30)   Telephone exchange and telegraph office.



      (31)   Other uses: Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above, which, in the judgment of the Plan Commission are similar to and not
more objectionable to the general welfare than the uses listed. Other uses so
determined shall be regarded as listed uses. In no instance, however, shall
the Plan Commission determine, nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
the uses shall be permitted in a District when such use is specifically
listed as first permissible in a less restricted district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses. All activities, including sales, display,
preparation, and storage, shall be conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.



   (D)   The uses permitted in the C-1 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements  (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.19  PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER (C-2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply in all C-2
Districts.



   (B)   Purpose of District. The C-2 Planned Shopping Center District
is intended for locations where there is a need for controlling the design
and arrangement of buildings and structures, access and circulation, and the
relations to surrounding areas to provide for efficient functioning of the
shopping area and to ensure adequate protection to adjacent and nearby
residential areas. These objectives can only be attained by review and
specific approval of the site plans by the Planning Commission for each
development in such Planned Shopping Center Districts.



   (C)   Use regulations. Acceptable uses in C-2 Districts include:



      (1)   Department store.



      (2)   Discount house.



      (3)   Supermarket.



      (4)   Sale of flowers and plants.



      (5)   Laundromat.



      (6)   Automobile service stations.



   (D)   Limitations of uses. Except for automobile parking lots and
automobile service stations, all storage shall be conducted entirely within a
completely enclosed structure.



   (E)   Any building, structure and/or use shall be erected, altered,
installed, and maintained in full conformity with the provisions of this
title and with development plans which have been approved by the APC.



   (F)   In passing upon and approving development plans, the APC shall
consider the location, size, height, spacing, appearance, character and use
of any building, structure or use and their appurtenances, access and
circulation for vehicles and pedestrians, streets, parking areas, yards and
open spaces, and the relationship to adjacent property. The APC shall not
approve such development plan unless it finds that such plan conforms to all
applicable provisions of this title, that the safety and convenience of the
public are properly provided for and that adequate protection and separation
are provided for contiguous and nearby residential property. The Commission
may attach to its approval of a development plan any reasonable conditions,
limitations or requirements which are found necessary in its judgment to
effectuate the purpose of this section and to carry out the spirit and
purpose of this title.



   (G)   A development plan for the purpose of this section shall
include, but is not limited to, the following plans, designs, specifications,
and information:



      (1)    Site plan with grades or contours;



      (2)    Elevations and floor plans of all buildings and
structures;



      (3)    Location and character of all outside facilities for
waste disposal;



      (4)   All curb cuts, driveways, parking areas, and surfacing
materials of same;



      (5)    All pedestrian walks, malls, yards and open areas;



      (6)    Location, height and material of all walls, fences and
screen planting;



      (7)    Location, size, character, height and orientation of
all signs; and



      (8)    Off street parking in the ratio of 4 square feet of
parking area to 1 square foot of retail sales space.



   (H)   Roadways shall be designated on the development plan as a
dedicated public road or the developer must provide proper demonstration to
the APC that access for each building site and or structure is provided. This
demonstration can be in the form of a written agreement or an easement.



   (I)   The uses permitted in the C-2 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



   (J)   Yards. There shall be a minimum 5-foot front, side, and rear
yard required except where a lot in a C-2 District abuts upon a lot in any R
(Residential) District, a yard at least 10 feet in width shall be provided on
the side adjacent to the R District.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.20  HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (C-3) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose of District. The following regulations shall apply in
all C-3 Districts. The C-3 Highway Commercial District is intended to provide
for retail commercial, amusement, and transient residential uses which are
appropriate to highway location.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure, or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or in part
for other than 1 of the following specific permitted uses in accordance with
the limitations hereinafter specified:



      (1)   Apartment building(s).



      (2)   Automobile washing establishment; automobile, truck and
trailer rentals; new and used automobile, trucks, motorcycle and trailer
sales; repair and service garages.



      (3)   Automobile seat cover installations.



      (4)   Ambulance service.



      (5)   Amusement enterprises, including boxing or sports arena,
bowling alley, golf driving range, pony riding (without stables) skating rink.



      (6)   Agricultural implement sales (new and used).



      (7)   Awning sales.



      (8)   Boat sales, service and rentals (including sale of boat
motors and accessories).



      (9)   Drive-in business, including theaters, refreshment
stands, restaurants, barbecue stands, and dairy products.



      (10)   Electrical repair shops, home appliance repairs.



      (11)   Electrical and plumbing fixtures.



      (12)   Feed stores.



      (13)   Hotel, motel and motor hotel.



      (14)   Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, including
coin-operated laundries, provided that:



         (a)    A laundry shall not exceed, for all washing units
combined, a total rated capacity of 200 pounds; and



         (b)    A dry cleaning establishment shall not use more
than 2 clothes cleaning units which shall have a rated capacity of not more
that 40 pounds per unit; nor use cleaning fluid which is explosive or
inflammable at temperatures below 138.5 degrees Fahrenheit.



      (15)   Greenhouse, nursery.



      (16)   Grocery store or food market.



      (17)   Monuments (sale, preparation and display only).



      (18)   Pawn shop.



      (19)   Pest control agency.



      (20)   Parking lots and parking garage.



      (21)   Plant and scrub nursery.



      (22)   Photographic development laboratory.



      (23)   Race track — horse or dog.



      (24)   Research and testing laboratory.



      (25)   Second hand stores.



      (26)   Sharpening and grinding shop.



      (27)   Taxidermist.



      (28)   Theatrical studios.



      (29)   Tire and battery stores.



      (30)   Trade associations and union halls.



      (31)   Wholesale merchandise broker.



      (32)   Veterinary and veterinary clinics.



      (33)   Accessory uses and structures.



      (34)   Antique store or mall.



      (35)   The following uses if approved as conditional uses:



         (a)   Circus or transient amusement;



         (b)   Freight or truck yard or terminal;



         (c)   Farm and contractor’s equipment storage yard or
plant or rental of equipment;



         (d)   Building material sales yard, including the sale
of lumber, rock, sand and gravel but excluding concrete mixing;



         (e)   Dance halls;



         (f)   Night clubs, bars, saloons, taverns;



         (g)   Public utilities, including electric distribution
substations and the like;



         (h)   Dairy supplies;



         (i)   Machinery;



         (j)   Industrial equipment;



         (k)    Produce;



         (l)   Restaurant and hotel supplies and equipment;



         (m)    Swimming pool supplies and equipment;



         (n)    Welding supplies and equipment;



         (o)    Accessory uses and structures.



      (36)   Other uses or enterprises similar to the above, which
in the judgment of the APC are similar to and not more objectionable to the
general welfare than the uses listed. Other uses so determined shall be
regarded as “listed uses.” In no instance, however, shall the APC
determine, nor the regulations be so interpreted, that a use shall be
permitted in a District when such use is specifically listed as first
permissible in a less restricted district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses. Except for open air sales of new or used
automobiles, trailers, or trucks; amusement enterprises; drive-in businesses;
race tracks; parking lots and parking garages; boat sales and rentals; all
activities, including sale, display, and preparation, shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building except as may be specified
hereafter:



      (1)   Any of the stores, shops or commercial establishments
may be operated as a retail and/or wholesale establishment.



      (2)   Open storage of materials and equipment shall be
permitted only when in conjunction to the use of an office, store, or other
commercial building that is, located on the front portion of the same lot,
and provided that:



         (a)    Such storage is located on the rear 1/2 of the
lot.



         (b)    The storage area is completely enclosed by a
solid wall or fence (with necessary openings) not less than 6 feet in height.



         (c)    No equipment or material is stored having a
height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area.



      (3)   Storage of merchandise and/or materials shall be
permitted within the rear portion of a building when in conjunction with the
operation of an office, store, or other commercial use, located within the
front portion of the same building, and provided that the office, store or
commercial use occupies a minimum of 25% of the total floor area of the
building or structure.



      (4)   Open air sales of new or used automobiles, trailers, or
trucks, located on land adjacent (either abutting or separated by an alley)
to an R (Residential) District, shall be separated from the land in the R
District by a solid wall or fence at least 6 feet in height.



   (D)   The uses permitted in the C-3 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02.)



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.21  GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-4) DISTRICT.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply in all C4
Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure or part thereof,
shall be erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in whole or in
part, for other than 1 or more of the following specified uses in accordance
with the limitations hereafter specified:



      (1)   Apartment building(s).



      (2)   Automobile washing establishment; automobile, truck and
trailer rentals; new and used automobile truck, motorcycle, and trailer
sales, repair and service garages.



      (3)   Automobile seat cover installation.



      (4)   Ambulance service.



      (5)   Amusement enterprises including boxing or sports arena,
bowling alley, skating rink.



      (6)   Armory.



      (7)   Auditorium.



      (8)   Awning sales.



      (9)   Bars, saloons, taverns.



      (10)   Bicycle sales and repairs.



      (11)   Boat sales, service and rentals (including sale of boat
motors and accessories).



      (12)   Blue printing and photostating, job printing publishing.



      (13)   Business college, private school and trade school
operated as a commercial enterprise.



      (14)   Department store.



      (15)   Electrical repair shops, home appliance repairs.



      (16)   Electrical and plumbing fixtures.



      (17)   Employment office.



      (18)   Feed stores.



      (19)   Hotels, motels and motor hotels.



      (20)   Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, including
coin-operated laundries, provided that:



         (a)   A laundry shall not exceed for all washing units
combined, a total rated capacity of 200 pounds;



         (b)   A dry cleaning establishment shall not use more
than 2 clothes cleaning units which shall have a rated capacity of not more
than 40 pounds per unit; nor use cleaning fluid which is explosive or
inflammable at temperatures below 38.5 degrees Fahrenheit.



      (21)   Letter servicing and mimeographing.



      (22)   Lithographing or engraving establishments.



      (23)   Music conservatory.



      (24)   Motor bus terminals.



      (25)   Night clubs.



      (26)   Pawn shop.



      (27)   Pest control agency.



      (28)   Parking lots and parking garage.



      (29)   Pool and billiard room.



      (30)   Photographic development laboratory.



      (31)   Research and testing laboratory.



      (32)   Second-hand stores.



      (33)   Supermarket, discount house.



      (34)   Sharpening and grinding shop.



      (35)   Sheet metal-fabricating shop.



      (36)   Theatrical studios and theaters.



      (37)   Tire and battery stores.



      (38)   Taxidermist.



      (39)   Trade associations and union halls.



      (40)   Veterinary and veterinary clinics.



      (41)   Wholesale merchandise broker.



      (42)   Antique store or mall.



      (43)   The following uses if approved as a conditional use:



         (a)   Sale and display of the following:



            1.   Agricultural implements.



            2.   Building supplies.



            3.   Construction equipment.



            4.   Dairy supplies.



            5.   Machinery.



            6.   Industrial equipment.



            7.   Produce.



            8.   Restaurant and hotel supplies and equipment.



            9.   Swimming pool supplies and equipment.



            10.    Welding supplies and equipment.



            11.    Flowers, plants and shrubs.



         (b)   Uses to be conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed structure or within an area enclosed on all sides with a solid,
opaque barrier (i.e., wall, fence, and the like), with necessary openings,
not less than 6 feet in height.



            1.   Building material and yard sales, including
the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and the like as an incidental part of the
main business, but excluding concrete batch plants.



            2.    Power-driven excavating, or road building
equipment, commonly used by contractors.



            3.   Lumber yards.



            4.   Building contractor’s shop.



            5.   Freight, or truck yard or terminal.



         (c)   The following service establishments:



            1.   Battery charging and repair.



            2.    Bookbinding.



            3.   Distribution service.



            4.   Diaper service.



            5.   Janitorial services.



            6.   Linen supply.



            7.   Milk distributing station but not involving
any bottling on the premises.



            8.   Tinsmith.



         (d)   The following repair shop uses:



            1.   Awning and canvas shop.



            2.   Cabinet and carpenter shop.



            3.   Electrical contractor shop.



            4.   Furniture repair shop.



            5.   Glass shop.



            6.   Heating contractor shop.



            7.   Plumbing shop.



            8.   Restaurant and store fixture shop.



            9.   Sign shop.



            10.   Upholstering shop.



            11.   Welding shop.



         (e)   Wholesale, warehouse and storage uses.



      (44)   Accessory uses and structures.



      (45)   Other uses: Other uses or enterprises similar to the
above which in the judgment of the commission are similar to and not more
objectionable to the general welfare than the uses listed. Other uses so
determined, shall be regarded as “listed uses.”  In no instance,
however, shall the APC determine, nor the regulations be so interpreted, that
a use shall be permitted in the District when such use is specifically listed
as first permissible in a less restricted district.



   (C)   Limitations on uses.



      (1)   Any use conforming with the standard for an M-1
Industrial District provided that not more than 10% of the rentable floor
area of any floor of a building is devoted to such use. In determining the
floor area so used, it shall be the entire rentable floor area occupied by
concerns engaged in such production activities exclusive of that used for
office, display, waiting rooms or clerical work.



      (2)   Except for open air sales of new or used automobiles,
trailers, or trucks; amusement enterprises; parking lots and parking garages;
boat sales and rentals, all activities, including sale, display, and
preparation, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
building except as may be specified hereafter.



      (3)   Any of the stores, shops or commercial establishments
may be operated as a retail and/or wholesale establishment.



      (4)   Open storage of materials and equipment shall be
permitted only when in conjunction with the use of an office, store or other
commercial building, located on the same lot and provided that:



         (a) The storage area is completely enclosed by a solid,
opaque barrier (i.e., wall, fence, and the like), with necessary openings,
not less than 6 feet in height; and



         (b) No equipment or material is to be stored having a
height greater than that of the wall enclosing the storage area.



      (5)   Storage of merchandise and/or materials shall be
permitted within the rear portion of a building when in conjunction with the
operation of an office, store, or other commercial use, located within the
front portion of the same building, and provided that the office, store, or
commercial use occupies a minimum of 25% of the total floor area of the
building or structure.



      (6)    Open air sales of new or used automobiles, trailers, or
trucks, located on land adjacent (either abutting or separated by an alley)
to an R (Residential) District, shall be separated from the land in the R
District by a solid, opaque barrier (i.e., wall, fence, and the like), with
necessary openings, at least 6 feet in height.



   (D)   The uses permitted in the C-4 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.22  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   General. The following regulations shall apply in all M-1
Districts.



   (B)   Use regulations. No building or structure or part of an M-1
District shall be erected, altered, or used, or land or water used in whole
or in part for other than the manufacture, processing, compounding,
assembling, treatment, or use of the following:



      (1)   Awnings, metal.



      (2)   Beverage (non-alcoholic) manufacture and blending.



      (3)   Blacksmith.



      (4)   Broom and brush.



      (5)   Buttons except button blanks from shell.



      (6)   Carbon paper and ink ribbons.



      (7)   Carpentry products, cabinet making and pattern shops.



      (8)   Chemicals (packaging only).



      (9)   Clay products of handicraft nature, including ceramics,
pottery, tile (glazed), or similar products.



      (10)   Cleaning and dyeing of garments, hats and rugs.



      (11)   Clocks and watches.



      (12)   Cloth products, including canvas, clothing garments.



      (13)   Cosmetics or toiletries.



      (14)   Electrical appliance and apparatus assembly (small)
including fans, fixtures, hot plates, irons, mixers, motion picture equipment
(home), phonographs, radios, television sets, toasters, toys, or similar
products, but not including electrical machinery.



      (15)   Electrical supplies, including cable or wire
assemblies, batteries (dry cell), insulation, lamps, switches, or similar
supplies.



      (16)   Flowers, artificial.



      (17)   Food processing, including creamery and dairy bakery
products (wholesale), candy manufacture, coffee, tea, and spices (processing
and packaging), ice cream manufacture, macaroni and noodle manufacture,
oleo/margarine (compounding and packaging only).



      (18)   Fur finishing and fur goods, not including tanning or
dyeing.



      (19)   Grain elevator and grain storage.



      (20)   Glass products from previously manufactured glass.



      (21)   Greenhouses, wholesale.



      (22)   Hair, felt, or feather products.



      (23)   Hat finishing and millinery from straw and other fibers.



      (24)   Ink or ink ribbon, packaging.



      (25)   Jewelry.



      (26)   Laboratories, research experimental or testing but not
including combustion type motor testing.



      (27)   Leather products (no tanning operation), including
shoes, machine belting, or similar products.



      (28)   Luggage.



      (29)   Machine shops.



      (30)   Machines, business, including accounting machines,
calculators, card-counting equipment, typewriters, or similar products.



      (31)   Medical appliances, including braces, limbs,
stretchers, supports, or similar products.



      (32)   Motion picture products.



      (33)   Musical instruments (including pianos and organs).



      (34)   Novelty products (from prepared materials).



      (35)   Optical equipment.



      (36)   Paper products, including bags, boxes, bulk goods,
containers (shipping) envelopes, interior packaging components, stationery,
tubes, wallpaper, or similar products.



      (37)   Pharmaceutical products.



      (38)   Photographic equipment.



      (39)   Precision instruments.



      (40)   Printing, publishing, engraving, including
photo-engraving.



      (41)   Scenery construction.



      (42)   Signs and displays.



      (43)   Soaps or detergents, including washing or cleaning
powder or soda, packaging only.



      (44)   Statuary and art goods, other than stone and concrete
including church art, figurines, mannequins, religious art (excluding foundry
operations).



      (45)   Stamps (hand), stencils, and brands.



      (46)   Toys and games.



      (47)   Trade and business schools.



      (48)   Umbrellas and parasols.



      (49)   Upholstery and furniture shops, wholesale.



      (50)    Vehicles, children’s including baby carriages,
bicycles, scooters, wagons, or similar vehicles.



      (51)   Window shades, venetian blinds, awnings, tarpaulin, and
canvas specialties.



      (52)   Wood products including furniture, baskets, boxes,
crates, or similar products, and cooperage works.



      (53)   Accessory uses and structures.



      (54)   Other uses not prohibited by law, not specifically
permitted by this title and which are found to be similar in character to a
use specifically permitted.



      (55)   The processing and marketing of any recycled or
composted product if excluded under the M-3 Solid Waste Disposal Facility
District, provided no permit for the operation is required from the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management and written verification it is
submitted by the land owner to the Advisory Plan Commission of the same prior
to the start of the operation.



   (C)   The uses permitted in the M-1 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.23  GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (M-2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Principal permitted uses. The following regulations shall
apply in all M-2 Districts. No building or structure or part thereof shall be
erected, altered or used, or land or water used, in full or in part, for
other than the uses permitted in an M-2 District or the manufacture,
processing, compounding, assembling, treatment, or use of the following:



      (1)   Air conditioners.



      (2)   Aircraft and aircraft parts.



      (3)   Aluminum, extrusion, rolling, fabrication, molding, and
casting.



      (4)   Aluminum powder and paint.



      (5)   Apparel or other textile products from textiles or other
materials, including had bodies of fur, wool, felt or similar products.



      (6)   Assembly of automobile, carriage, engine (rebuilt),
motorcycle, trailer, truck, wagon, including parts.



      (7)   Asphalt and bituminous materials.



      (8)   Athletic or sports equipment.



      (9)   Baskets and hampers (wood, reed, rattan, and the like).



      (10)   Battery, storage (wet cell).



      (11)   Bedding materials (mattress, pillow, quilt), including
rebuilding or renovating.



      (12)   Boat manufacture of vessels less than 5 tons, and boat
building or repair of boats, less than 100 feet in length.



      (13)   Boilers.



      (14)   Boxes and crates.



      (15)   Brick, firebrick, tile, clay products, including
refectories.



      (16)   Building materials (cement, lime sand, gravel, lumber
and the like).



      (17)   Carpets, rugs mats.



      (18)   Cider and vinegar.



      (19)   Stone products.



      (20)   Coal and coke, storage and sales.



      (21)   Concrete products including central mixing and
proportioning plants.



      (22)   Cooperage works (cooperage stock mill).



      (23)   Distilleries (alcoholic), breweries and alcoholic
spirits (non-industrial).



      (24)   Electric power and steam generating plants.



      (25)   Exposition building or center.



      (26)   Firearms, fireworks.



      (27)   Food processing, including chewing gum; chocolate,
cocoa and cocoa products; condensed and evaporated milk, processing and
canning; flour, feed, grain, food products including slaughtering of meat or
preparation of fish for packing; fruit and vegetable processing including
canning, preserving, drying, and freezing; gelatin products; glucose and
dextrin; malt products; meat products, packing and processing yeast.



      (28)   Foundry products.



      (29)   Furniture.



      (30)   Glass and glass products, including structural or plate
glass or similar products.



      (31)   Grain blending, packaging and milling.



      (32)   Hardware products or tools, including bolts, brads,
cutlery, door knobs, drills, hinges, household items, locks metal casting
(non-ferrous), nails, needles and pins, nuts pluming appliances, rivets,
screws, spikes, staples, tools (hand), or similar products.



      (33)   Hair, felt, feathers, shoddy, bulk processing, washing,
curling, dyeing.



      (34)   Heating, ventilating, cooking, and refrigerating
supplies and appliances.



      (35)   Hosiery.



      (36)   Household appliances, electrical and gas, including
stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, clothes dryers, and similar products.



      (37)   Ice, dry or natural.



      (38)   Implements, agricultural.



      (39)   Ink.



      (40)   Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, and related
industrial and household chemical compounds.



      (41)   Iron or steel (ornamental), miscellaneous fabrication
or assembly, including steel cabinets, doors, fencing, metal furniture, or
similar products; cleaning, grinding, heat treatment, metal finishing,
plating, polishing, rust proofing, sharpening, or similar processes.



      (42)   Jute, hemp, sisal or oakum products.



      (43)   Lead oxide.



      (44)   Linoleum and other hard surfaced floor covering (except
wood), oil cloth, oil treated products or artificial leather.



      (45)   Livery stable and riding academy.



      (46)   Lumber sawmill.



      (47)   Machine tools including metal lathes, metal presses,
metal-stamping machines, wood-working machines or the like.



      (48)   Machinery, heavy including electrical, construction,
mining or agricultural.



      (49)   Metal and metal ores, reduction, refining, melting
alloying, including blast furnaces, cupolas and blooming mills.



      (50)   Metal alloys or foil, miscellaneous including solder,
pewter, brasses, bronzes or tin, lead, gold foils or similar products.



      (51)   Metal casting or foundry products, heavy, including
ornamental iron work or similar products.



      (52)   Metal or metal products, treatment or processing,
including enameling, japanning, lacquering, galvanizing and (hot dip) plating.



      (53)   Mill work and planning.



      (54)   Molasses.



      (55)   Minerals and earths (including sand-lime products),
grinding, crushing, processing.



      (56)   Monument and architectural stone, monument works.



      (57)   Motor testing (internal combustion motors).



      (58)   Motion picture equipment, commercial.



      (59)   Paint, lacquer, shellac and varnish, including
calcimine, casein, colors and pigment, thinners and removers.



      (60)   Paper, paper board and pulp.



      (61)   Petroleum or petroleum products, refining, including
gasoline or other petroleum products.



      (62)   Petroleum tank farm, commercial bulk storage of
petroleum products.



      (63)   Pottery and porcelain products.



      (64)   Pencils.



      (65)   Perfumes or perfumed soaps, compounding only.



      (66)   Plastic products/plastic molding, including tableware,
phonograph records, and similar products.



      (67)   Plastic extrusion.



      (68)   Plating, electrolytic process.



      (69)   Plumbing supplies.



      (70)   Pulp goods, pressed or molded (including paper
products).



      (71)   Railroads, freight terminals, repair shops, yards or
appurtenances, or facilities or services used or required in railroad
operations.



      (72)   Roofing material, building paper and felt.



      (73)   Rubber and synthetic-treated fabric products (excluding
all rubber or synthetic processing), such as washers, gloves, footwear,
bathing caps, atomizers, or similar products.



      (74)   Safes and vaults.



      (75)   Sheet metal products from metal stamping or extrusion,
including containers, costume jewelry, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons,
kitchen utensils or similar products.



      (76)   Steel works and rolling mills (ferrous) for steel,
structural iron and steel fabrication and structural products, including bars
cable, girders, rails, wire rope or similar products.



      (77)   Slaughtering of animals and poultry.



      (78)   Stock yards and feed lots.



      (79)   Silverware, plate or sterling.



      (80)   Shipping containers (corrugated board, fiber or
wirebound).



      (81)   Storage yard and contractor’s shop.



      (82)   Sugar refining.



      (83)   Textiles and fibers into fabric goods; spinning,
weaving, knitting, manufacturing, dyeing, printing and finishing of goods
yarns, knit goods.



      (84)   Tire retreading and vulcanizing shop.



      (85)   Tobacco (including curing) or tobacco products.



      (86)   Training schools (industrial vocational) including
internal combustion engine schools.



      (87)   Truck or transfer terminal, freight and motor freight
stations.



      (88)   Vitreous enamel products.



      (89)   Waterfront shipping.



      (90)   Chemical manufacturing.



      (91)   Wholesale markets (goods not contained in totally
enclosed building).



      (92)   Wood products.



      (93)   Accessory uses and structures.



      (94)   Other uses not prohibited by law not specifically
permitted by this title and which are found to be similar in character to a
use specifically permitted.



   (B)   Solid waste shall not be considered permitted uses as defined
under the terms of this title. See Solid Waste Disposal Facility and Salvage
Yards (M-3) District.



   (C)   The uses permitted in the M-2 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 171.24  SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY AND SALVAGE YARDS (M-3) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Use regulations. The following use regulations in an M-3
District shall be subject to all local, state, and federal regulations and
any required permit pertaining to the operation of the facility. Copies of
permits must be furnished to the Area Advisory Plan Commission office to be
filed with the approved development plan prior to start of operation. No
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or used, or
land or water used, in whole or in part, for other than 1 or more of the
following specified uses:



      (1)   Solid waste disposal facilities.



      (2)   Junk, salvage yard, provided the entire operation is
enclosed within a solid fence at least 8 feet high.



      (3)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities, if approved as a
conditional use.



      (4)   Accessory uses and structures.



      (5)   Other uses not prohibited by law not specifically
permitted by this title and which are found to be similar in character to a
use specifically permitted.



   (B)   The uses permitted in the M-3 District are subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   A maximum height, minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
yard requirements and lot coverage as shown in § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



      (2)   Additional area regulations (§ 172.01).



      (3)   Additional yard requirements (§ 172.02).



      (4)   Additional height requirements (§ 172.03).



      (5)   Minimum floor area schedule as shown in § 172.04.



      (6)   Fence restrictions as provided in § 172.05.



      (7)   Parking restrictions as provided in § 172.06.



      (8)   Restrictions on signs as provided in Chapter 174.



   (C)   Definitions.



      COLLECTION. The process of picking up wastes — at homes,
businesses, and other locations — loading them into an enclosed collection
vehicle, and hauling for final disposal.



      COMPACTOR. Any power-driven equipment designed to reduce the
volume of wastes by compressing.



      COMPOST. A mixture of organic wastes aerobically decomposed to an
intermediate state. COMPOST can be used as a soil conditioner. This
definition includes the recycling of sludge from wastewater treatment plants
for use as compost products as soil conditioners.



      CONVERSION. The transformation of wastes into other forms, such
as steam, gas, or oil. Transformation is usually accomplished by burning or
pyrolysis.



      FACILITY. Any assemblage of equipment used in the collection,
storage, conversion, or disposal of solid waste. Usually refers to a TRANSFER
FACILITY, RECYCLING FACILITY, or ENERGY RECOVERY PLANT.



      INCINERATION. The process by which solid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible wastes are burned and changed into gaseous by-products and
residue (referred to as ASH).



      PROCESSING. Any means designated to change the physical form or
chemical content of solid wastes.



      RECYCLING. The separation, processing, and marketing of a waste
material (e.g., glass, aluminum) from the waste stream so that it can be
reused.



      RESOURCE RECOVERY. A concept involving the extraction of
economically usable materials or energy from wastes. It may involve recycling
or physical/chemical conversion to various end products.



      SANITARY LANDFILL. A land area where solid wastes are disposed of
under regulatory control.



      SEPARATION FACILITY. A division of wastes, either manually or
mechanically, into groups of similar materials, such as paper, glass, or
metal. It is also used to describe the further sorting of materials into more
specific categories, such as clear glass/dark glass, aluminum, copper,
newspaper/cardboard/office paper.



      SOLID WASTE. Any of a wide variety of solid materials, as well as
some containerized liquids, which are discarded including agricultural,
commercial, construction, demolition, hazardous, industrial, municipal, and
residential wastes.



      SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES. Any facility or operation
involving the handling, storage, and processing of solid waste including the
following:



         (a)   Sanitary landfills.



         (b)   Recycling facilities, excluding:



            1.   Any transport vehicle or collection bin used
for collection by a non-profit organization at any commercially zoned
property;



            2.   Curb-side collections;



            3.   On-call collections; and



            4.   Any processing and/or marketing of a
recyclable material already separated from the general waste stream, provided
no permit for the operation is required from the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management and written verification is submitted by the land
owner to the Advisory Plan Commission of the same prior to the start of
operation. These uses shall be allowed under the M-1 Light Industrial and M-2
General Industrial Zoning Districts.



         (c)   Composting facilities, excluding the packaging and
marketing of the soil conditioner produced by a composting facility, provided
no permit is needed from the Indiana Department of Environmental Management
and written verification is submitted by the land owner to the Advisory Plan
Commission of the same prior to the start of operation. These uses shall be
allowed under the M-1 Light Industrial and M-2 General Industrial Zoning
Districts.



         (d)   Solid waste transfer station including separation
and/or compaction facilities which may include collection facilities.



         (e)   Incineration facilities including resource
recovery and/or conversion facilities.



         (f)   Sludge or by-products generated from the operation
of a municipal sewage treatment plant and to be used on, or applied to,
agricultural real estate for fertilization purposes.



      TRANSFER STATION. A facility where wastes are removed from small
collection vehicles (e.g., compactor trucks) and loaded onto larger transport
vehicles (e.g., tractor trailers) for transport to disposal areas. Compaction
or separation may occur prior to loading.



   (D)   Application procedure. In addition to the standard
requirements of the prescribed rezoning application adopted by the Plan
Commission, the following information must also accompany the application.
When a solid waste disposal facility is proposed, the rezoning petition must
clearly state the type of facility and be accompanied by a detailed
development plan which shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Town
Council, whichever is applicable, in accordance with the following
requirements:



      (1)   The development plan shall be prepared by a licensed
land surveyor or licensed professional engineer.



      (2)   The development plan must show all proposed structures
and/or open areas to be used in the operation clearly delineated.



      (3)   All ingress and egress to the site must be shown.



      (4)   The Planning Commission may require any other pertinent
information.



   (E)   The specified type of facility and development plan cannot be
changed from 1 designated approved use to any other listed permitted use
under this title.



   (F)   The specific use approved must be in operation according to
the approved development plan within 1 year from the zoning change so enacted
and development plan approval. If upon the expiration of 1 year from the
zoning change so enacted and approval of the development plan the solid waste
disposal facility is not in operation, the land involved in the plan shall
revert to its former zoning district classification. The Plan Commission,
upon application and public notice as required by law, may grant 1 extension
of one 1 year upon an application being filed with the Plan Commission. In
the event of reversion to former zoning as provided herein, the land and
structures thereon shall be subject to all regulations and limitations of the
zoning district then applicable.



   (G)   If any solid waste disposal facility is approved and in
operation with the operation ceasing for any reason for a period of more than
6 consecutive months, the land involved in the zoning change so enacted and
development plan approved shall revert to its former zoning district
classification. In the event of reversion to former zoning as provided
herein, the land and structures thereon shall be subject to all regulations
and limitations of the zoning district then applicable.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



CHAPTER 172: AREA, YARD, HEIGHT, AND PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   172.01   Area regulations



   172.02   Yard regulations – R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-2, R-3,
R-O Districts



   172.03   Height regulations – all districts



   172.04   Minimum residential floor area – specified districts



   172.05   Fences, walls, hedges, and shrubbery



   172.06   Off-street parking and loading



   172.07   Accessory uses and structures



§ 172.01  AREA REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or
structure shall be erected on a lot unless such building, structure or
enlargement conforms with the minimum lot area regulations of the district in
which it is located. The “Table of Standards for Principal Buildings on
Individual Lots” set forth in § 171.08 shall apply.



   (B)   Ingress and egress. Every lot shall front and have ingress and
egress to and from the proposed building site from a dedicated street or
right of way maintained by the town or other participating jurisdiction
unless the lot is subject to the following modifications:



      (1)   Recorded lots on non-maintained dedicated town or other
participating jurisdiction street or right-of-way. Where a lot fronts and has
ingress and egress to and from the proposed building site from a dedicated
street or right-of-way which has not been accepted for maintenance by the
town and was a lot of record prior to the effective date of this title the
lot shall qualify for an improvement location permit.



      (2)   Lots in subdivisions recorded after the effective date
of the Subdivision Control Ordinance of 2001, which have streets or
rights-of-way which are not maintained by the town or other participating
jurisdiction but have met bonding or other proof of financial responsibility
for their construction. Where a lot fronts and has ingress and egress to and
from the proposed building site from a dedicated street or right-of-way which
has not been accepted for maintenance by the town or other participating
jurisdiction but the subdivision has been approved and recorded after the
effective date of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, 2001, and which the
street improvement has been bonded or other proof of financial responsibility
has been provided, the lots shall qualify for an improvement location permit.



      (3)   Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure
shall be erected on a lot unless such building, structure or enlargement
conforms with the minimum lot area regulations of the district in which it is
located.



   (C)   Area, reduction of lot area. No lot area shall be reduced,
diminished or maintained so that the yards, other open spaces or total lot
area shall be smaller than prescribed by this title, nor shall the density of
population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the
regulations herein established.



   (D)   Area, principal main building on a lot. Every building
hereafter erected shall be on a lot as herein defined. In no case shall there
be more than 1 principal residential building and its accessory buildings on
1 lot. Row dwelling or group housing may be considered as 1 principal
residential building.



   (E)   Area, lot coverage.  The lot coverage of an accessory
building or combination of accessory buildings shall not exceed the lot
coverage of the principal structure (dwelling).



   (F)   Except for dwellings permitted pursuant to § 173.05, where a
lot has a width or contains less area than herein required and was a lot of
record prior to adoption of this title, such lot may be utilized for
residential use permitted in R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D and R-2, provided
yard  regulations in § 172.02 are met.



   (G)   A through lot may be 2 lots.  Where a through lot has a depth
of 180 feet or more, and an area of 15,000 feet or more, the lot may be
assumed to be 2 lots with the rear line of each approximately equidistant
from the front lot line, provided all area requirements are complied with and
both lots front onto a dedicated street or right-of-way. Accessory buildings
shall not be located in either front yard.



   (H)   Lot coverage or accessory building.  Except as hereinafter
provided no residential building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, or
reconstructed to exceed the lot coverage established for the district wherein
such building or structure is located. See § 171.08, “Table of Standards
for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.” (Lot coverage in square feet
divided by lot square feet = % of lot coverage).



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 172.02  YARD REGULATIONS – R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-2, R-3, R-O
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Except hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be
erected on a lot unless such building or structure or enlargement conforms
with the yard regulations of the district in which it is located. The
“Table of Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots” set forth
in § 171.08 shall apply.



   (B)   Yards apply to only 1 building. No required yard or other open
space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall
be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor
shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered
as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be
erected.



   (C)   Front yard.



      (1)   Setback. Every lot shall have a front yard between the
building line and the right-of-way line of streets not less than 40% of the
width of the right-of-way, but in no case less than 25 feet.



      (2)   Front yard on a through lot.  At each end of a through
lot there shall be a front yard of a depth required by this title for the
district in which each street frontage is located, and 1 of such front yards
may serve as a required rear yard.



      (3)   Front yard – between projected buildings. Where a lot
is situated between 2 lots, each of which has a main building projecting
beyond the established front yard line and so maintained when this title
became effective, the front yard requirements on such lot may, except on
major highways and thoroughfares, be the average of the front yards of the
existing building, provided, however, the front yard of such lot shall not be
less than ten feet.



      (4)   Front yards – adjoining projected buildings. Where a
lot adjoins only 1 lot having a main building which projects beyond the
established front line and has been so maintained when this title became
effective, the front yard requirements on such lot may be the average of the
front yard of the existing building and the required front yard line,
provided, however, the front yard of such lot shall not be less than 10 feet.



      (5)   Front yard – sloping lot. To be determined.



      (6)   Front yard – between buildings in block.  Where 25%
or more of the lots on the same street within the block are occupied by
buildings on the effective date of this title, no building or other structure
shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or moved so as to project closer to
the right-of-way line of the street on which it faces than the average
building setback line established by such buildings.  Where no front yard
line has thus been established the front yard requirements contained herein
shall be complied with.



   (D)   Side yards.



      (1)   There shall be 2 side yards for each lot.  The minimum
width of each side yard shall be as follows: All districts permitting
residential uses shall have a side yard on each side, 1 side shall be at
least 10% of the lot width and the aggregate total shall be at least 25% of
the lot width.



      (2)   Side yard – corner lot. A side yard at least 25 feet
in width shall be provided on the side of the lot abutting on the side street.



      (3)   Side yard waived. For the purpose of side yard
regulations, the following type of dwellings with common party walls shall be
considered as 1 building occupying 1 lot: duplexes; semi-detached dwellings;
row dwellings; and group dwellings.



   (E)   Rear yard.



      (1)   All districts permitting residential uses shall have a
rear yard of not less than 25 feet from the face of the main building wall to
the rear property line.



      (2)   Rear yard – accessory building(s).



         (a)   An accessory building or combination of accessory
buildings, not exceeding 20 feet in height, and not exceeding the floor area
(footprint) of the principal dwelling, may occupy not more than 30% of the
area of a required rear yard, provided that no accessory building shall be
closer than 3 feet to a side or rear lot line.



         (b)   The distance between the rear vertical wall of the
principal dwelling and the front of the vertical wall of the accessory
building(s) shall not be less than 10 feet apart at a point perpendicular
from the principal building to the accessory building(s).



   (F)   General provisions and modifications to yard requirements.



      (1)   Yards apply to only 1 building. No required yard or
other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided
around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot
be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building
is to be erected.



      (2)   Projections into yards.



         (a)   Cornice, sill, or chimney. A cornice, eave belt
course, sill, canopy or other similar architectural feature (not including
bay windows or other vertical projection) may extend or project into a
required side yard not more than 2 inches for each 1 foot of width of side
yard and may extend or project into a required front, side or rear yard not
more than 30 inches. Chimneys may project into a required front, side or rear
yard not more than 1 foot, provided the width of such side yard is not
reduced to less than 3 feet.



         (b)   An open unenclosed stairway or balcony, not
covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into a required yard not
more than 4 feet, and such balcony may extend into a required front yard not
more than 30 inches.



         (c)   An open, unenclosed porch, platform or landing not
covered by a roof or canopy, which does not extend above the level of the
first floor of the building, may extend or project into any required side or
rear yard not more than 4 feet.



         (d)   A fire escape may extend or project into any side
or rear yard not more than 4 feet.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 172.03  HEIGHT REGULATIONS – ALL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall
be erected, enlarged, or reconstructed to exceed the height limit established
for the district wherein such building or structure is located. The “Table
of Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots” set forth in §
171.08 shall apply.



   (B)   Modification to height limitations.



      (1)   On through lots 150 feet or less in depth, the height of
a building may be measured from the adjoining curb level on either side. In
the event no curb is present the height of a building may be measured from
the closest edge of the adjoining street on either side.



      (2)   On through lots more than 150 feet in depth, the height
of a building may be measured from the street permitting the greater height
and shall apply to a depth of not more than 150 feet from the closest edge of
the street.



   (C)   Exclusions from height limits. Penthouses on roof structures
for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain the building, fire or parapet
walls, skylights, television aerials, steeples, roof signs, flagpoles,
smokestacks, chimneys, wireless masts, water tanks, grain elevators, silos,
gas containers, industrial installations requiring a vertical production
procedure, such as flour mills, steel mills and refineries, or similar
structures may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed, but no
penthouse or roof structures or any space above the height limit shall be
allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space for residential,
business, or industrial use.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 172.04  MINIMUM RESIDENTIAL FLOOR AREA – SPECIFIED DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Except for dwellings permitted pursuant to § 173.05, no
building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or reconstructed for
residential purposes having a total floor area, exclusive of unenclosed
porches, terraces, breezeways and garages, of less than the minimum
established for the district wherein such building or structure is located as
follows.



   Minimum floor area shall be as follows:



 



Single-family dwelling
 
1,000 square feet *


Two-family & multiple-family dwellings
 
700 square feet per unit


Apartment units


Efficiency unit
 
400 square feet


One-bedroom unit
 
500 square feet


Two-bedroom unit
 
600 square feet


Three-bedroom unit
 
800 square feet


More than 3-bedroom unit
 
1,000 square feet


Townhouse
 
650 square feet


Residential mobile home (R-MH1)
 
950 square feet


Residential mobile home (R-MH2)
 
1,000 square feet


*  Single family dwelling shall include manufactured homes, modular homes
and prefabricated homes




 



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 172.05  FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES, AND SHRUBBERY.



   (A)   No person shall erect, cause to be erected or substantially
alter, or cause to be substantially altered a fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery
within the town without first having obtained a fence permit issued by the
Executive Director.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued by the town until the Executive
Director as directed by the APC has determined that the proposed fence, wall,
hedge or shrubbery complies with applicable regulations hereunder and with
all other applicable laws and ordinances of the town.



   (C)   General restrictions and prohibitions.



      (1)   The installation of any fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery
to be used as a fence, wall, or property line separation shall require a
fencing permit as issued by the APC, Executive Director.  Located in the
Town Hall.



      (2)   The fence permit application shall include a scaled
drawing showing the proposed fence location on the property and shall include
a picture of the proposed fence profile and material for approval and for
final installation comparison.  All fence material shall match.



      (3)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be erected, or
cause to be erected, or plant or cause to be planted within the right-of-way
of any public street, road, avenue, alley, highway, or parkway (hereafter
called “street”), dedicated easement, drainage easement, public utility
easement or combination thereof (hereafter called “easement”).



      (4)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be maintained,
erected or cause to be erected with any material, which is likely to inflict
bodily harm if a person or animal was to come in contact with the fence,
wall, hedge or shrubbery.  Materials covered by this prohibition, but not
limited to, sharp or ragged metal spikes or spears, rough wood surfaces, and
the like, as determined by the APC. No barbed wire or barbed wire fences
shall be used on any residential property within the town limits.



      (5)   A fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall have at least
25% open space from the front of the building to the street right-of-way on
single streets or street right-of-way on each street of corner lots. Such
open space shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the entire area of the
fence.



      (6)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall be installed
closer than 24 inches off of the installer’s property line in order for the
installer to maintain the fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery without impeding on
the adjacent owner’s property, or forcing the adjacent property owner to
maintain the installer’s fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery.



         (a)   Exception. A fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery may
be installed on a property line or adjacent to a property line with the
following requirements:



            1.   Both property owners must agree on the
location of the property line.  If in doubt the property shall be surveyed
by the property owners.



            2.   Both property owners must sign an agreement
to erect a fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery on the property line and have said
agreement notarized.  A copy of the notarized agreement shall be attached to
the application for a fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery and maintained in the
office of the APC, Executive Director.



         (b)   The cost, exact location, type of profile, type of
material, and maintenance shall be determined by the property owners.



         (c)    In the event the front of the buildings of the
adjacent property owners do not align a 6-foot (72-inch) high fence shall
stop at the front of the building of the property owner who is paying for the
fence. If both property owners are paying for the fence the fence can stop at
the front of either building, but no closer than the building closest to the
street side.



      (7)   All fences, walls, hedges or shrubbery shall not be
installed beyond the property’s right-of-way or inside any easement(s). The
owner shall install a gate or gates or provide an open space between hedges
or shrubbery of sufficient width to allow access of equipment to maintain the
right-of-way or easement side of the property beyond the fence, wall, hedge
or shrubbery.



      (8)   No above ground electric or electronic fence or fences
shall be installed within the town limits.  Below grade electric fence for
animal control are acceptable with the Executive Director’s approval.



      (9)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall interrupt,
impede or otherwise alter the natural flow of water shall be erected or cause
to be erected in any district.



      (10)   All fences, or walls shall be erected or cause to be
erected so that the supporting structure (posts, supporting cross members,
and the like) faces the installer side of the fence, or wall.  The finish
side shall face out (away from the installer).



      (11)   All fences, walls, hedges or shrubbery shall be
maintained in a good, structurally sound, and in a neat, clean and attractive
condition at all times.



      (12)   All hedges or shrubbery shall be planted or cause to be
planted and maintained so that the hedge or shrubbery will not overhang or
interfere with the use of a public way such as, but not limited to a
sidewalk, street or beyond the right-of-way easement for streets.



      (13)   No person shall plant or cause to be planted, construct
or cause to be constructed or maintain or cause to be maintained upon any
land or premises within the town any fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery or other
structure or object that will interfere with, obstructing the view of or
create a safety hazard for any motor vehicle being driven, or bicycle being
ridden, whether on private property or on any public property.



   (D)   Height restrictions.



      (1)   Front yards: facing 1 street.



         (a)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall exceed 48
inches maximum in height above the finish ground level starting at the front
of the building to the street right–of-way line for any Residential,
Commercial, or Industrial District.



         (b)   Exception. A higher fence can transition down to
the lower fence starting in line with the front of the building toward the
street for a maximum distance of 72 inches in length.



      (2)   Front yard and side yard (corner lots): fronting on 2
streets.



         (a)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrubbery shall exceed 48
inches maximum in height above the finish ground level from starting at the
front or side street of the building for any Residential, Commercial, or
Industrial District.



         (b)   Exception. A higher fence can transition down to
the lower fence starting in line with the front of the building toward the
street for a maximum distance of 72 inches in length.



      (3)    Side and rear yards.  No fence or wall shall exceed 72
inches maximum in height above the finish ground level from the front of the
building to the rear of the property or to a recorded dedicated easement for
any Residential District.



      (4)    Residential property that abuts commercial or
industrial property may erect a fence or wall that shall not exceed 96 inches
maximum in height above the finish ground level from the front of the
residential building to the rear or side of the property or to a recorded
dedicated easement for any Residential District.  The 96-inch high fence can
only be erected on the abutting property line with the commercial or
industrial property.



      (5)    Commercial and Industrial Districts. 



         (a)   No fence or wall shall exceed 96 inches maximum in
height (plus the maximum 12-inch high barbed wire) above the finish ground
level from the front of the building to the rear of the property or to a
recorded dedicated easement for any Commercial or Industrial District. With
the approval of the APC the use of barbed wire may be used on fences in
Commercial or Industrial Districts only where the fence exceeds 96 inches
(plus the maximum 12-inch high barbed wire). Barbed wire may not project or
extend beyond the installers property line.



         (b)   Exception. The higher fence can transition down to
the lower fence starting in line with the front of the building toward the
street for a maximum distance of 96 inches in length. No barbed wire will be
allowed on a fence or wall lower than 96 inches in height or beyond the front
of the building or side of the building if located on a side street.



      (6)   Pool fence. All pool and deck areas must be contained
within a fenced enclosure of not less than 60 inches minimum in height above
the finish ground or deck level.  Such fence shall be design to obstruct
access to the pool.  All gates shall open out and should be self-closing and
self-latching.  Latching device shall be mounted a minimum of 54 inches
above the finish ground or deck.  When the latching device will be mounted
less than 54 inches install the latch on the side facing the pool and 3
inches below the top of the gate.



         (a)   Above ground pools with a fixed stairway or other
permanent access to above ground deck around the pool shall have a lockable
gate at ground level that will open out or at the pool level deck, no gate
shall open over the steps.



         (b)   Chain link fence shall have a maximum mesh size of
1-1/4 inch square.



         (c)   All fencing openings shall not allow a 4-inch
diameter sphere to pass through.



         (d)   All fencing shall not allow the passage of a
4-inch diameter sphere from the bottom to the top of the grade on the side
facing away from the pool.



         (e)   Unacceptable fences are any type of fence material
installed horizontally that will act as a ladder to access the pool area.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Privacy screens around air conditioning condensing
units, trash containers, and similar equipment not exceeding 48 inches in
height above finish grade shall not be considered a fence and will not
require a fence permit.



      (2)   Pet enclosures and similar uses not exceeding 24 inches
in height above finish grade shall not be considered a fence and will not
require a fence permit.



   (F)   Exemptions. Fences, walls, hedges or shrubbery legally in
existence at the time of adoption of this title which are not in violation of
current ordinances, and which do not prevent a safety hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, and which do not prevent accessibility by emergency
vehicles, but which violate other provisions of this section may continue to
be maintained and to exist, but may not be replaced unless current ordinances
are complied with.



   (G)   Nonconforming fences, walls, hedges or shrubs. Nonconforming
fences, walls, hedges or shrubbery not exempted, above, shall be subject to
repair or removal.  If, following inspection by the APC Executive Director,
any fence, wall, hedge or shrub in the Executive Director’s determination
does not meet the requirements herein, the Executive Director shall order the
owner or occupier of the premises to make the necessary repairs, improvements
or to remove the fence, wall, hedge or shrub.  A reasonable period time not
to exceed 90 days shall be provided to make repairs, based upon the nature,
extent and cost of such repairs, improvements or removals. Should the
aforesaid owner or occupant fail to make the requested repairs, improvements
of removal within the time provided, the owner or occupier shall be in
violation of these regulations, and the town shall be authorized to undertake
the necessary repairs, improvements or removal at the expense of the owner or
occupier.







 







 



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 172.06  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   (A)   General. The following off-street parking spaces shall be
provided and satisfactorily maintained, by the owner of the property for each
building which is hereafter erected, enlarged, or altered for use for any of
the following purposes herein.



      (1)   Standard parking space shall be minimum 9 feet wide and
18 feet long.



      (2)   All non-residential parking areas and/or lots shall be
paved with portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete.



      (3)   All non-residential parking areas and/or lots shall be
striped and all disabled spaces shall have appropriate markings/graphics and
signage.



      (4)   See Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines for
parking standards for disabled parking and quantity.



   (B)   Amount of off-street parking.



      (1)   Dwellings.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling: at least 2 parking spaces.



         (b)   Duplex dwelling: at least 2 parking spaces per
unit.



         (c)   Apartment dwellings: at least 2 parking spaces per
unit and 1 visitor parking space for every 3 units.



      (2)   For any general auditorium, gymnasium, churches or
theatre; high school or college, or university auditorium or stadium; or
other place of public assembly, there shall be provided at least 1 parking
space for each 6 seats provided for its patrons, based on the maximum seating
capacity, including fixed and movable seats. In computing required off-street
parking spaces, and the use of joint parking facilities in connection with
any building or use not normally open used or operated during the principal
operating hours of the uses shall be allowed, providing a properly drawn
legal instrument is executed by the parties concerned for the joint use of
such off-street parking facilities, which instrument, duly approved as to
form by the Town Attorney, shall be filed with the application, for a permit.



      (3)   For any hotel, apartment hotel, clubhouse, dormitory,
fraternity house or any other similar use or establishment there shall be
provided at least 1 parking space for each 2 guest sleeping rooms.



      (4)   For any dancing, exhibitions, labor temple, lodge hall;
skating rink or other assembly hall without fixed seats, there shall be
provided not less than 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of net floor
area thereof.



      (5)   For any bank, clinic, funeral home, office building;
professional office, welfare institution or any other similar use or
establishment, there shall be provided not less than 1 parking space for each
400 square feet of gross floor area.



      (6)   For any hospital, sanitarium, convalescent home or any
other similar use or establishment, there shall be provided not less than 1
parking space for each 3 beds or any portion thereof.



      (7)   For any eating or drinking establishment or any similar
use, there shall be provided not less than 1 parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area thereof.



      (8)   For any retail store, except a food market, there shall
be provided not less than 1 parking space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area thereof.



      (9)   For any food market, or any similar use, there shall be
provided 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area in
excess of 500 square feet.



      (10)   For any manufacturing, processing, wholesaling, or any
other industrial use or establishment including any printing or engraving
establishment or any warehouse or storage building, there shall be provided 1
parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area thereof or at
least enough parking for at least 90% of proposed employees per shift.



      (11)   For any launderette, laundromat, self-service laundry,
washateria, or any similar use or establishment under a different name there
shall be provided 1 parking space for 2 washing or drying machines.



      (12)   For any bowling alley, there shall be provided 4
parking spaces for each alley thereof.



      (13)   For any motel, tourist court, or similar use or
establishment, there shall be provided 1 parking space on the same parcel of
land for each individual sleeping or living unit.



      (14)   For any trailer coach park, there shall be provided not
less than 1 parking space on the same parcel of land for each individual
house trailer.



      (15)   For any supermarket there shall be provided not less
than 1 parking space for each 100 square feet floor area in excess of 2,000
square feet of floor area.



   (C)   Mixed uses. In the case of any use not listed herein, the
number of parking spaces required for such use shall be the same as for a
similar use, which is listed. In the case of mixed uses in the same building
or structure, the total requirement of off-street parking facilities shall be
the sum of the requirement of the various uses computed separately from the
item set out in this section and off-street parking facilities for 1 use
shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any
other use except as hereinafter specified for collective use.



   (D)   Collective parking facilities. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent the provision of any off-street parking facility for
1 or more buildings or uses, provided, however, that the total number of
off-street parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of requirements for
the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the time
set out in this section. All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section
shall be on the same lot with the building, except that the Plan Commission
may permit the parking spaces to be on any properly zoned lot within 300 feet
of the building; provided that the requirements of division (B) above shall
not be waived. The distance to any parking space areas as herein required
shall be measured between the nearest point of the off-street parking
facility and the nearest point of the building the parking area or facility
is to serve.



   (E)   Off-street loading. On the same premises with every building,
structure, or part thereof, hereafter erected, established or enlarged and
occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse goods display, department
store, wholesale store, market, hotel, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or
other uses, involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or
merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for
standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with
public use of the street or alley.



   (F)   Separate accessory parking lots in Residential Districts. Open
parking lots for the parking of self-propelled passenger vehicles accessory
to a permitted use located on a lot separate from the lot occupied by the
main use and approved by the Plan Commission shall be arranged, maintained
and used in accordance with these requirements:



      (1)   The lot shall front onto a dedicated street and have a
front yard not less than 25 feet in depth. Corner lots shall provide a side
yard not less than 15 feet in depth.



      (2)   A solid, opaque barrier (i.e., wall, fence, and the
like), with necessary openings, not more than 5 feet and not less than 4 feet
in height shall be placed between the parking area and the side and rear lot
lines with only such openings as may be required to perform maintenance. No
solid, opaque barrier shall be required in the front yard between the parking
area and street.



      (3)   The required front yard shall be planted with
landscaping or grass and maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and
orderly appearance. The required yard shall be kept free from refuse and
debris.



      (4)   No signs shall be permitted other than unlighted
entrance and exit markers not exceeding 2 square feet in area located within
the parking area.



      (5)   The parking area shall be paved with an asphaltic
concrete or portland cement concrete and graded so as to prevent dust and
surface water accumulation and no flow of water onto either adjacent property.



      (6)   If lighting is provided for the parking area, all lights
shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from all residentially-zoned
property.



      (7)   (a)   No charge shall be made for parking.



         (b)   Exception. Unless a parking lot has been
specifically designed and approved as a pay parking lot.



   (G)   Business parking lots in Residential Districts. Open parking
lots located in Residential Districts for the parking of automobiles
incidental to a commercial zoned area adjacent thereto and approved by the
Planning Commission shall be designed, maintained, and used in accordance
with the following requirements:



      (1)   Parking area shall be used only for the parking of
private passenger vehicles of customers, clients, patrons, visitors, and
employees in the business area. No charge shall be made for parking. No
business of any kind, including repair, service, washing, sale, display or
storage shall be conducted on or from the lot. No structures, other than
those specifically permitted or required, shall be erected on the premises.
No advertising signs shall be erected on the premises, except that not more
than 1 directional sign at each point of ingress and egress may be erected
which may also bear the name of the operator of the parking area and the
enterprise it is intended to serve. Such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet
in area nor extend to a greater height than 6 feet above the ground and shall
be erected within the parking area. Such transitional use shall not extend
more than 100 feet from the boundary of the less restricted zone.



      (2)   Ingress and egress for parking area shall be over
business zoned property of from a public alley lying between the business and
residential-zoned property. There shall be no vehicular access to such
parking area through or across any yard required under this section, provided
that the Plan Commission may, after investigation and public hearing,
authorize not more than 1 driveway not over 10 feet in width, over or through
a required yard in cases where it finds that public convenience, relief of
street congestion and peculiar circumstances required such action that the
spirit and purpose of this title will be promoted and that the surrounding
neighborhood will not be unduly affected in connection with authorizing such
a driveway; the Plan Commission may impose any conditions or requirements
reasonably necessary to effectuate the objective of this section.



      (3)   A solid, opaque barrier (i.e., wall, fence, and the
like), with necessary openings, not more than 5 feet and not less than 4 feet
in height shall be placed between the parking area and the side and rear lot
lines with only such openings as may be required to perform maintenance. No
solid, opaque barrier shall be required in the front yard between the parking
area and street.  The ingress/egress shall not exceed 20 feet in width and
subject to conditions in this section.



      (4)   The lot shall provide a front yard not less than 25 feet
in depth nor less than the front yard of any existing residential structure
immediately adjacent and on either side of the lot. The space or yards
between the parking area and residential lot lines or building lines shall
not be used or occupied for any purpose except as permitted or required in
this section.



      (5)   All yards and spaces between the walls required by this
section and residentially-zoned property or building lines shall be planted
with landscaping or grass and maintained so as to present a healthy, neat,
and orderly appearance. The required yard shall be kept free from refuse and
debris.



      (6)   The parking area shall be paved with an asphaltic
concrete or portland cement concrete and graded so as to prevent dust and
surface water accumulation and no flow of water onto either adjacent property.



      (7)   If lighting is provided for the parking area, all lights
shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from all residentially-zoned
property.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 172.07  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   A structure or use that is clearly incidental to a principal
structure or use, and is located on the same lot or on an adjacent lot with
the principal structure or use and in the same ownership, is an accessory
use. All accessory uses are subject to the restrictions in this section.



   (B)    Accessory uses and structures must be operated and maintained
under the same ownership and use as the principal use or structure, and must
be a permitted use in the zoning district in which they are located.



   (C)   Accessory structures must be subordinate in height, and a
combination of all accessory structures must be subordinate in area to the
principal structure, and accessory uses must be subordinate in purpose to the
principal use.



   (D)   The principal structure and combination of all accessory
structures shall not exceed the maximum allowable lot coverage, as specified
for the district in which the lot is located per § 171.08, “Table of
Standards for Principal Buildings on Individual Lots.”



   (E)   The accessory structure must meet the minimum front yard, and
side yard on a street side of a corner lot, setback and other requirements as
established by § 171.08. In a rear or side yard, all residential accessory
structures not attached to or part of the principal structure shall be
located at least 10 feet behind the principal structure and at least 3 feet
from any lot line as measured from the face of the vertical walls.



   (F)   The accessory structure must be erected and maintained without
any permanent foundation.  The accessory structure shall have a positive
anchor system to prevent displacement, but shall not have a concrete
foundation.



   (G)   Accessory structures must not be erected prior to the
principal residential structure. No accessory structure shall be located in
or over any easement or within the right of entry of any regulated drainage
as defined in I.C. 36-9-27.



   (H)   For clarification the following list is considered accessory
structures also, but is not limited to these items:



      (1)   Travel trailers or campers.



      (2)   Utility trailers open or enclosed.



      (3)   In ground swimming pools.



      (4)   On ground (above ground) swimming pools.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



CHAPTER 173: NON-CONFORMING SITUATIONS



Section



   173.01   Non-conforming lots of record



   173.02   Non-conforming uses of land



   173.03   Non-conforming structures



   173.04   Non-conforming uses of structures



   173.05   Dwellings on small lots



   173.06   Repairs and maintenance



   173.07   Exception uses under special exception provisions not
non-conforming uses



§ 173.01  NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.



   Where a lot has less width or less area than herein required and was a
lot of record prior to January 1, 2017, such lot may be occupied by any
residential use permitted in the Residential District.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 173.02  NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   If at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title, lawful
use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the term of this
title as enacted or amended, such use may be continued subject to the
following provisions:



   (A)   No non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied by such use at
the effective date of adoption of this title.



   (B)   No non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title.



   (C)   If any non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 6 consecutive months, any subsequent use of land shall
conform to regulations specified by this title for the district in which the
land is located, except that a 12-month period of discontinuance shall apply
to uses which are dependent upon seasonal trade and which are customarily
closed for the greater portion of the years’ time.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 173.03  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Except for dwellings permitted pursuant to § 173.05, if a lawful
structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title
that could not be built under terms of this title by reason of restrictions
on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the
structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued subject
to the following provisions:



   (A)   No non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a
way which increases its non-conformity.



   (B)   If a non-conforming structure is destroyed by any means to an
extent of more than 60% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
title.



   (C)   If a non-conforming structure is moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 173.04  NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.



   Except for dwellings permitted pursuant to § 173.05, if a lawful use
of structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the
effective date of the adoption or amendment of this title that would not be
allowed in the district under the terms of this title, that use may be
continued subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.



   (B)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of
a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of adoption or amendment of this title, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.



   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use
of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another
non-conforming use provided the proposed use is equally appropriate to the
district than the existing non-conforming use.



   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on
which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is
located, and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed.



   (E)   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 6 consecutive
months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.



   (F)   Where a non-conforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the non-conforming status of the land.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 173.05  DWELLINGS ON SMALL LOTS.



   Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other provisions of this
title, a single-family dwelling may be erected on any lot described in a deed
recorded prior to January 1, 1980, and containing a setback, area, or lot
size smaller than that required for a single-family dwelling, so long as such
dwelling and lot shall meet the following criteria:



   (A)   The lot size shall not be less than 40 feet in width and have
at least 4,000 square feet in area.



   (B)   The minimum front yard and corner side yard setback shall be
at least as large as 1/2 of the other residential dwellings on the same block
as the non-conforming dwelling.



   (C)   The dwelling shall have a total floor area, exclusive of
unenclosed porches, terraces, breezeways and garages, of at least 700 square
feet.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 173.06  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use,
work may be done provided that the cubic content of the building as it
existed at the time of passage or amendment of this title shall not be
increased. Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 173.07  EXCEPTION USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT
NON-CONFORMING USES.



   Any use for which a special exception is permitted in this title shall
not be deemed a non-conforming use, but shall without further action be
deemed a conforming use in such district.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



CHAPTER 174: SIGNS



Section



   174.01   Purpose



   174.02   Definitions



   174.03   General requirements



   174.04   Permit process



   174.05   Authorized signs



   174.06   Prohibited signs



   174.07   Identification of signs



   174.08   Inspection of signs



   174.09   Ground or monument signs



   174.10   Flat wall signs



   174.11   Projecting signs



   174.12   Marquee signs



   174.13   Banner signs



   174.14   Roof signs



   174.15   Poster advertising panels



   174.16   Permitted uses by district



   174.17   Maintenance and removal



   174.18   Enforcement



   174.19   Sign Table



§ 174.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   (1)   Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace
alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for
regulation. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the size, color,
illumination, movement, materials, location, height, and condition of all
signs placed on private property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the
protection of property values, the character of the various neighborhoods and
districts, the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious
community, protection against destruction of or encroachment on historic
convenience to citizens, and encouraging economic development. This chapter
allows adequate communication through signage while encouraging aesthetic
quality in the design, location, size, and purpose of all signs.



      (2)   This chapter must be interpreted in a manner consistent
with the First Amendment guarantee of free speech. If any provision of this
chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
finding must not affect the validity of other provisions of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision.



   (B)    A sign placed on land or on a building for the purpose of
identification, protection, or directing persons to a use conducted therein
must be deemed to be an integral but accessory and subordinate part of the
principal use of land or building. Therefore, the intent of this chapter is
to establish limitations on signs in order to ensure they are appropriate to
the land, building, or use to which they are appurtenant and are adequate for
their intended purpose while balancing the individual and community interests
identified in division (A) of this section.



   (C)    These regulations are intended to promote signs that are
compatible with the use of the property to which they are appurtenant,
landscape and architecture of surrounding buildings, are legible and
appropriate to the activity to which they pertain, are not distracting to
motorists, and are constructed and maintained in a structurally sound and
attractive condition.



   (D)   These regulations distinguish between portions of the town
designed for primarily vehicular access and portions of the town designed for
primarily pedestrian access.



   (E)    These regulations do not regulate every form and instance of
visual communication that may be displayed anywhere within the jurisdictional
limits of the town. Rather, they are intended to regulate those forms and
instances that are most likely to meaningfully affect 1 or more of the
purposes set forth above.



   (F)    These regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms
that may be created by the installation and display of signs. Rather, they
strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of communication
by means of visual display while still reducing and mitigating the extent of
the harms caused by signs.



   (G)   These regulations are not intended to and do not apply to
signs erected, maintained, or otherwise posted, owned, or leased by the State
of Indiana, the United States government, or this town. The inclusion of
“government” in describing some signs does not intend to subject the
government to regulation, but instead helps illuminate the type of sign that
falls within the immunities of the government from this regulation.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 174.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AWNING. Any fixed or retractable structure made of cloth, metal or
other material that is attached to a building.  If the sign is on an awning,
then only the awning area covered by the actual lettering or symbol shall be
used in calculating the sign area.  If the awning is illuminated then the
entire lit area shall be included in computing the sign area.



   BANNER SIGN.



      (1)   A temporary sign constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic
fabric, or similar lightweight non-rigid material and fastened at all corners
or edges to a building or other structure.



      (2)   Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that
is mounted to a pole or a building at 1 or more edges.  See § 174.13,
Banner Signs, for additional information.



   COMMISSION.  The Town of Chandler Advisory Plan Commission.



   COPY. Any word, number, letter, picture or emblem that is a feature of
a sign.



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN (EMS). A sign capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed
by remote or automatic means.



   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The Executive Director of the Advisory Plan
Commission.



   FLAG. A geometric shaped cloth, fabric or other lightweight non-rigid
material normally fastened to a stringer which is secured or tethered to a
building, flag pole or other permanent structure so as to allow movement of
the flag caused by movement in the atmosphere.



   FLASHING SIGN. One that employs a pattern of changing light where the
sign illumination suddenly, instantaneously, rapidly and/or repeatedly
changes for the purpose of drawing attention.  The term excludes signs
illuminated by an exterior light source.



   FLAT WALL SIGN. Signs attached directly to or painted on or otherwise
inscribed on the exterior walls or surface of a building and confined within
the limits thereof of any building, no part of which projects or extends more
than 12 inches out from that surface at all points.



   HIGHWAY SIGN. A pole sign, banner sign, or EMS that is erected and
maintained for the purpose of being within the view of motorists who are
driving on a state or federal highway.



   MARQUEE SIGN. A canopy or covered structure bearing a signboard or copy
projecting from and attached to a building.



   MONUMENT SIGN. An identification device permanently embedded in the
ground, upon which is affixed only the name and/or symbol of a particular
neighborhood, subdivision, municipality, commercial or industrial development.



   POLE SIGN. A sign supported by 1 or more poles which elevate the sign.
Also see FREESTANDING SIGN.



   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or sign
designed to be transported, including, but not limited to “A” or “T”
frames; menu and sandwich board signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and
signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public
right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation
of the business.



   REGULATORY SIGN. Traffic and other municipal signs, legal notices,
railroad crossings, danger, and other such necessary, temporary, emergency,
or non-advertising signs.  REGULATORY SIGNS do not required a sign permit.



   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a
building and which is wholly or partially support by said building.  A ROOF
SIGN shall not be larger than 40 square feet in total area.



   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, or illustration,
which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building or other outdoor surface which directs attention to or is designed
or intended to direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. Signs
located completely within an enclosed building, and not exposed to view from
a street, shall not be considered a SIGN. Each display surface of a sign or
sign face must be considered to be a SIGN.



   SIGN AREA.



      (1)   That area within a line including the outer extremities
of all the characters of words, numbers, graphics, or design, or within a
line including the outer extremities of the framework or background of the
sign whichever line includes the larger area.  The supporting structure
shall not be included in the SIGN AREA.



      (2)   Where attached directly to a building wall or surface,
the space within the outline enclosing all the characters of the words,
numbers, graphics or design.



      (3)   The supporting structure shall not be included in the
SIGN AREA, unless the supporting structure provides back-lighting for the
sign, then the back-lighting portion will be calculated as part of the SIGN
AREA.



   SIGN FACE. The entire display surface area of a sign upon, against, or
through which copy is placed.



   SIGN PERMIT. An improvement location permit for a sign, issued in
accordance with this chapter by the Executive Director of the Plan Commission.



   SNIPE SIGN. Any sign of any size, made of any material, including
paper, cardboard, wood, and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted,
pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences, or other
objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to
the premises upon which said sign is located.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. A banner, pennant, poster, or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood, or other like materials and that appears to be intended or is
determined by the Commission to be displayed for a limited period of time.
Properties that have an electronic message sign shall not be eligible to have
TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   VEHICLE SIGN. Any sign attached to or displayed on a vehicle.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 174.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All signs shall be constructed and erected in a safe and
stable manner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter applicable to
their construction. Every sign installed within the town pursuant to this
chapter, which is deemed unsafe by the Executive Director, shall be removed
immediately on the order of the Executive Director, or shall be put in a safe
condition.



   (B)    Signs are prohibited in all districts unless authorized under
this code or constructed pursuant to a valid building permit when required
under the code.



   (C)    In residential zones or on property used for non-transient
residential uses, commercial signs are prohibited except for those properties
on which a home occupation or a transient residential use has been approved.



   (D)   No signs of any kind shall be attached to or placed on a
building in such a manner as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or
door, nor shall any sign be attached in any form, shape, or manner to a fire
escape.



   (E)    All electrical work in signs shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the rules of the Department of Buildings
relative to electrical wiring.



   (F)    A property owner may not accept a fee for posting or
maintaining a sign allowed under § 174.05(B) and any sign that is posted or
maintained in violation of this provision is prohibited.



   (G)   Illumination. Lights used to illuminate a sign shall be
shielded from adjacent properties to prevent glare across property lines or
into any thoroughfare.



      (1)    All electronic message signs shall either utilize
automatic dimming technology which electronically adjusts the sign's
brightness in direct correlation with ambient light conditions, or from
sunset to sunrise display only messages that have a dark colored background.



      (2)    Existing signs that do not have the automatic dimming
ability and are determined to be a nuisance or safety hazard must be turned
off from sunset to sunrise or otherwise be adjusted to comply with this
chapter.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.04  PERMIT PROCESS.



   (A)   No sign for which a permit is required in this chapter shall
be erected or altered unless a permit shall have first been obtained from the
Executive Director for the erection or alteration.



   (B)    Application for permit.



      (1)    An application for a sign permit must be filed with the
Executive Director on forms furnished by that Department and approved by the
APC. An application for sign permits shall be accompanied by the plans,
drawings, and specifications as are necessary to fully advise the Executive
Director of the type, size, shape, location, construction, and materials of
the proposed sign and the building or structure on which the sign is to be
placed.



      (2)    The Executive Director must promptly process the sign
permit application and approve the application, reject the application, or
notify the applicant of deficiencies in the application within 30 days after
receipt. Any application that complies with all provisions of this code, the
zoning ordinance, the building code, and other applicable laws, regulations,
and ordinances must be approved.



      (3)   If the application is rejected, the Executive Director
must provide a list of the reasons for the rejection in writing. An
application must be rejected for non-compliance with the terms of this code,
the zoning ordinance, building code, or other applicable law, regulation, or
ordinance.



   (C)    Permit fee. A nonrefundable fee of $25 must accompany all
sign permit applications.



   (D)   Duration and revocation of permit. If a sign is not installed
within 6 months following the issuance of a sign permit, the permit is void.
The town may revoke a sign permit under any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The town determines that information in the application
was materially false or misleading;



      (2)    The sign as installed does not conform to the sign
permit application;



      (3)    The sign violates this code, the zoning ordinance,
building code, or other applicable law, regulation, or ordinance; or



      (4)    The Executive Director determines that the sign is not
being properly maintained or has been abandoned.



   (E)   Permits not required. A permit is not required for signs:



      (1)   Described in § 174.05 with a total area of up to 32
square feet and a maximum height of 8 feet; or



      (2)    Official notices or advertisements posted or displayed
by or under the direction of any public or court officer in the performance
of official or directed duties; provided that all such signs must be removed
no more than 10 days after their purpose has been accomplished.



   (F)   Appeal. If the Commission denies a permit the applicant may
appeal to the Town Council within 60 days of the denial.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.05  AUTHORIZED SIGNS.



   (A)   Although these regulations do not apply to signs erected,
maintained, or posted by the state, federal, or town government, these
regulations clarify that government signs which form the expression of that
government are allowed in every zoning district and include the signs
described and regulated in this section when erected and maintained pursuant
to law.



      (1)    Traffic control devices on private or public property
must be erected and maintained to comply with the Indiana Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices adopted in this state.



      (2)    Each property owner may mark their property using
numerals that identify the address of the property so that public safety
departments can easily identify the address from the public street. Where
required under this code or other law the identification may be on the curb
and must be on the principal building on the property. The size and location
of the identifying numerals and letters, if any, must be proportional to the
size of the building and the distance from the street to the building and in
no case larger than 2 square feet. In cases where the building is not located
within view of the public street, the identifier may be located on the
mailbox or other suitable device such that it is visible from the street each
direction.  Minimum 3-inch high numerals for residential, and minimum 5-inch
high numerals for anything other than residential.



      (3)    Where a federal, state, or local law requires a
property owner to post a sign on the owner’s property to warn of a danger
or to prohibit access to the property either generally or specifically, the
owner must comply with the federal, state, or local law to exercise that
authority by posting a sign on the property. If the federal, state, or local
regulation describes the form and dimensions of the sign, the property owner
must comply with those requirements; otherwise, when not defined, the sign
shall be no larger than 2 square feet and located in a place on the property
to provide access to the notice that is required to be made. Signs posted
under this section are not snipe signs.



      (4)    Official notices or advertisements may be posted or
displayed by or under the direction of any public or court officer in the
performance of official or directed duties; provided, however, that all such
signs must be removed by the property owner no more than 10 days after their
purpose has been accomplished or as otherwise required by law. Signs posted
under this section are not snipe signs.



      (5)    A flag that has been adopted by the federal government,
the State of Indiana, or the Town of Chandler may be displayed as provided
under the law that adopts or regulates its use and as provided in division
(D) below.



   (B)   Temporary signs. It is the intent of this code to limit the
aesthetic impact of signs on properties to prevent clutter and protect
streetscapes thereby preserving property values and protecting traffic
safety. The accumulation of signs adversely affects these goals, property
values, and public safety. Accordingly, a person exercising the right to
place temporary signs on a property as described in this division (B) must
limit the number of temporary signs on the property per 0.25 acre at any 1
time to 2 plus any sign allowed in division (B)(2), or if the property is
smaller than 0.25 acres then no more than 2 signs plus any sign allowed in
division (B)(2) per principal building on the property unless a court having
jurisdiction determines that additional signs must be permitted and then the
signage must be limited to the fewest signs and the smallest accumulated sign
area permissible under the court’s determination. The sign face of any
temporary sign, unless otherwise limited in this division (B) must not be
larger than 2 square feet. Permitted temporary signs include:



      (1)    A property owner may place 1 temporary sign at any time
with a sign face no larger than 2 square feet on the property.



      (2)    Temporary signs may be located on the owner’s
property for a period of 60 days prior to, and a period of 60 days after, an
election involving candidates for a federal, state, or local office that
represents the district in which the property is located or involves an issue
on the ballot of an election within the district where the property is
located.



      (3)    One temporary sign may be located on a property when
the owner consents and that property is being offered for sale.



      (4)    One temporary sign may be located on the owner’s
property on a day when the property owner is opening the property to the
public; provided, however, the owner may not use this type of sign in a
Residential District on more than 2 days in a year and may not use this type
of sign in any Commercial District for more than 14 days in a year and the
days must be consecutive. For purposes of this division (B)(4) a year is
counted from the first day on which the sign is erected counting backwards
and from the last day on which the sign exists counting forward.



      (5)    During the 40-day period from December 1 to January 10,
a property owner may place 1 temporary sign on the property and may use
lights that do not exceed 4,000 lumens as measured at the property line
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. to decorate the property even
if the lights might be arranged to form a sign.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the lessor of a property is
considered the property owner as to the property the lessor holds a right to
use exclusive of others (or the sole right to occupy). If there are multiple
lessors of a property then each lessor must have the same rights and duties
as the property owner as to the property the lessor leases and has the sole
right to occupy and the size of the property must be deemed to be the
property that the lessor has the sole right to occupy under the lease.



   (D)   Flags.



      (1)   Single-Family Zoning Districts. In a Single-Family
Zoning District, 2 flags and 1 flag pole per premises. Each flag must be a
maximum of 15 square feet in area. The flag pole must be a maximum of 25 feet
in height or no higher than the highest point of the principal building’s
roof, whichever is lower. Flag poles must meet the minimum yard setback
requirements for a principal building.



      (2)    Non-Residential Zoning Districts. In a Non-Residential
Zoning District, 1 flag per 25 feet of frontage on a right-of-way up to a
maximum of 6 flags and 6 flag poles per premises. Each flag must be a maximum
of 24 square feet in area. Flag poles must be a maximum of 50 feet in height
but no higher than the highest point of the nearest principal building’s
roof on the premises. Flag poles must meet the minimum yard setback
requirements for a principal building or a minimum of 10 feet whichever is
more restrictive.



      (3)    Small flags at vehicle sales and service
establishments. One small flag of no more than 1 square foot per vehicle on
display for sale or rent at vehicle sales and service establishments. Such
flags must be no higher than 2 feet above the height of the vehicle as if it
were displayed at grade level.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.06  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following types and placement of signs are prohibited in all zoning
districts:



   (A)    Portable signs. Any portable signs not defined in § 174.05,
Authorized Signs; provided, however, that arrow boards and other rigid
portable signs and marquees may be used if a sign permit is obtained for the
use, which is subject to the following conditions and restrictions in
addition to those otherwise required for a sign permit:



      (1)    One sign per development site.



      (2)    Maximum area: 32 square feet.



      (3)    Maximum freestanding height: 6 feet.



      (4)    Setback from edge of pavement: 15 feet.



      (5)    Placement limitation: 6 times per year.



      (6)    Time limitation: 30 days per placement.



      (7)    Must not be used at the same time as any sign exempt
under § 174.05(D).



      (8)   Signs erected in a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision of streets, alleys, or driveways or erected, designed, or positioned
to interfere with, obstruct, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device that may mislead or confuse traffic.



      (9)   Signs posted on public property, including utility
poles, lighting fixtures, street signs, benches, and similar fixtures.



      (10)   Billboards.



   (B)   Emissions. Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible
matter.



   (C)   Imitation of official signs. Signs that purport to be, are in
imitation of, or resemble, but that are not, an official traffic sign or
signal pursuant to § 174.05, or which bear words such as “Stop,”
“Slow,” “Caution,” “Danger,” “Warning,” “Look,” or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that creates a danger of
interfering with, misleading, or confusing motorists or other individuals;
however, use of the words listed in this division (C) is not prohibited if
the use does not create such danger.



   (D)   Imitation of emergency vehicles or lights. Signs or displays
that may be mistakenly construed as a light of an emergency or road equipment
vehicle, or lights resembling danger or emergency lights of any kind.



   (E)   Visual impairment and obstruction. Signs that hide any traffic
or roadway sign, signal, or device from view, as well as signs that obstruct
the visibility or use of any door, fire escape, stairway, or any opening
intended to provide entrance or exit for any structure.



      (1)   No sign or sign structure is allowed at any location
where it may interfere with a motorist’s or pedestrian’s view of other
traffic or pedestrians at any street or highway intersection, or in such a
manner as to materially impede view at an intersection of a street, highway,
alley, or driveway with a railroad grade crossing.



      (2)   On a corner lot, no sign is allowed in the area bounded
by: (a) lines on each side of the corner, drawn along the edge of pavement on
each side and extended toward the intersection to the point of intersection;
and (b) a line joining the points on each edge of pavement line 25 feet from
the point of their intersection. For purposes of illustration, this area is
depicted as the “Sight Triangle” in Figure 1, below.  No advertising
device shall be erected or maintained in the sight triangle unless the
triangular area is occupied by an existing building or structure. In that
event, no advertising devices shall be erected or maintained closer to the
intersection than the building or structure itself. However, a wall sign that
does not protrude/project more than 12 inches may be attached to the building
or structure.







 







 



   (F )    Obscenity. Signs that contain statements, words or pictures
which are obscene as defined by I.C. 35-49-2-1.



   (G)   Encroachment. Signs that are located in any right-of-way or
thoroughfare setback including projecting signs and signs posted on utility
poles or street signs, except pursuant to an encroachment permit approved by
the town and the entity that owns the structure, and by the Executive
Director of the Commission in the case of signs located in a thoroughfare
setback.



   (H)   Vehicle and trailer signs. Any sign attached to, or placed on,
a vehicle or trailer moving or parked on public or private property except
for signs meeting the following requirements:



      (1)    The primary purpose or use of the vehicle or trailer
for any period of time must not be the display of signs.



      (2)    The sign must be:



         (a)   A magnetic sign attached to a steel body panel of
the vehicle or trailer;



         (b)   An adhesive decal, including an adhesive vehicle
wrap;



         (c)   Painted onto the vehicle itself;



         (d)   A delivery vehicle sign; or



         (e)   An integral part of the vehicle or equipment as
originally designed by the manufacturer.



      (3)    The vehicle or trailer on which the sign appears is in
operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public
streets when applicable, and actively used or available for use in the daily
function of the business to which such signs relate.



   (I)   Signs that are improperly illuminated/shielded resulting in
glare being shed across property lines creating a nuisance for any abutting
property owner or into any thoroughfare creating a hazard or distraction for
traffic.



   (J)   Flashing signs. Signs that pose significant distraction to
drivers by the rapid and repeated changes in the sign illumination.



   (K)   Parking interference. Signs placed in such a manner as to
displace, obstruct or interfere with the use of a required parking space, and
signs placed in any parking or access aisle without approval by the
Commission.



   (L)    Electronic message signs are not allowed in a historic
district which has been established by ordinance or recognized by the
National Register of Historic Places.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.07  IDENTIFICATION OF SIGNS.



   Signs of the following classes, except temporary signs, shall carry the
imprint of the licensed erector in clearly legible letters, as follows:



   (A)   On projecting signs, flat signs, pole signs, and ground signs,
the imprint of the licensed erector may be applied in the border thereof in
color or by metal tag substantially and permanently attached to each sign in
such a place on the sign as can be seen from the sidewalk or street below the
signs after the signs are erected.



   (B)   On all roof signs, the imprint of the licensed erector may be
applied in the border thereof, in color, or on a separate metal panel
attached to the framework of the sign.



   (C)    In case of re-hanging or re-erection of any sign required to
carry the imprint of the erector, the new erector, if different than the
original, shall remove the imprint of the former erector and place its own
imprint on the sign.



   (D)   All electrical signs shall meet the specifications of and be
labeled with the Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing mark in a place visible
and legible from the ground after installation.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.08  INSPECTION OF SIGNS.



   (A)   All signs, signboards, projecting signs, and roof signs for
which a permit has been issued may be inspected by the Executive Director or
a designee of such official, and if found to have been well constructed,
supported, braced, and painted in accordance with approved plans submitted to
the Department, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, then a
certificate of inspection shall be issued, upon request, without charge to
the owner or erector.



   (B)    If, upon inspection, a sign of any class is found unsafe,
insecure, corroded, or subject to corrosion, so that the sign may become
unsafe or insecure, then the owner shall be required to make the sign safe
and secure by causing the necessary repairs, additions, paint, or other
matters to be made or done within 1 week from the time of notification in
writing to that effect from the Executive Director or a designee of such
official. If the notice is not complied with within the time specified, the
Executive Director or a designee of such official shall cause the sign to be
removed, the expense to be assessed against the owner of the sign. It shall
also be the duty of the Executive Director or a designee of such official to
order the removal of unsafe signs for which a permit and license is not
required herein. The maintenance of the sign in an unsafe condition after
receipt of notice to remove or repair the sign shall be a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.09  GROUND OR MONUMENT SIGNS.



   (A)   Permits shall be required for the erection of all ground signs
and monument signs.  No ground sign or monument sign shall be erected to a
height greater than 30 feet above finished grade. However, no permits shall
be required where signs pertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a piece of
property are erected by the owner or agent on the real estate.



   (B)   Ground or monument signs shall be thoroughly braced and
constructed to withstand a wind pressure of 30 pounds per square foot in all
directions.



   (C)   All ground or monument signs shall be properly and securely
embedded and anchored in the ground and all signs of steel construction shall
have braces and supporting members which extend into the ground embedded in
concrete or secured to masonry, anchors, or piers.



   (D)   No ground or monument sign shall be so erected as to obstruct
free access to any building, nor shall the signs be so erected as to unduly
obstruct the view of traffic on intersecting streets or highways.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.10  FLAT WALL SIGNS.



   (A)   Permits shall be required for any flat wall sign that is
greater than 60 square feet in area.  The signs shall be strongly built and
thoroughly secured to the building as described herein.  No permit shall be
required for any flat wall sign which is painted directly on a wall.



   (B)    For all flat wall signs larger than 60 square feet in area
and attached to a wall (e.g., not merely painted on the wall), a permit shall
be required and, if the signs are more than 2 feet high or more than 100
square feet in area, they shall be constructed of metal or of wood covered
with metal not less than No. 30 U.S. standard gauge, or of glass, porcelain,
or other hard, durable, nonflammable materials, except that ornamental
moldings, top boards, and wood letters not over 3 feet high shall not be
required to be covered with metal. Any flat wall sign attached to the
cornices or other projection of any building in such fashion that any part of
the sign projects more than 12 inches from the face of the building shall be
made entirely of metal or of glass, porcelain, or other hard, durable,
nonflammable materials.



   (C)    All flat wall signs shall be securely attached to structural
members of the building with metal brackets, expansion bolts, through bolts,
or lag screws. Nails and wire shall not be used for this purpose and no flat
wall sign shall be dependent for support on any cornice, window sill, window
frame parapet, or other projection. No flat wall signs shall be more than 12
inches thick and no sign projecting over public property shall be created
less than 8 feet above any sidewalk, or less than 15 feet above any alley,
but the signs, if projecting not more than 4 inches into public property,
shall not be limited as to height above a sidewalk or alley. In no case shall
any flat wall signs be allowed to cover any windows or exit doors.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.11  PROJECTING SIGNS.



   (A)   No permit shall be required for any projecting sign less than
2 square feet in area and not projecting more than 3 feet from the face of
the building. The signs shall be strongly constructed entirely of metal or
other incombustible material and shall be thoroughly secured to the building
with the bottom thereof not less than 8 feet 6 inches above the ground level.



   (B)    Permits shall be required for projecting signs not designated
in division (A) above, and all such signs, including letters, shall be
constructed entirely of metal, glass, porcelain, or other hard, durable,
incombustible material. All projecting signs shall be supported by strong
steel brackets attached to the walls of the building with through bolts,
expansion bolts, or some other equally secure method, and shall be braced and
held firmly in place with soft iron or steel cables of adequate strength.



   (C)    Projecting signs shall be further limited in size and
projection as follows. No projecting signs shall be allowed to extend beyond
the curb line without the permission of the Board of Public Safety and, if
permission is given, the signs shall be erected at a height of 18 feet above
the street. In cases where a street is widened, all signs on the street shall
be made to conform with the provisions of this chapter relating to the
installation of the signs.



   (D)   No sign shall project out from the street or alley line a
greater distance than the least distance measured from the sign to the
nearest side or adjoining property line without permission of the owner or
tenant of the adjoining property. Street or alley lines shall not be
considered adjoining property lines for the location of signs.



   (E)    Except for signs noted in division (A) above, there shall not
be more than 1 projecting sign for each 20 feet of street frontage of any
building, but buildings having less than 20 feet of frontage may have 1 sign.
There shall not be less than 10 feet horizontally between any 2 signs erected
on the same building. The requirements as to 10 feet separation shall not
apply to the 2 halves of “V” shaped signs made in 2 portions joined at 1
point similar to a letter “V.”



   (F)    No sign shall be erected so that any part of the sign,
including cables, guys, or other wires, will be within 4 feet of any electric
light pole, street lamp, or other public utility pole or standard. The
minimum clearance of a sign from public utility conductors shall be not less
than 24 inches for conductors carrying not over 600 volts, and 36 inches for
conductors carrying more than 600 volts. In all cases where a sign is
proposed to be hung adjacent to an electrical conductor carrying a higher
voltage than 600 volts, the erection of the sign shall not be made until a
representative of the public utilities company overhead inspection department
shall have examined and approved the conditions.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.12  MARQUEE SIGNS.



   Signs not complying as to height above ground level as provided in the
preceding sections may be erected on marquees if the signs comply with the
following provisions. Permits shall be obtained for these signs.



   (A)   All marquee signs shall be made entirely of metal, porcelain,
glass, or other hard, incombustible material, and the use of wood, wall
board, cloth, or paper signs in, on, or under any marquee is prohibited.



   (B)    The wording on the marquee signs shall be confined to the
following: the name of the proprietor or firm occupying the premises, the
name of the building or institution, and the general business or trade
carried on, such as jeweler, café, or dancing. The marquee signs may be used
to designate the location of the building entrance, box office, or the
program of a theater. No sign shall advertise any particular article of
merchandise, nor shall the sign refer to price or reduction in price.



   (C)    The height of the signs shall be limited to the equivalent of
1/5 the length of the front of the marquee. The bottom of the signs shall not
be less than 8 feet 6 inches above any sidewalk. The signs shall not extend
beyond the ends of the marquee.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.13  BANNER SIGNS.



   No permit from the Executive Director shall be required for the
erection of any banner sign. However, such signs shall not be installed for
more than 60 days and shall not exceed 100 square feet. When 2 or more signs
are erected on any building, the signs shall be separated vertically by the
height of 1 story less the height of the sign, or horizontally by a distance
of at least 9 feet. All signs shall be strongly constructed and securely
attached flat against the building (except those described as an encroachment
outlined below). The signs shall not obstruct any door, window, or fire
escape, and shall be removed as soon as torn or damaged and prior to the
expiration of the time limit. Additionally, no person shall cause to be
installed any banner sign over or upon any street, public sidewalk, or
right-of-way without obtaining an encroachment permit therefor from the Town
Council. A liability insurance certificate in the amount of $1,000,000 shall
be provided to the Board of Public Works prior to erecting any banner sign
over a street or right-of-way. The insurance certificate shall name the Town
of Chandler and its officials and employees as additional insureds.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.14  ROOF SIGNS.



   (A)   Permits shall be required for all roof signs. All roof signs
shall be constructed entirely of metal or other incombustible material. The
minimum clearance between the lower edge of the sign and the roof surface of
support shall be not less than 5 feet. No roof sign shall be placed so that
the face of the sign shall come within 3 feet of the inner plane of the outer
wall of the building on which the sign is placed. No roof sign shall exceed
100 feet in height above the mean level of the roof.



   (B)    In all cases where the extreme height of a roof sign exceeds
24 feet above the level of the roof, all sign loads and reactions shall be
carried directly to masonry walls or structural columns of the building on
which the sign is placed, unless the roof construction is designed to carry
the weight of the sign, and the wind load of the sign in addition to other
required loads. When the signs are erected on roofs which are not designed to
take the sign load, the roof beams, girders, or roof construction shall not
be used to resist any vertical reactions except uplift due to wind.



   (C)    No solid roof sign shall be erected of a greater height than
24 feet above the level of the roof without obtaining a permit therefor from
the Board of Public Works.



   (D)   Complete structural plans and details shall be submitted for
all roof signs showing the construction of the sign and of the building on
which the sign is to be placed. The maximum stresses in the frame of the
sign, as well as the stresses in the supporting structure, shall not exceed
the safe stresses as permitted in this chapter.



   (E)    All joints and connections of roof signs over 25 feet in
height above the roof level shall be made with rivets or with finished bolts
driven tightly to a snug fit in well-reamed holes which shall be in perfect
alignment.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.15  POSTER ADVERTISING PANELS.



   Permits shall be obtained for these signs.



   (A)   All poster advertising panels shall be designed to resist a
horizontal wind pressure of at least 30 pounds to the square foot with
stresses not exceeding those allowed elsewhere in this chapter for the
materials used in their construction. Poster advertising panels may be framed
with wood standards not less than 4 inches by 6 inches, with back bracing and
framing to take a plain surface of sheet metal not less than No. 38 gauge.



   (B)   All poster advertising panels shall be located entirely within
the lot lines and shall not extend further than the building lines. Where
panels face 2 streets, the junction point shall be arranged for a cut-off
corner of not less than 12 feet to be set at an angle of 45 degrees joined to
the sections facing each street.



   (C)   All panels shall have the owner’s name on a separate board,
not to exceed 12 inches high, placed either above or below the panel, and no
panel shall bear more than 1 name plate.



   (D)   All panels erected under the terms of this chapter shall be
kept in repair and no fee shall be charged for erection, resurfacing, repair,
or maintenance of any poster advertising panel erected by a concern who is
licensed.



   (E)   No person shall scatter, daub, or leave any paste, glue, or
similar substance used for pasting  materials on any public walk or
pavement, or scatter or throw any old bills or waste material removed from
panels on any thoroughfare or private ground.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.16  PERMITTED USE BY DISTRICT.



   (A)   In all districts, signs (except for highway signs in C-1, C-2,
C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and M-3 Districts) must not be erected or maintained
unless they conform to the requirements shown on the following Table
174.16(A).



   TABLE 174.16(A)



 


DISTRICT

 

R1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-O, R-MH1

 

C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4

 

M-1, M-2, M-3



Max. area of signage
 
10 square feet
 
300 square feet
 
700 square feet


Number of signs per street frontage
 

1

 

2

 

3



Electronic message signs (EMS)
 
Special use permit required; only allowed as accessory to a different
established special use.
 
Permitted, subject to § 174.16(B)
 
Permitted, subject to § 174.16(B)


Max. area for EMS (see Figure 2)
 
18 sq. ft. of 100 sq. ft. allowed in special use
 
32 sq. ft. of max. area of signage allowed
 
50 sq. ft. of max. area of signage allowed


Max. ht.* of EMS (top of electronic screen, measured from grade)
 
6 ft.

(see Figure 2)
 
Subject to overall sign height.
 
Subject to overall sign height.


Special provisions and restrictions
 
100 sq. ft. if approved as a special use by the BZA
 
Flat signs: Maximum coverage of wall area 50%; Canopy signs: maximum
extension above canopy 6 ft.
 
N/A



 







 



   (B)    The following requirements shall apply to electronic message
signs:



      (1)    All electronic message signs shall be located at least
200 feet from any residence/dwelling.



      (2)    The specific requirements for electronic message signs
are:



         (a)    In Agricultural, Conservation, R-1, R-2, R-O, and
R-MH1 Districts, electronic message signs are not permitted unless a special
use (other than for the electronic message sign) has been established on the
site.



         (b)    In C-1 and C-2 Districts, electronic message
signs must obtain special use approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals.



         (c)    In the C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and M-3 Districts,
electronic message signs are a permitted use and special use approval is not
required.



         (d)    The size of an electronic message sign shall not
exceed the maximum area for the EMS allowed in Table 174.16(A) for the
district or use.



         (e)    Message duration. Static message displays for
on-premises electronic message signs shall display each message for at least
4 seconds before transitioning to another message; however, such messages
displayed on an electronic message sign that is only capable of displaying 1
line of text at a time and that has a display area no more than 12 inches in
height shall display each line of text for at least 3 seconds before
transitioning to another line of text.



         (f)    Only 1 electronic message sign per single-use
commercial lots/parcels; and for uses such as commercial shopping centers,
institutional campuses, and the like which could incorporate multiple parcels
under common ownership with unified, integrated development such as a shared
roof, facade, parking, drainage or similar facilities.



   (C)    Highway signs in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and M-3
Districts must conform to the requirements shown on the following Table
174.16(C). For the purpose of applying the spacing requirements of Table
174.16(C) below, the following must apply:



      (1)    Distances must be measured parallel to the centerline
of the highway;



      (2)    Measurements for the spacing between signs must be
based on when the construction of the sign:



         (a)    Received final approval by the Commission
measuring from the first sign to have received that approval; or



         (b)   If the Commission has not given final approval to
a sign that will be limited by the spacing requirement once it is
constructed, then:



            1.   Measured from the first sign given a building
permit that is not cancelled or void at the time of measurement; or



            2.   When no permit has been issued that is still
valid, measured from the first fully complete application for a building
permit received by the Code Official that has not been cancelled or which is
void.



      (3)    Back-to-back, multiple signs on 1 freestanding pole,
double-faced, or V-type signs must be considered as 1 sign.



   TABLE 174.16(C)



 


DISTRICT

 

C-1, C-2

 

C-3, C-4

 

M-1, M-2, M-3





Max. area of signage
 
300 square feet
 
700 square feet
 
700 square feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet


Minimum setback from right-of-way
 
Equal to zoning code setback requirements


Minimum setback from right-of-way: controlled access thoroughfares*
 
Equal to zoning code setback requirements


Minimum spacing between signs: controlled access thoroughfares*
 
Minimum 500 feet; 1,000 feet along same side of street
 
Minimum 500 feet; 1,000 feet along same side of street
 
Minimum 500 feet; 1,000 feet along same side of street


Minimum spacing between signs
 
Minimum 400 feet; 800 feet along same side of street
 
Minimum 400 feet; 800 feet along same side of street
 
Minimum 400 feet; 800 feet along same side of street


Minimum distance from residential property
 
200 feet from a residential dwelling; 200 feet from property line of
undeveloped residential district property; absolute minimum 60 feet from any
residential property line


Minimum distance from public park, school, church, or museum
 
300 feet


Electronic message signs (EMS)
 
Permitted, subject to § 174.16(B)
 
Permitted
 
Permitted


300-foot spacing from a residential dwelling or undeveloped R District


Max. area for EMS (see Figure 2)
 
32 sq. ft. of max. area of signage allowed
 
12.5 sq. ft. of max. area of signage allowed
 
50 sq. ft. of max. area of signage allowed


Special provisions and restrictions
 
Nonilluminated signs only after 10:00 p.m.
 
Height limit increased along elevated roads; Maximum 65 feet
 
Height limit increased along elevated roads; Maximum 65 feet


* Streets defined within Chandler Municipal Code.




 



§ 174.17  MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   When the product, business, or service that is advertised on a
sign is abandoned or altered, or when the event or purpose advertised by the
sign has passed or no longer exists, the sign and its structural elements
must be removed or altered within 30 days to depict an existing product,
person, business, service, or event, or to communicate an existing purpose.
The owner and tenant of the land are equally responsible for removal or
alteration of the sign and its structural elements.



   (B)   If copy is not displayed for a period exceeding 60 days, the
permit for a sign may be revoked and the sign and structure may be removed,
or required to be removed, pursuant to this section.



   (C)   Except in the case of a face change of a sign or as otherwise
provided in this section, prior to the alteration of a sign or the erection
of a previously removed or abandoned sign, an improvement location permit and
compliance with this chapter are required.



   (D)   Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and
good structural condition at all times including the replacement of defective
parts, painting, re-painting, cleaning, and other acts required for
maintenance of the sign. Compliance shall be required with all standards of
this chapter and with all standards in this code that are applicable to signs.



   (E)   A sign is considered not functional when any of the following
conditions exist:



      (1)    Its essential elements are no longer readable or
recognizable;



      (2)    It is physically obstructed from view;



      (3)    A condition of dilapidation or danger exists;



      (4)    The area that is leased for or within 25 feet of a sign
is not kept free of weeds, debris, or refuse; or



      (5)    Copy is not displayed for a period of 60 days.



   (F)   The Executive Director of the Planning Department, or a
designee of such official, has the right of entry to inspect signs to
determine whether they are functional.



   (G)   If a sign is not made to comply with adequate safety
standards, not kept in a presentable or good structural condition, is not
functional, has been abandoned, or is not removed or altered as required
under division (A) above, its removal will be required as follows:



      (1)    The Executive Director of the Planning Department or
designee(s) thereof shall provide a 10-day written notice to the owner or
lessee of the sign in violation to either remove the sign or to bring it into
compliance.



      (2)    Upon failure to comply with the written notice of
violation, the Executive Director of the Planning Department, or the
respective designee, may do either or both of the following:



         (a)    Remove the sign, its structure, or both, with all
cost of removal to be borne by all owner(s) or lessee(s) of the sign, jointly
and severally;



         (b)    Issue a notice of violation with fines pursuant
to this code.



      (3)    The Executive Director or designee(s) may remove a
sign, its structure, or both, immediately and without notice and with all
cost of removal to be borne by the owner(s) and lessee(s) of the sign,
jointly and severally, if in the opinion of the Executive Director or
designee the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat
to the safety of the public.



   (H)   When relocation or removal of a sign becomes necessary, and
documentation is provided from the owner of the site that the relocation of
the sign is necessary due to construction, expansion, or other development
planned for the site where the sign is located, the sign may be moved by the
sign owner to another location on that same site within 20 feet of the
original location of the sign, providing the location within 20 feet of the
original sign does not create nonconformity of the sign. Once the sign has
been removed from its original location, it may remain removed for a period
of up to 90 days without requiring a permit, and will be considered to remain
in existence at its original location or within 20 feet thereof during that
period for purposes of locating other signs. At or before the expiration of
the 90-day period, a new sign permit must be obtained for the sign being
relocated or replaced. Permit fees may be waived if the sign structure is the
same configuration and erected in the same manner as the original sign and is
of the same or smaller size than the original sign. Removal or relocation of
a sign under this division (I) does not waive or alter the need for permits
required by the Planning Department or any other agency.



   (I)   When replacement of a sign becomes necessary, and
documentation is provided from the Executive Director, OSHA, or other
governmental agency of competent jurisdiction that replacement of the sign is
necessary due to the unsafe or dangerous condition of the sign, a safety
upgrade by the sign owner is allowed on that same site within 20 feet of the
original location of the sign, provided the safety upgrade or the location
within 20 feet of the original location does not create nonconformity of the
sign. Once the sign has been removed from its original location, it may
remain removed for a period of up to 90 days without requiring a permit, and
will be considered to remain in its existence at its original location or
within 20 feet thereof during that period for purposes of locating other
signs. At or before the expiration of the 90-day period, a new sign permit
must be obtained for the sign being relocated or replaced. Permit fees may be
waived if the sign structure is the same configuration and erected in the
same manner as the original sign, is of the same or smaller size as the
original structure, and documentation is provided from the Executive
Director, OSHA, or other governmental agency of competent jurisdiction that
replacement of the sign is necessary due to the unsafe or dangerous condition
of the sign. Removal or relocation of a sign under this division (I) does not
waive or alter the need for permits required by the Planning Department,
Executive Director, or any other agency.



   (J)   When a legal nonconforming sign is removed, no permit may be
issued to replace the sign.



   (K)   Electronic message signs shall be immediately turned off in
the event of a malfunction.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 174.18  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the enforcement
of the requirements of this chapter shall be as follows:



      (1)    The Executive Director of the Planning Department or
designee thereof will issue a warning letter to the person(s) committing, in
whole or in part, a violation. The letter will identify the violation, set
out required corrective measures, and specify the time frame for such
corrective measures.



      (2)    In the event there is no response or action taken by
the violator within 10 days of the notice of the violation, 1 additional
violation letter shall be reissued explaining the violation and making demand
that the violator comply or risk fine.



      (3)    If the violator fails to respond to the notice of
violation after 30 days from the issuance of the original letter sent in
division (A)(1) above, the Executive Director of the Planning Department or
designee thereof shall issue a notice of violation with fines pursuant to §
157.16.



      (4)    If at any time a person to whom a violation notice has
been issued commits another signage violation in regards to this chapter,
whether of the same section or otherwise, the Executive Director of the
Planning Department shall issue a notice of violation along with fines
pursuant to § 157.16 without any further warning or notice. This provision
does not apply in the event the Board of Zoning Appeals or a court of
competent jurisdiction has found that the person did not commit any of the
alleged violations referred to in the prior notices.



   (B)    The enforcement procedures in this chapter are subject to
modifications at the discretion of the Executive Director of the Planning
Department to include additional notices, extensions of time limits, or
expedited or delayed steps to address immediate threats to public safety.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 174.19  SIGN TABLE.




SIGN TABLE




 

Sign Type
 

R-1

 

R-1A

 

R-1B

 

R-1C

 

R-1D

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

R-O

 

R-MH1

 

R-MH2

 

C-1

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

M-1

 

M-2

 

M-3





Address
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Banner
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Poster advertising panels (Billboard)
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Government flag
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Government sign
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Ground or monument sign
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Flashing
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Flat wall
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Marquee
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Projecting
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

S



Roof
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S

 

N

 

S

 

S

 

S



Temporary
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A



Traffic
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A




Table Key:

A   Sign permitted without Planning Commission approval. No sign permit
required when installed in conformance with code.

P   Sign permitted subject to Planning Commission approval. No sign permit
required depending on the size and location.

S   Sign permitted subject to Planning Commission approval. A sign permit
is required.

N   Sign not allowed.

 




 



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



CHAPTER 175: ADMINISTRATIVE AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS



Section



   175.01   Administration



   175.02   Amendments



   175.03   Variances



   175.04   Conditional use permit



   175.05   Special uses



   175.06   Definitions



   175.07   Special use permit procedure



   175.08   Restrictions applicable to particular special uses



   175.09   Discontinuance of special use



   175.10   Time limits



   175.11   Pre-existing uses



   175.12   Severability



   175.13   Violations and penalties



§ 175.01  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Enforcement. Except as otherwise noted herein, the Plan
Commission, through its officers and employees, shall enforce the provisions
of this title.



   (B)   Improvement location permit. No building or structure except
government agencies, government owned and/or operated utilities, and
buildings whose primary use is in connection with the production of
agricultural crops and livestock and fowl, other than residences may be
erected, move, added to, or structurally altered unless an improvement
location permit has been issued.



   (C)   Application for improvement location permit.  Application for
improvement location permit must be made in duplicate on a form prescribed by
the APC and accompanied by a scale drawing, showing the dimensions and the
shape of the lot to be built upon; the size and location of existing
buildings; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alteration. The application must include any other information that is
required by the Executive Director and is necessary for the administration
and enforcement of this title, including but not limited to existing or
proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building
and land; the number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the
building is designed to accommodate; and the conditions existing on the lot.
Any residential application for an improvement location permit shall be
reviewed by the Executive Director.  Any non-residential application for an
improvement location permit shall be forwarded to the Town of Chandler
Planning Commission for site review thru the Executive Director.



   (D)   Proof of compliance. Shall be provided to the Executive
Director, for sewer and water tap permit numbers from the appropriate water
and sewer companies, municipalities, or the applicable Health Department must
accompany the application. Where a state law requires a release prior to
construction from the State Building Commissioner for a proposed structure,
no improvement location permit will be issued until the release is obtained
by the applicant by the appropriate state agency. Prior to issuance of an
improvement location permit, the applicant must provide proof of compliance
with all state building codes and other applicable regulations. One copy of
the application shall be returned to the applicant by the Executive Director
after approval or disapproval of the application. The second copy similarly
marked, shall be retained by the APC. If any application is not approved, the
Executive Director shall state the reasons for its action of the
application.  When permits are issued for lots located in subdivisions for
which streets have not been accepted for maintenance by the town, the Plan
Commission shall cause to be printed on the face of the permit the following:



   “The streets in your subdivision have not been accepted for
maintenance by the Town of Chandler.”



   (E)   After a permit is issued and construction has commenced it
shall be unlawful to bury any construction debris including trees and tree
stumps during or at completion of any improvement made on a parcel of real
estate.  Burying of any construction debris is a violation and subject to a
violation fee.



   (F)   Certificates of occupancy.  It is unlawful to use or occupy
or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, converted, or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use or structures until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this title. A non-conforming structure or use may be
maintained, renewed and changed only after a certificate of occupancy has
been issued stating specifically how the non-conforming use differs from the
provisions of this title. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
for a period not exceeding 6 months during alteration or partial occupancy of
a building. The APC may require as a condition precedent safeguards that will
reasonably protect the safety of the occupants and the public.



   (G)   Expiration of improvement location permits. If the work
described in an improvement location permit has not been started within 6
months from the date it was issued, the permit shall expire and written
notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. If the work described
in any improvement location permit has not been substantially completed
within 1 year of the date it was issued, the permit shall expire and written
notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with the
notice that all work shall cease until a new permit has been obtained.



   (H)   Construction and use. Improvement location permits or
certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the APC or the Executive Director authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications and no other use arrangement, or construction.



   (I)   Fees and expenses for notice.



      (1)   Each application for an improvement location permit
shall be accompanied by a fee set forth herein, except that no fee is
required for a building, structure, or improvement of a size less than 25
square feet. In the event construction has started without first obtaining an
improvement location permit and the Zoning Inspector for the Town of Chandler
Plan Commission has posted the site, an additional fee of $200 is required.
Start of construction is when any material is used.



      (2)   (a)   All persons applying for petitions to rezone
property, variances, conditional uses, special exemptions, appeals, zoning
certifications, and review by the Department of Natural Resources of an
improvement location permit in a flood hazard area shall accompany
applications with the following fees payable to the Town of Chandler:



         Improvement local permit: $50.



         (b)   (Fees for the following items include the costs of
the public notice and for up to 6 certified letter notices. If more than 6
certified letter notices are required, an additional charge of $10 each for
each certified letter notice over the initial 6.)



 



Petition to rezone
 
$200 per lot


Variance
 
$200 per lot


Special exemption
 
$200


Appeals
 
$200


Zoning certificate
 
$25 per lot


Conditional or special use
 
$200


Certificate of occupancy
 
$25


Subdivision plat
 
 


   Major (3 lots or more)
 
$250, plus $20 per lot


   Minor (2 lots)
 
$150


   Replat
 
$150


Copies of any documentation
 
$0.25 ($0.50 if legal sized)




 



      (3)   On all work having a value of $1,000 or more (unless
otherwise specified herein), for structural, electrical, HVAC, and plumbing
the following fees shall be paid.



 


Type of Construction

 

Improvement Location Permit Fee

 

Inspection Fee





Single-family dwelling
 
$0.10 per sq. ft. ($150 minimum; includes electrical, HVAC, plumbing,
driveway, and culvert)
 
$30


Two-family dwelling (duplex)
 
$0.10 per sq. ft. ($175 minimum; includes electrical, HVAC, plumbing,
driveway, and culvert)
 
$30 per unit


Multi-family dwellings (3 or more units)
 
$0.12 per sq. ft. ($200 minimum; includes electrical, HVAC, plumbing, 1
driveway, and 1 culvert per building)
 
$30 per unit


Manufactured (mobile) home (single wide)
 
$0.10 per sq. ft. ($95 minimum; includes electrical, HVAC, plumbing,
driveway, and culvert)
 
$30


Garage (unattached), pole barns, storage structures, and accessory buildings
with a permanent foundation
 
$0.10 per sq. ft. ($50 minimum)
 
$30


Addition to existing building, including attached garage
 
$0.10 per sq. ft. ($50 minimum)
 
$30


Interior remodeling, structural alteration (over $1,500)
 
$50
 
Included with permit


Exterior remodeling (siding, windows, doors, etc. – over $1,500)
 
$50
 
Included with permit


Decks, porches, yard barns, metal storage buildings, gazebos, and ramps
 
$40 (no charge if under 50 sq. ft.)
 
Included with permit


Metal carport
 
$40
 
Included with permit


Fences (new)
 
$30
 
Included with permit


Fences (replacing old fence with no alterations)
 
Permit required – no fee
 
No fee


Fences (replacing old fence with alterations)
 
$30
 
Included with permit


Roof repair/replacement (5 square feet or more)
 
$50
 
Included with permit


Driveway culvert (new)
 
$40
 
Included with permit


Driveway culvert (replacing)
 
Permit required – no fee
 
No fee


Driveway
 
$30
 
Included with permit


In-ground swimming pool (requires fence)
 
$75
 
Included with permit


Above ground swimming pool (deeper than 36 inches of water) (requires fence)
 
$30
 
Included with permit


Spa or hot tub
 
$30
 
Included with permit


Electrical
 
$35
 
Included with permit


Electrical inspection
 
$35 (includes turn-on notice to Vectren)
 
Included with permit


HVAC
 
$35
 
Included with permit


Plumbing
 
$35
 
Included with permit


Demolition (any structure over 500 sq. ft.)
 
$40
 
 


Storm shelter
 
Permit required – no fee
 
No fee


Business, commercial, hotel, and motel
 
$0.12 per sq. ft. ($200 minimum), plus $20 per unit for hotels and motels
 
$50


Industrial, warehouses, and bulk storage buildings
 
$0.16 per sq. ft. ($200 minimum)
 
$50


Church
 
$0.12 per sq. ft.
 
$50


Schools and libraries
 
$0.12 per sq. ft.
 
$50


Institutional (prison/jail)
 
$0.16 per sq. ft.
 
$50


Additions on commercial and industrial use buildings
 
Same as use of building listed above


Communication, radio, and TV towers
 
$1 per linear foot ($50 minimum)




 



      (4)   A violation fee of $200 will be required in addition to
the regular fee for any application to locate a mobile home, or manufactured
home, or modular home if the home has been moved onto property and posted as
a violation by the Zoning Inspector for the Town of Chandler Plan Commission.



      (5)   All fees include the costs for legal notice of public
hearing. No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this section shall be
returnable to the applicant or petitioner. Fees may be adjusted from time to
time by the APC following approval from Town Council.



      (6)   A violation fee of $500 will be imposed if it is
determined by the Executive Director that construction debris has been buried
during or upon completion of construction of any improvement made on a parcel
of real estate for which an improvement location permit has or has not been
issued. The requirement and/or receipt of payment of the violation fee is not
a waiver of the provisions of any other local ordinances regulating the
disposal of waste.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 175.99



§ 175.02  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   General. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general
welfare, or good zoning practice require the amendment, supplement or change
in the regulations, district boundaries or reclassification of property, now
or hereafter established by this title or amendments thereto, the amendment
may be proposed by:



      (1)   A member of a participating legislative body, to that
body;



      (2)   The Plan Commission to the Town Council of the town; or



      (3)   By petition of the owners of property of 50% or more of
the area involved in the petition either to the body having legislative
authority over the land or to the Plan Commission. Any proposed ordinance for
the amendment, supplement, change, or repeal of this title shall be referred
to the Plan Commission for consideration and report before any final action
is taken by a legislative body.



   (B)   Area for rezoning. In case of a petition for a change in the
zoning of property, the Plan Commission may consider whether the area
described in the original petition should be enlarged, reduced or modified in
order to reflect the interests of the community and to correspond with the
Comprehensive Plan. The Plan Commission may recommend to the Town Council
such enlargement, reduction or modification if any, as it may deem desirable,
provided the Plan Commission properly notifies any and all persons affected
by such enlargement, reduction or modification.



   (C)   Plan Commission initiation. The Plan Commission shall carry on
a continual study of zoning, zoning techniques and the relation of zoning to
private developments and public improvements and the Comprehensive Plan for
the orderly growth of the town and may from time to time submit
recommendations as to the amendment of this title to the Town Council.



   (D)   Basis for recommendations. In reviewing and formulating
recommendations to the Town Council as to requested or proposed changes in
this title, the Plan Commission shall consider and evaluate the change in
relation to the following aspects of the Comprehensive Plan:



      (1)   The land use pattern of the town.



      (2)   The transportation system of the town.



      (3)   Other parts of the Comprehensive Plan deemed pertinent
by the Plan Commission.



      (4)   Whether there have been substantial changes in the
character, development of areas in or near the area under consideration.



      (5)   The purposes and objectives of this title as outlined in
Chapter 170.



   (E)   Conditional rezoning. No amendment to this title to rezone
property shall contain conditions, limitations, or requirements not
applicable to all other property in the zoning district to which the
particular property is rezoned.



   (F)   Limit on petitions. The following time limitations shall apply
to petitions for rezonings or variances:



      (1)   Whenever the Plan Commission has taken action to
recommend denial of a petition for rezoning of property, the Plan Commission
shall not consider any further petition for the same rezoning of any part of
the same property for a period of 6 months from the date of such action.



      (2)   Whenever the Board of Zoning Appeals has taken action to
recommend denial of a petition for a variance on any property, the Board
shall not consider a petition for a variance on any part of the same property
for a period of 6 months from the date of such action.



      (3)   Whenever the Town Council has changed the zoning of
property by an amendatory ordinance, the Town Council shall not consider any
petition for rezoning of any part of the same property for a period 6 months
from the effective date of the amendatory ordinance.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.03  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Board of Zoning Appeals. There is hereby created a Town of
Chandler Board of Zoning Appeals the members of which shall be appointed and
serve in accordance with state laws and all acts amendatory thereto.



   (B)   Requirements for variances. No recommendations shall be made
by the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance in the provisions or
requirements of this title unless the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the
following facts and conditions exist:



      (1)   That a variance is a means of relief which is available
only when some peculiar circumstance as to size or shape of the parcel of
land (and sometimes its location) is such that the literal application of the
provisions of this title would impair the owner’s rights to some reasonable
use of the property. A variance shall not be granted unless, in the first
place, there are such peculiar circumstances.



      (2)   That the circumstances which cause the hardship must be
peculiar to the property in question, or to such a small number of properties
that they clearly constitute marked exceptions to the property in the
neighborhood. If the circumstances cited as a basis for applying for the
variance are common to the property in the neighborhood the variance shall
not be granted.



      (3)   That after establishing the peculiar circumstance
applying to the property in question, it is next necessary to show that the
variance is required in order to reserve a substantial property right of the
petitioner. It is of no moment whatever that the denial of the variance might
deny to the property owner some opportunity to use his or her property in a
more profitable way or to sell it at a greater profit than is possible under
the terms of this title. The owner is entitled only to a reasonable use of
his or her property.



      (4)   That any alleged hardship is not self-created by any
person having an interest in the property nor is the result of mere disregard
for or ignorance of the provisions of this title.



      (5)   That the regulations to which the variance is sought
shall be modified as little as possible so that the substantial intent and
purpose of the regulations shall be preserved. The granting of the variance
should be made subject to such conditions as will constitute this end.



      (6)   That the variance will not result in substantial
detriment to adjacent property nor the surrounding neighborhood, and will not
be materially detrimental to the public welfare.



   (C)   Grant of variance. The grant of a variance by the Board of
Zoning Appeals in a proper case where practical difficulty and unnecessary
hardship shall have been found, shall be by resolution. The granting of a
variance shall not be by ordinance amending this title.



   (D)   Conditions and limitations. In connection with any
recommendation by the Board of Zoning Appeals for the granting of a variance,
the Board shall include any conditions, requirements or limitations to be
attached to the variance, which the Board may believe to be necessary and
desirable to protect adjacent properties and the surrounding neighborhood,
and to carry out the purposes and objectives of this title. The Board shall
incorporate such conditions, requirements and limitations in any grant of a
variance, which the Board in its judgment deems reasonable and appropriate to
effectuate the principles and purposes of this title.



   (E)   Time limit. Any variance granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals (“BZA”) shall expire 6 months after the effective date of such
action by the BZA, unless a permit based upon and incorporating the variance
is obtained within the aforesaid 6-month period, or unless the provisions of
the variance are adhered to within the aforesaid 6 months, provided good
cause is shown, and the application for extension shall be filed with the BZA
at the Planning Commission 2 weeks prior to the expiration of the aforesaid
6-month period.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.04  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Objectives. The principal objective of this title is to
provide for the proper location of all types of land use. To accomplish this
objective, various uses of land are classified by this title as being
permitted in 1 or more of the various districts established. However, it may
be necessary to permit certain uses in districts other than those in which
they are classified, because of their unusual characteristics or the large
area required for their operation. These uses require special consideration
as to their proper location in relation to adjacent uses or to the
development of the town, and to the various elements, of the land use plan
for the town. Because of the various types of uses and locations requiring
special consideration, the specific conditions under which each use may be
permitted also must be considered. Such uses, together with the conditions
controlling their operation are specifically designated as conditional uses
within this title.



   (B)   Approval. Approval may be granted by the BZA after a public
hearing provided the following findings are made:



      (1)   The use is deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare.



      (2)   The use is in harmony with the various elements of
objectives of the land use plan for the town.



      (3)   The use will not be detrimental or injurious to the
character of the development of the immediate neighborhood.



   (C)   Conditions and limitations. When granting approval for a
conditional use the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach any conditions or
limitations that it determines necessary for the protection of the
surrounding area in order to promote the intent and purpose of this title.



   (D)   Granting of conditional use. The grant of a conditional use,
by the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be by resolution and shall not be by
ordinance amending this title.



   (E)   Time limit. Any conditional or special use granted by the BZA
shall expire 6 months after the effective date of such action by the BZA,
unless a permit based upon and incorporating the conditional or special use
is obtained within the aforesaid 6-month period, or unless the provisions of
the conditional or special use are adhered to within the aforesaid 6 months,
provided good cause is shown, and the application for extension shall be
filed with the BZA at the Planning Commission 2 weeks prior to the expiration
of the aforesaid 6-month period.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.05  SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Objectives. The principal objective of this title is to
provide for the proper location of all types of land use. To accomplish this
objective, various uses of land are classified by this title as being
permitted in 1 or more of the various districts established. However, it may
be necessary to permit certain uses in districts other than those in which
they are classified, because of their unusual characteristics or the large
area required for their operation. These uses require special consideration
as to their proper location in relation to adjacent uses or to the
development of the town, and to the various elements, of the land use plan
for the town. Because of the various types of uses and locations requiring
special consideration, the specific conditions under which each use may be
permitted also must be considered. Such uses, together with the conditions
controlling their operation are specifically designated as special uses
within this title. These special uses are specifically listed in division
(G), “List of Special Use Designations,” below.  Procedures and
conditions for the approval of a special use are enumerated in this chapter.



   (B)   Special uses as secondary classifications.  Special uses are
secondary classifications.  If land is approved by the Municipal Planning
Commission for the town for a special use, the special use designation shall
be placed on the zoning map in addition to its primary zoning classification.



   (C)   Approval. Approval may be granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals after a public hearing provided the following findings are made:



      (1)   The use is deemed essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare.



      (2)   The use is in harmony with the various elements of
objectives of the land use plan for the town.



      (3)   The use will not be detrimental or injurious to the
character of the development of the immediate neighborhood.



   (D)   Conditions and limitations. When granting approval for a
special use the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach any conditions or
limitations that it determines necessary for the protection of the
surrounding area in order to promote the intent and purpose of this title.



   (E)   Granting of special use. The grant of a special use, by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be by resolution and shall not be by ordinance
amending this title.



   (F)   Time limit. Any conditional or special use granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall expire 6 months after the effective date of
such action by the Board, unless a permit based upon and incorporating the
conditional or special use is obtained within the aforesaid 6-month period,
or unless the provisions of the conditional or special use are adhered to
within the aforesaid 6 months, provided good cause is shown, and the
application for extension shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals at
the Plan Commission 2 weeks prior to the expiration of the aforesaid 6-month
period.



   (G)   Special use designation chart.



 


SPECIAL USE DESIGNATION

 

DESIGNATION





Schools
 
SU-01


Religious institutions
 
SU-02


Hospital, nursing homes, convalescent or care centers
 
SU-03


Cemeteries
 
SU-04


Public parks or public recreational facilities, including public athletic
facilities
 
SU-05


Resident occupied and resident-operated preschools, child day-care, adult
day-care facilities or similar operations which keep up to 12 persons on a
daily basis, but not including 24-hour care
 
SU-06


Temporary mobile office
 
SU-07


Commercial and private non-commercial recreational areas, uses and facilities
including country clubs, social centers, swimming pools, golf courses and
golf driving ranges
 
SU-08


Borrow pit and earth storage areas
 
SU-09


Commercial athletic fields, stadiums, or arenas
 
SU-10


Drive-in restaurant
 
SU-11


Public or private outdoor entertainment
 
SU-12


Airports or heliports
 
SU-13


Electronic message boards and/or signs with flashing, moving, rotating or
intermittent lights or animated messages
 
SU-14


Home occupations
 
SU-15


Adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, 
adult cabaret or juice bar, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
massage parlor, nude model studio, peep show facility or sexual encounter
center
 
SU-16


Radio, cellular antenna, microwave or television towers, wireless
communication facilities and/or towers for similar uses excluding exempt
public utilities; amateur radio antennas exceeding 20 feet
 
SU-17


Private aircraft landing facilities
 
SU-18


Self-storage warehouses facilities
 
SU-19


Kennel (without veterinary clinic or other accessory business)
 
SU-20




 



   Only those special uses which are indicated in the above, “Table B:
Special Uses Allowed Only in a Specific Zone,”shall be permitted in the
zoning districts indicated.



   (H)   Table “B” Special Uses Allowed Only in a Specific Zone.



 



 

SU
 
R-1
 
R-1A
 
R-1B
 
R-1C
 
R-1D
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-4
 
R-O
 
R-MH1
 
R-MH2
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
C-3
 
C-4
 
M-1
 
M-2
 
M- 3




1
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


2
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


5
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


6
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 


10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


15
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
 


17
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X


18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
 
 


20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X




 



   Only those special uses which are indicated in the above, “Table B:
Special Uses Allowed Only in a Specific Zone,” shall be permitted in the
zoning districts indicated.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE.  A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, 1 or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors
or similar machines or other image producing machines or gaming machine for
viewing by 5 or fewer persons per machine at any 1 time, in which a
substantial (30% or more) portion of the total presentation time of the
images so displayed is devoted to the showing of material which meets the
definition of “harmful to minors” as specified in I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as
it may from time to time be amended) and/or represent or display “sexual
conduct” as defined in I.C. 35-42-44 (and as it may from time to time be
amended).



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE. A
commercial establishment which has a substantial (30% or more) portion of its
revenues, floor space or advertising associated with the sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, of any 1 or more of the following;



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion picture cassettes, slides, tapes records,
CD-ROMs, DVDs, DVD-ROMs or other form of visual or audio representations
which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” under I.C. 35-49-2-2
(and as it may from time to time be amended) and/or represent or display
“sexual conduct” as defined in I.C. 35-42-44 (and as it may from time to
time be amended).



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with “sexual conduct” as defined in I.C. 35-42-44
(and as it may from time to time be amended).



   ADULT CABARET. A commercial establishment such as, but not limited to,
a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which feature live
performances which meet I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may from time to time be
amended) and/or represent or display “sexual conduct” as defined in I.C.
35-42-44 (and as it may from time to time be amended) to a clientele which
pays any form of consideration for such live performance.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An indoor or outdoor facility with a
capacity of 5 or more persons, where for any form of consideration, displays
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial (30% or more) of the
total revenue derived from or a substantial (30% or more) is devoted to the
showing of such material which meets the definition of “harmful to
minors” as specified in I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may from time to time be
amended) and/or represent or display “sexual conduct” as defined in I.C.
35-42-44 (and as it may from time to time be amended) for observation by
patrons.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment, either indoor or outdoor, which for any form of consideration,
regularly features live or displays of recorded performances, for a
substantial (30% or more) of the total presentation time are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of
“harmful to minors” under I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may from time to time
be amended) and/or represent or display “sexual conduct” as defined in
I.C. 35-42-44 (and as it may from time to time be amended).



   AIRPORT OR HELIPORT.  A tract of leveled land where all aircraft and
helicopters can take off and land.



   BORROW PIT.  A pit created to provide earth that can be used as fill
at another sit.



   CEMETERIES.  See § 170.03, Definitions.



   COMMERCIAL, ATHLETIC FIELDS, STADIUMS, OR AREAS.  Privately-owned
structures or surfaces for sporting events open to the public, generally a
for-profit organization.



   COUNTRY CLUB.  A suburban club for social and sports activities,
usually featuring a golf course.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.  A business involving the preparation and serving
of meals for consumption on the premises in a motor vehicle or off the
premises, normally requiring short amounts of time between the period of
ordering and serving of the food, which is served in edible or disposable
containers.



   EARTH STORAGE AREA.  The extent of a 2-dimensional surface enclosed
with a boundary to store fill from a borrow pit.



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARDS AND/OR SIGNS WITH FLASHING, MOVING, ROTATING,
OR INTERMITTENT LIGHTS OR ANIMATED MESSAGES.  A message center or large
bulletin board that serves a specific interest group used to convey specific
information.  Also see § 170.03, Definitions.



   GOLF COURSE.  A large tract of land laid out for golf.



   GOLF DRIVING RANGE.  A practice range for practicing golf shots.



   HELIPORT.  See AIRPORT OR HELIPORT above.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  See § 170.03, Definitions.



   HOSPITALS, NURSING HOMES, CONVALESCENT, HOSPICE CARE CENTERS, OR
CUSTODIAL CARE CENTERS.  Land, and buildings thereon, which are used for the
care of sick, injured or disabled persons.  Also see § 170.03, Definitions
for HOSPITAL.



   JUICE BAR.  An adult cabaret which does not serve alcoholic beverages.



   KENNEL (without veterinary clinic or other accessory business).  A
building or collection of buildings or a property in which many dogs are
housed and maintained.



   MASSAGE PARLOR.  An establishment that offers illicit sexual services
under the guise of therapeutic massage.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  A place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons, who pay any form of consideration, or
such display is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the
definition of “harmful to minors” under I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may
from time to time be amended) and/or represent or display “sexual
conduct” as defined in I.C. 35-42-44 (and as it may from time to time be
amended).  This definition shall not apply to colleges or universities who
are accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting organization.



   NUDITY.  The showing of human male or female genitals, public area
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or
the showing of covered male genitals in a discernable turgid state. BUTTOCK
means either of the 2 rounded prominences on the human torso that are
posterior to the hips and formed by the gluteal muscles to the hips and
underlying structures.



   PEEP SHOW FACILITY.  Any facility in which 1 or more patrons or
persons for any payment of consideration are allowed to view another person
or persons dance, remove their clothing, perform activities in the nude or
semi-nude in a room or outdoor facility in a manner which would meet the
definition of “harmful to minors” under I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may
from time to time be amended) and/or represent or display “sexual
conduct” as defined in I.C. 35-42-44 (and as it may from time to time be
amended).



   PRIVATE AIRCRAFT LANDING FACILITIES.  A privately owned tract of
leveled land where aircraft can take off and land.



   PUBLIC OR PRIVATE OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT.  Public or private events
including but not limited to performances of live or recorded forms of
entertainment with an attendance of more than 25 persons whether attendance
is free or for any form of consideration.



   PUBLIC PARKS OR PUBLIC RECREATION FACILITIES.  Land, and building
thereon, owned by the State of Indiana, Warrick County or the Town of
Chandler, Indiana which are open to the general public for recreational
activities.



   RADIO, CELLULAR ANTENNA, MICROWAVE OR TELEVISION TOWERS, WIRELESS
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND/OR TOWERS FOR SIMILAR USES EXCLUDING EXEMPT
PUBLIC UTILITIES.  A facility designed and/or used for the purpose of
transmitting, receiving, or relaying voice and/or data signals from various
wireless communication devices and includes any transmission tower, antenna,
or other facility designed or used for that purpose.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is primarily used for religious worship of a supreme being or
beings.  Also included are religious institution operated
incidental/accessory facilities (on same site or adjacent to) including
Sunday schools, child care, preschools, adult day care, offices, soup
kitchens, shelters, and similar uses.



   RESIDENT-OCCUPIED AND RESIDENT-OPERATED PRESCHOOLS, ADULT DAY CARE
FACILITIES OR SIMILAR OPERATIONS WHICH KEEP UP TO 12 PERSONS ON A DAILY
BASES, BUT NOT INCLUDING 24-HOUR CARE.  Land, and buildings thereon, which
are used for daily care and/or supervision of children or adults.



   SCHOOLS.  Any public or private school containing any grade of
preschool or kindergarten through grade 12.  This definition is to also
include post-secondary educational institutions such as colleges,
universities or similar schools.



   SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSE FACILITIES.  Real property with 50 or more
enclosed spaces rented to individuals and businesses for storage.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  An enterprise that, as 1 of its business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite or same sex.



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex where 1 or more persons appear in a state of nudity
or where the activities in division (1) or (2) herein are characterized by an
emphasis on activities which meet the definition of “harmful to minors”
under I.C. 35-49-2-2 (and as it may from time to time be amended) and/or
represent or display “sexual conduct” as defined in I.C. 35-42-44 (and as
it may from time to time be amended) or nudity for observation by patrons
thereof.



   SOCIAL CENTERS.  Community spaces.  Buildings which are used for a
range of disparate activities which can be linked only by virtue of being
not-for-profit.



   SWIMMING POOL.  Any in ground or above ground swimming pool that
complies with all state and local building codes.



   TEMPORARY MOBILE OFFICE. An office built within a truck, motor home,
trailer or purposed built shipping container to be used for a limited amount
of time.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



Cross-reference:



   See § 170.03 for additional definitions



§ 175.07  SPECIAL USE PETITION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A person desiring a special use classification must submit a
petition to the Municipal Planning Commission.  The petition must contain a
site plan showing the following:



      (1)   The proposed use of land.



      (2)   The location and size of all buildings and structures,
including signs.



      (3)   The location of streets, access drives, and off-street
parking and loading facilities.



      (4)   Buffer landscaping and required green area.



      (5)   Any other plans or specifications which the staff of the
Municipal Planning Commission deems necessary.



   (B)   After receipt of the petition, the Municipal Planning
Commission (MPC) for the town shall conduct a public hearing pursuant to I.C.
36-7-4 for which 12 days’ prior notice has been given by the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to abutting property owners whose
boundaries include and/or are contiguous to the subject property, and to the
public by legal advertisement.  Also, no less than 12 days prior to the
hearing, a notice containing the date, time, place, and purpose of the
hearing must be posted conspicuously on the property by the petitioner. 
Should the petitioner fail to comply with the notice requirements, as
provided by this section, before the next regular meeting of the Municipal
Planning Commission following the date the petition is filed, the petition
shall be withdrawn by the Commission and the time limits imposed by § 175.10
shall apply.  After public hearing, the Municipal Planning Commission shall
make its determination for approval, denial or modification of the special
use classification based on the following criteria:



      (1)   Whether the specific site is an appropriate location for
the use.



      (2)   Whether the use as developed will adversely affect the
surrounding area.



      (3)   Whether there will be nuisance or serious hazard to
vehicles, pedestrians, or residents.



      (4)   Whether adequate and appropriate facilities will be
provided for proper operation of the use.



      (5)   Whether the use is in harmony with this title.



      (6)   Whether the use is essential or desirable to the public
convenience and welfare.



   (C)   The Municipal Planning Commission’s approval or modification
of a special use classification may include whatever reasonable conditions,
limitations or temporary uses necessary for the protection of the public
interest including the following:



      (1)   Greater front, side and rear yards than the minimum for
the area.



      (2)   More off-street parking and screening.



      (3)   Modification of exterior design or materials.



      (4)   Limitations on the lot coverage and occupancy of the
building or structure.



      (5)   Limitations on signs and sign coverage.



      (6)   Time limitations.



   (D)   To protect the interest and to ensure compliance with
requirements to be included in the site plan, the Municipal Planning
Commission may require whatever evidence and guarantees are necessary to
assure compliance with conditions, limitations and temporary uses.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.08  RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO PARTICULAR SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   In addition to all other limitations and provisions contained
in this title and this chapter, all SU-15 special uses shall be subject to
the following requirements :



      (1)   No identifying or business sign shall be erected or
placed on any site for which an SU-15 has been granted by the Municipal
Planning Commission.



      (2)   Except for the shipment and receipt of goods, products
or items necessary for the SU-15 shall not be visible from the exterior of
the premises.



      (3)   The maximum time for which the first SU-15 may be
granted is 2 years from the date of approval; thereafter, a subsequent grant
of a SU-15 for the same parcel of property for the same use shall be for such
length as requested and approved by the Municipal Planning Commission.



      (4)   No person or persons may be employed in the SU-15 home
occupation at the site other than the resident (or residents) of the site for
which the SU-15 has been granted.



      (5)   The use may not be varied from the specific home
occupation identified by the applicant for which it is granted.



   (B)   In addition to all other limitations and provisions contained
in this title for the town and this chapter, all SU-16 special uses shall be
subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Not be located within 1,000 feet of any property zoned,
or currently used, for any residential use;



      (2)   Not be located within 1,000 feet of any property zoned,
or currently used, for religious purposes (SU-02);



      (3)   Not be located within 1,000 feet of any public or
private recreational facility (SU-05 or SU-08);



      (4)   Not be located within 1,000 feet of any public or
private school (SU-01);



      (5)   Not be located within 1,000 feet of a resident occupied
and operated pre-school, child day care facility, adult day care facility
(SU-06);



      (6)   Not be located within 500 feet of a special use SU-16
facility.  However, more than 1 special use SU-16 may be located on the same
parcel of property so long as it meets the other provisions of this section
and the other provisions of this title;



      (7)   The applicant shall have certified all distance
measurements by a licensed land surveyor registered in the State of Indiana
who shall certify that there are no residential properties, religious
institutions, town park, school or other special use SU-16 not located on the
same property.



      (8)   In addition to all other procedures listed above, the
applicant for a SU-16 designation shall send notice as called for in §
175.10(B), Time Limits, to not only the abutting property owners, but the
applicant shall send notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
all property owners located within 1,000 feet of the property subject to the
petition for special use SU-16.  A list of such property owners shall be
given to the Municipal Planning Commission at the time of filing the petition
for special SU-16 designation.  Should the applicant fail to comply with the
notice requirement herein, before the second regular meeting of the Municipal
Planning Commission following the date the petition was filed, the petition
shall be withdrawn by the Municipal Planning Commission.



      (9)   In addition to all the other limitations and provisions
in this title, special use SU-16 shall be limited as follows:



         (a)    No identifying or business sign with letters,
pictures, numbers or symbols with a size greater than 1 foot in vertical
height shall be erected or placed on any site for which a special use SU-16
designation has been granted by the Municipal Planning Commission.



         (b)   Except for the shipment or receipt of goods,
product or items used in the operation of businesses with special use SU-16
designation shall not be visible from the exterior of the premises at any
time.



   (C)   In addition to all other limitations and provisions contained
in this title and this chapter, all SU-17 special uses shall be subject to
the following requirements:



      (1)   The applicant must submit a commercial site plan meeting
the requirements for review by the Municipal Planning Commission, including a
surveyor certification of the exact location of the proposed tower from
property  lines; center lines of abutting streets or right-of-way; distance
to the nearest residential district or zone, residence or recorded
residential subdivision.



      (2)   Structural plans including elevation and plan views
showing height above grade level and dimensions are required in addition to
the site plan.



      (3)   Information regarding the number of antennas that the
proposed new tower or structure is designed to or can safely accommodate.



      (4)   Evidence demonstrating that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna or tower, either
because there are no existing towers or structures meeting the applicant’s
engineering requirements within the geographic area, evidence that such
structures do not have sufficient height or structural strength to meet the
applicant’s engineering requirements.  This division (C)(4) shall not be
interpreted to mandate, but encourage co-location.



      (5)   The setback requirements from any residential dwelling
property or undeveloped residential district(s) or zone or recorded
residential subdivision(s) shall be a distance of 2 feet for each foot of
height of the tower or 300 feet, whichever is greater.



      (6)   Wireless communication facilities that include towers
are not permitted in residential districts or zones.  However, in these
districts, commercial telecommunication antennas attached to existing
buildings or structures are permitted on any property with a commercial use
or an institutional use such as a church, park, library, government, school
hospital, utility or similar use.  Commercial antennas mounted on roof-tops,
walls and existing structures may be approved by the Municipal Planning
Commission, providing the antennas meet the requirements of the district or
zone in which they are located and do not exceed the building height by more
than 20 feet.



      (7)   The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by
more than 1 telecommunications provider (co-location) is encouraged, and when
new towers or antennas are necessary, construction should accommodate
multiple users.  Co-location of antennas on a single tower antenna attached
to existing structures or buildings, or replacement towers to be constructed
at the site of a current tower are permitted uses and will not be subject to
the special use permitting process.



      (8)   Each operator of a telecommunications facility must send
to the Municipal Planning Commission a copy of any notice sent to the FFC of
intention to cease operations.  All abandoned or unused towers and
associated facilities shall be removed within 6 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the Municipal
Planning Commission.  A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease
which requires the applicant to remove the tower or associated facilities
upon cessation of operations at the site shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of the required improvement location permit, shall be incorporated
as part of the permit, and permit approval shall be conditioned upon removal
of the structure(s) within 6 months after the cessation of use.  In the
event that the tower is not is not removed within 6 months of the cessation
of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed
by the town with the costs of such removal assessed against the property
and/or the applicant for the SU-17 use.



   (D)   The distances and measurements provided in this section shall
be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening
buildings, structures or other obstacles from the nearest point or the
property upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point
of the property or land use district boundary line from which the proposed
land is to be separated.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-201)



§ 175.09  DISCONTINUANCE OF SPECIAL USE.



   (A)   If a special use, including pre-existing use as defined in §
175.06, is abandoned for 6 months or has not been established within 6 months
after the date granted, the special use classification shall be null and void.



   (B)   Petitioners which have been granted a special use who
experience delays in construction or commencement of the approved special use
due to delays caused by state or federal regulatory entities may petition the
Municipal Planning Commission for an extension of time.



   (C)   A special use may not be altered to become any use other than
the approved by the Municipal Planning Commission.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.10  TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   Appeals for petitions for special uses must be submitted to
the Town Council within 30 days of the denial of a petition for a special use.



   (B)   The denial of a petition for a special use, or the denial of a
petition for special use after an appeal procedure shall prohibit the
Municipal Planning Commission from hearing a petition for the subject
property or a part thereof for 12 months from the date of the denial of the
petition, denial of the appeal or from the date of a dispositive appeal.



   (C)   The withdrawal of such petition by the petitioner shall
prohibit the Municipal Planning Commission from hearing a petition for a
special use or an appeal for the subject property or a part thereof for a
period of 6 months from the date of the withdrawal.



   (D)   A withdraw of such a petition by the Municipal Planning
Commission for failure to comply with the notice requirement in this chapter
shall prohibit the Municipal Planning Commission from hearing a petition for
a special use for the subject property or a part thereof for a period of 6
months from the date of withdrawal.



   (E)   An exception may be made to this section upon unanimous vote
of the Municipal Planning Commission.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.11  PRE-EXISTING USES.



   All uses or similar activities which fall under the special use
classifications herein described shall be deemed to meet the qualifications
set out in this chapter.  No petition for special use is necessary for these
pre-existing uses.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.12  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this chapter or the application of any provisions
of this chapter to any person or circumstance is invalid, the invalidity
shall not affect the other provision or the application of any provision
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end, all provisions and sections or parts thereof, are declared to be
severable.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 175.13  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation, or anyone acting in
behalf thereof who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this title by the erection, construction, enlargement, conversion, moving
or maintenance of any building which is continued, operated or maintained, or
land or water used in whole or in part, contrary to any of the provisions of
this title is hereby declared to be in violation of this title and a common
nuisance and the owner of the structure, land or premises shall be liable for
maintaining a common nuisance.



      (2)   The Area Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals may
request the appropriate prosecuting authority for the town to take
appropriate actions in any case involving the violation of this title, or of
a regulation adopted pursuant to it.



      (3)   In civil actions for the enforcement of this title or a
part thereof, an attorney appointed by the Plan Commission may bring an
action in the name of the Commission.



   (B)   Injunction. The Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals,
or any designated official, may institute a suit for injunction, to restrain
an individual or a governmental unit from violating the provisions of this
title, or of an ordinance enacted pursuant to its provisions. The Plan
Commission, or the Board of Zoning Appeals, may also institute a suit for a
mandatory injunction, directing an individual or a governmental unit to
remove a structure, erected in violation of the provision of this title or of
an ordinance enacted pursuant to its provisions. If the Plan Commission or
the Board of Zoning Appeals is successful in its suit, the respondent shall
bear the cost of the action. A change of venue from the town shall not be
granted in such a case.



   (C)   Damages. In an action or proceeding by the town for the
taking, appropriation, or condemnation of land, or in an action against the
town, or any other participating city or town no compensation or damages
shall be awarded for the taking of or injury to any structure erected in
violation of the provisions of this title.



   (D)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation, or anyone acting on
behalf thereof who violates a provision of this title or regulation enacted
under its authority, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be fined not less than $10 and not more than $300, for each day’s
violation.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-20-2018)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



   I.   FUNDS



   II.   CLOSING/VACATING STREETS



   III.   DESIGNATING/NAMING STREETS



TABLE I: FUNDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1965-5
 
6 - -
 
Create a Cumulative Capital Development Fund


6-1982
 
6-21-1982
 
Creating a Sidewalk Fund


1988-10
 
7-5-1988
 
Establishing a Cumulative Capital Development Fund


1992-11
 
7-5-1988
 
Amends Ord. 1988-10; Cumulative Capital Development Fund


1995-3
 
- -
 
Amends Ord. 1988-10; Cumulative Capital Development Fund


2000-3
 
2-22-2000
 
Amends Ord. 1988-10; Cumulative Capital Development Fund


2001-5
 
2-5-2001
 
Establishing the Eye Care Fund


2002-5
 
7-15-2002
 
Amends Ord. 1988-10; Cumulative Capital Development Fund


2005-1
 
1-18-2005
 
Amends Ord. 1988-10; Cumulative Capital Development Fund


2005-11
 
9- -2005
 
Establishing a Riverboat Tax Sharing Fund


2005-13
 
12-19-2005
 
Establishing a Wastewater System Development Fund


2006-12
 
6-5-2006
 
Establishing a Chandler Town Park and Recreation Gift, Donation, and Subsidy
Fund


2012-9
 
7-25-2012
 
Establishing a Municipal Cumulative Capital Development Fund


2012-12
 
8-20-2012
 
Establishing the Chandler Unsafe Building Fund


Res. 2012-13
 
12-17-2012
 
Establishing the Rainy Day Fund


Res. 2013-4
 
5-20-2013
 
Establishing the Safe Routes to School Fund


Res. 2013-6
 
8-5-2013
 
Authorizing the Clerk-Treasurer to close the Riverboat Fund #242, and to
transfer its remaining balance to the General Fund #101


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II: CLOSING/VACATING STREETS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


7-1982
 
8-2-1981
 
Temporary closing of South Illinois Street


1989-10
 
10-16-1989
 
Changing a section of a town alley into a town street


1990-3
 
9-17-1990
 
Vacating a public street in the Town of Chandler


2001-3
 
2-5-2001
 
Vacating a public way


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III: DESIGNATING/NAMING STREETS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1
 
11-2-1953
 
Naming streets


3-1984
 
2-6-1984
 
Changing name of Illinois Street


Res. 2015-4
 
7-20-2015
 
Dedicating and declaring an extension of North Kentucky Street as a public way


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Cites
 
Code Section




1-1-1-5
 
10.04


1-1-1-7
 
10.12


1-1-1-8
 
10.06


1-1-4-5
 
10.05


1-1-5-1
 
10.11


1-1-6-1
 
10.08


3
 
32.05


3-5-2-40.1
 
32.05


4-21.5-3-7
 
150.15


4-22-2
 
94.07


5-3-1-2
 
51.73


5-4-1
 
30.03


5-14-1.5-1
 
33.03


5-22
 
30.01


5-22-22
 
92.07


7.1-5-12
 
32.03


8-1-2-1(a)
 
93.50


8-1.5
 
93.50


8-1.5-5
 
53.072; 53.073


8-1.5-5-1 et seq.
 
53.071


8-1.5-5-4
 
53.071


8-1.5-5-5
 
53.084


8-1.5-5-6
 
53.071


9-13-2
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I; 92.01


9-18-12
 
92.08


9-22-1
 
92.01; 92.02; 92.12


9-22-1-4
 
92.12


9-22-1-5
 
92.12


9-22-1-12
 
92.07


9-22-1-13
 
92.07; 92.12


9-22-1-20(3)(B)
 
92.07


9-22-1-24
 
92.12


9-29-4-2
 
30.02


9-29-11-1
 
30.02


13-14-10
 
53.047


13-15-7
 
53.047


13-30
 
53.047


14-16-1-21
 
70.16


14-28-1
 
152.08


14-28-1-26
 
152.08


14-32
 
53.002


14-34
 
53.004


16-41-27-1 et seq.
 
171.16; 171.17


22 et seq.
 
152.05; 170.03


22-9-1-4 et seq.
 
155.02


22-9.5-1 et seq.
 
155.01


22-9.5-2-2
 
155.02


22-9.5-2-3
 
155.02


22-9.5-2-4
 
155.02


22-9.5-2-8
 
155.02


22-9.5-2-9
 
155.02


22-9.5-2-11
 
155.02


22-9.5-2-13
 
155.02


22-9.5-3 et seq.
 
155.10


22-9.5-3
 
155.03


22-9.5-4-8
 
155.11


22-9.5-5-1
 
155.03


22-9.5-5
 
155.02


22-9.5-6
 
155.02; 155.11


22-11-1-1 et seq.
 
171.11


22-12
 
150.15


22-12-1-4
 
150.11


22-12-1-5
 
150.11


22-12-1-7
 
150.11


22-12-1-14
 
150.11


22-12-1-16
 
150.11


22-12-1-17
 
150.11


22-12-1-18
 
150.11


22-12-1-22(b)(12)
 
150.16


22-12-1-26
 
150.11


22-12-7
 
150.12


22-13
 
150.15


22-13-2-3(b)
 
150.16


22-13-2-6
 
150.12


22-13-2-7
 
150.15


22-13-2-7(b)
 
150.16


22-13-2-9
 
150.12


22-13-2-11
 
150.12


22-14
 
150.15


22-15
 
150.15


22-15-3
 
150.13


22-15-4
 
150.12


32-30-8-1 et seq.
 
97.10; 97.13


34-28-5-1
 
130.04


35-42-4-1 through 35-42-4-13
 
97.07


35-42-44
 
175.06


35-47-2-3
 
30.02


35-49-2-1
 
174.06


35-49-2-2
 
175.06


36-1-3
 
30.02


36-1-3-8(a)(10)
 
10.99


36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B)
 
54.99


36-1-5-4
 
150.16


36-1-6-2
 
52.99; 53.999


36-1-6-4
 
150.15


36-1-6-9
 
150.15


36-3-4-14
 
93.50


36-5-2-4.1
 
33.02


36-5-6
 
50.43


36-5-6-7(b)
 
50.43


36-7-4
 
152.01; 175.07


36-7-8-9
 
150.15


36-7-9
 
94.07; 150.01


36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-23
 
94.08


36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28
 
94.08


36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-29
 
94.08


36-7-9-14
 
94.08


36-7-9-27
 
94.04


36-7-12
 
31.01


36-7-14
 
31.32


36-7-37
 
94.04


36-8-3-20
 
31.51


36-8-17
 
150.14


36-9-207
 
172.07


36-10-3 et seq.
 
31.30


36-10-3-10
 
31.30


36-10-3-11
 
31.30


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




2001-1
 
3-5-2001
 
95.01


2011-3
 
12-5-2011
 
50.05


2012-5
 
7-2-2012
 
32.05


2012-6
 
7-2-2012
 
32.06


2012-9
 
7-2-2012
 
50.05


2012-11
 
8-20-2012
 
31.53


2012-13
 
12-17-2012
 
TSO I


2013-4
 
5-20-2013
 
TSO I


2013-6
 
8-5-2013
 
TSO I


2014-38
 
11-17-2014
 
50.05


2015-2
 
3-2-2015
 
50.06


2015-4
 
7-20-2015
 
TSO III


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
32.01


1981-5
 
- -
 
30.03


1988-4
 
- -
 
30.02


1989-7
 
- -
 
51.37


1992-3
 
- -
 
51.37


1995-3
 
- -
 
TSO I


96-3
 
- -
 
32.03; 32.99


1998-20
 
- -
 
51.02


2006-6
 
- -
 
53.001-53.006; 53.020-53.028; 53.045-53.054; 53.999


1965-5
 
6 - -
 
TSO I


1
 
11-2-1953
 
TSO III


3-1967
 
10-2-1967
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I


2-1968
 
2-5-1968
 
70.02


3-1969
 
8-18-1969
 
31.30


4-1969
 
1-5-1970
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. IV


5-1969
 
1-5-1970
 
130.35; 130.36; 130.99


5-1974
 
4-20-1974
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. III


6-1974
 
4-20-1974
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I; Ch. 71, Sch. IV


1980-2
 
3-17-1980
 
31.01


1980-5
 
4-7-1980
 
31.15


7-1982
 
8-2-1981
 
TSO II


5-1981
 
9-8-1981
 
90.03


9-1981
 
12-7-1981
 
50.03


6-1982
 
6-21-1982
 
TSO I


3-1984
 
2-6-1984
 
TSO III


1985-1
 
3-1-1985
 
130.20; 130.99


6-1986
 
7-21-1986
 
50.03


1987-13
 
12-21-1987
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I; Ch. 71, Sch. III


1988-10
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO I


1992-11
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO I


1989-1
 
2-27-1989
 
110.01; 110.99


1989-10
 
10-16-1989
 
TSO II


1989-11
 
11-6-1989
 
31.51


1990-3
 
9-17-1990
 
TSO II


1991-10
 
4-15-1991
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I–Sch. III


1991-11
 
6-17-1991
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. II


1991-15
 
12-30-1991
 
31.65


1992-20
 
12-21-1992
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I; Ch. 71, Sch. III; Ch. 71, Sch. IV


1994-4
 
9-19-1994
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I


1995-5
 
10-2-1995
 
51.35-51.42; 51.99


1996-5
 
6-5-1996
 
32.03; 32.99


1996-6
 
6-5-1996
 
92.01-92.08


1996-7
 
6-5-1996
 
95.15; 95.17; 95.19-95.21; 95.99


1996-7
 
8-21-1996
 
31.50


1996-19
 
12-4-1996
 
30.02


1997-2
 
4-2-1997
 
51.03


2001-4
 
1-16-1998
 
32.01


1998-12
 
6-24-1998
 
30.01


1998-14
 
7- -1998
 
32.01


1998-17
 
8-26-1998
 
51.20


1998-19
 
12-16-1998
 
31.30


2000-3
 
2-22-2000
 
TSO I


2000-13
 
8-7-2000
 
31.65


2000-16
 
8-7-2000
 
52.31


2000-11
 
8-21-2000
 
70.99; Ch. 72, Sch. I


2000-9
 
9-5-2000
 
92.01-92.12; 92.99


2000-17
 
9-5-2000
 
32.02


2000-18
 
10-2-2000
 
130.01-130.06; 130.99


2001-6
 
2-1-2001
 
32.01


2001-3
 
2-5-2001
 
TSO II


2001-5
 
2-5-2001
 
TSO I


2001-12
 
7-2-2001
 
91.01; 91.99


2002-1
 
4-1-2002
 
92.01


2002-5
 
7-15-2002
 
TSO I


2002-5
 
8-19-2002
 
90.02, 90.99


2002-6
 
8-19-2002
 
95.15-95.22; 95.99


2002-8
 
12-3-2002
 
70.99; Ch. 72, Sch. I


2003-2
 
4-21-2003
 
70.99; Ch. 72, Sch. I


2003-3
 
7-21-2003
 
54.16; 54.99


2004-3
 
3-1-2004
 
90.01; 90.99


2004-4
 
3-1-2004
 
53.070-53.085; 53.999


2004-5
 
3-1-2004
 
51.37


2004-6
 
4-5-2004
 
92.01-92.11; 92.13


2004-7
 
9-20-2004
 
53.072


2004-9
 
11-15-2004
 
54.01


2004-10
 
11-15-2004
 
52.01–-52.03


2004-11
 
11-15-2004
 
50.15-50.28; 50.99


2005-1
 
1-18-2005
 
TSO I


2006-5
 
3-6-2005
 
52.20-52.30; 52.99


2005-7
 
7-18-2005
 
50.01; 50.99


2005-11
 
9 - -2005
 
TSO I


2005-12
 
12-5-2005
 
51.02


2005-13
 
12-19-2005
 
TSO I


2006-4
 
2-6-2006
 
150.01


2006-6
 
- -
 
53.001-53.006; 53.020-53.028; 53.045-53.054


2006-8
 
4-3-2006
 
54.15; 54.99


2006-11
 
6-5-2006
 
51.01


2006-12
 
6-5-2006
 
TSO I


2006-13
 
8-21-2006
 
50.02


2006-17
 
10-16-2006
 
50.02


2007-12
 
6-14-2007
 
50.04


2007-7
 
11-5-2007
 
90.01; 90.99


2007-13
 
11-19-2007
 
70.99; Ch. 71, Sch. I


2008-3
 
4-21-2008
 
32.02


2008-4
 
4-21-2008
 
110.01; 110.99


2008-6
 
7-21-2008
 
31.52


2008-9
 
11-17-2008
 
Adopting Ordinance


2008-10
 
11-17-2008
 
30.02; 31.15; 31.16; 31.31; 32.01; 32.02; 52.31; 53.001-53.006;
53.020-53.028; 53.045-53.054; 53.070-53.085; 53.999; 54.01-54.07; 54.99; 90.03


2008-11
 
11-17-2008
 
Ch. 71, Sch. III


2009-1
 
2-2-2009
 
32.04


2009-7
 
8-3-2009
 
51.02


2009-10
 
8-17-2009
 
70.15


2010-7
 
8-27-2010
 
70.16


2011-2
 
2-22-2011
 
32.02


2011-3
 
6-20-2011
 
51.70-51.73; 51.99


2012-1
 
6-4-2012
 
50.40-50.45


2012-2
 
6-18-2012
 
32.03


2012-4
 
7-2-2012
 
32.01


2012-9
 
7-25-2012
 
TSO I


2012-11
 
8-20-2012
 
150.01


2012-12
 
8-20-2012
 
TSO I


2012-16
 
11-19-2012
 
33.01


2012-17
 
12-17-2012
 
33.02


2012-18
 
12-3-2012
 
30.03


2012-22
 
12-17-2012
 
30.04


2012-23
 
2-19-2013
 
155.01- 155.08; 155.10; 155.11


2013-4
 
5-6-2013
 
70.99


2013-14
 
8-19-2013
 
150.10-150.17


2013-15
 
8-19-2013
 
32.01


2013-16
 
11-18-2013
 
95.16-95.21


2013-18
 
1-21-2014
 
51.02


2014-26
 
4-21-2014
 
32.02


2014-27
 
7-15-2014
 
53.071


2014-30
 
6-16-2014
 
50.04


2014-33
 
8-4-2014
 
31.32


2014-34
 
8-26-2014
 
155.01–155.11


2015-2
 
2-17-2015
 
32.01


2016-01
 
2-15-2016
 
97.01–97.13; 97.99


2016-03
 
3-21-2016
 
130.50


2016-04
 
6-6-2016
 
33.03


2016-05
 
6-6-2016
 
94.01–94.08; 94.99; 96.01–96.04; 96.99


2016-06
 
6-6-2016
 
97.02; 97.04; 97.07


2016-07
 
8-15-2016
 
50.05


2017-02
 
2-20-2018
 
152.01–152.10; 152.99; 170.01–170.11; 171.01–171.24; 172.01–172.07;
173.01–173.07; 174.01–174.19; 175.01–175.13


2017-03
 
7-3-2017
 
90.04


2017-04
 
10-2-2017
 
93.01–93.04; 93.11–93.13; 93.30–93.36; 93.99


2017-05
 
9-18-2017
 
90.05


2017-06
 
10-2-2017
 
90.06


2018-05
 
5-24-2018
 
50.20; 53.007; 53.029–53.037


2018-06
 
10-1-2018
 
130.20


2018-09
 
1-7-2t018
 
93.50 - 93.57

SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE
CHAPTER I PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 1 GENERAL
This Ordinance is enacted for the purpose of adopting subdivision regulations to control
and regulate the division of land for any purpose whatsoever within the jurisdiction of
the Town of Chandler. The Town of Chandler shall have all the powers and duties with
respect to primary and secondary plant approvals and subdivisions, and the procedures
relating thereto which are specified by law and by this Ordinance. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the requirements
adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, by providing for the
harmonious development of Chandler, for the coordination of streets within subdivisions
with other existing or planned streets or with other features, for adequate open spaces for
traffic, schools, recreation and air, for adequate storm water drainage and sewage
disposal, for the efficient and economical maintenance of streets, and for the
development for public use of public grounds.
Section 2 ADMINISTRATION
(1) JURISDICTION
This Ordinance shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the corporate limits
of the Town of Chandler
(2) AUTHORITY
Be it ordained by the Town Council of Chandler under authority of Title 36,
Article 7, Chapter 4, Section 700, et seq. Of the Indiana Code, as amended,
General Assembly of the State of Indiana, that:
(a) No plat or replat of a subdivision of land as defined herein located within the
corporate limits of the Town of Chandler shall be recorded until it shall have
the approval of the Plan Commission, and such approval shall be entered
upon the plat. The Plat shall be accompanied by a certificate bearing the seal
of the Town, signed by the president of the Plan Commission, and attested to
by the secretary of the Plan Commission disclosing that proper public notice
of the hearing has been given and that a majority of the members of the Plan
Commission concur in its approval.
(b) No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed
subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such
subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission, in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations.
1
CHAPTER II DEFINITIONS
Section 1 GENERAL
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural
and the plural the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is
permissive.
Section 2 TERMS DEFINED
(1) ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS
Record title owners, whose property is contiguous to the subject property, including
any property that would touch at any point the subject property, ignoring all rights of
way, easements, and alleys. For the purpose of notifying abutting property owners, if
only a portion of a parcel of real estate is being considered at the public hearing, and
with the remaining portion owned by the same property owner, then the abutting
property owner to the entire parcel shall be notified, except that when the abutting
property owner’s real estate is 1000 feet or more distant from the part of the real
estate being considered, no notification shall be required.
(2) ACT
Title 36, Article 7, Chapter 4, Section 700, et seq. Of the Indiana Code, as added by
Acts of 1981, P.L. 309, Section 23, and amended by Acts of 1982, P.L. 211, Section 4
and all future acts amendatory thereto.
(3) ALLEY
A strip of land dedicated to public use and providing a permanent secondary means of
access to abutting property at the rear or sides thereof.
(4) BENCH MARK
A monument for which an accurate elevation has been established and recorded on the
plat.
(5) BOND (OR PERFORMANCE BOND)
A legally binding instrument from a duly chartered financial institution or insurance
company providing surety satisfactory to the Town that all improvements and
installations required as a condition of primary plat approval will be constructed in
accordance with the standards of this Ordinance.
(6) BUILDING SETBACK LINE
The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way of any
street, and the foundation of any buildings, except designated projections as set forth
in Chapter 20, Section 4 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance in effect for the
Town of Chandler.
2
(7) COMMISSION
The Municipal Plan Commission for the Town of Chandler.
(8) COUNTY
Warrick County, Indiana.
(9) CUL-DE-SAC
Local street with only one (1) outlet having an appropriate terminal for the safe and
convenient reversal of traffic movement.
(10) DESIGN MANUAL
Public Works Design Standards Manual adopted by the Town of Chandler in April
1999.
(11) EASEMENT
Authorization or grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to use
land for specific purposes.
(12) EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
The duly appointed head of staff of the Municipal Plan Commission of the Town of
Chandler.
(13) “FIRM”
Federal Insurance Rate Map as prepared by Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the Town of Chandler.
(14) FLOOD HAZARD AREA
100-year flood contour line from FIRM and FEMA maps for the Town of Chandler.
(15) IMPROVEMENTS-BASIC
The installation of sanitary sewers and water supply lines.
(16) IMPROVEMENTS-STREET
The installation of streets, street signs, storm sewers, curbs, gutters and sidewalks
when required by the Area Plan Commission.
(17) LEGAL DRAIN
An open or tiled ditch or combination of the two which are subject to the jurisdiction
and control of the Town of Chandler.
(18) LOT
The tract within a subdivision marked by the subdivider as a numbered, lettered or
other identified tract to be offered as a unit of land for transfer of ownership or for
development which is an identifiable parcel of land having frontage on a public street
or right of way.
3
(19) LOT, CORNER
A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
(20) LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE
A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street or through lots
abutting two (2) streets.
(21) LOT, REVERSED CORNER
A corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot
line of the first lot to its rear.
(22) MAINTENANCE, ACCEPTANCE OF
Official recognition by the Town of Chandler that streets in a subdivision have been
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and approved
construction plans for a specific subdivision and acceptance by the Town of Chandler
of responsibility for ongoing maintenance of the streets.
(23) MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The complete development plan, or any of its parts, for the development of Town of
Chandler prepared by the Town of Chandler and adopted in accordance with Chapter
138, Acts of 1957, General Assembly of Indiana, and all amendments thereof and
supplement thereto as is now or may hereafter be in effect.
(24) OFFICIAL THOROUGHFARE PLAN
That part of the Master Development Plan for the Town of Chandler, now or hereafter
adopted, which includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth the location,
alignment, dimensions, identification, and classification of existing and proposed
streets, alleys, highways, and other thoroughfares.
(25) ORDINANCE
This Ordinance and all subsequent additions or amendments thereto.
(26) OWNER
The individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or any
other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this
Ordinance.
(27) PERSON
A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any other group acting
as a unit, as well as a natural person.
4
(28) PLAT OR PRIMARY PLAT
A map or drawing prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance
upon which the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision is presented and which he
submits for approval of the Town of Chandler and intends to record in the final form.
(29) PLAT RELEASE
The release of a final plat for the purpose of recordation effected by the execution of
the plat by the Clerk of the Town of Chandler subsequent to the Town granting
secondary approval of the plat.
(30) PRIMARY APPROVAL
An approval (or approval with conditions imposed) granted to a subdivision by the
Town of Chandler after having determined in a public hearing that the subdivision
complies with this Ordinance.
(31) PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Any form of security, other than a bond, including a cash deposit, collateral stock, or
instrument of credit or combination thereof, in an amount and form satisfactory to the
Town of Chandler providing surety that all improvements and installation s required
as a condition of primary plat approval will be constructed in accordance with the
standards of this Ordinance.
(32) RECORDER
The County Recorder of Warrick County, Indiana
(33) REPLAT
A change in a recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on
such plat, or area reserved therein for public use, or any lot line, except as otherwise
exempted in this Ordinance.
(34) RIGHT OF WAY
A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public
utilities, or other special public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of
the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
(35) SECONDARY APPROVAL
The stage of application for formal Town approval of a final plat of a subdivision the
construction of which has been completed or guaranteed in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance which, if approved and signed by the designated officials
may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.
(36) SECONDARY OR FINAL PLAT
The map, drawing, or plan described in this Ordinance of a subdivision and any
accompanying material submitted to the Town for secondary approval, and which, if
5
approved and signed by the designated officials, may be submitted to the County
Recorder for filing.
(37) STATE BOARD OF HEALTH
Indiana State Board of Health
(38) STREET
A public right-of-way, intended for vehicular traffic, including expressways,
parkways, primary thoroughfares, collector streets, local streets, cul-de-sacs, marginal
access streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, ways, courts and other public ways,
with the exception of alleys and as now or hereafter or otherwise designated.
(a) Arterials or Expressways – Major streets and highways used primarily for
through traffic, mixed traffic or fast or heavy traffic, generally including U.S.
and/or State routes.
(b) Primary Thoroughfares – Streets designed, planned and intended for through
vehicular traffic in conformance with partial control of access.
(c) Secondary Thoroughfares – Streets designed, planned and intended to serve as
collectors and distributors of through vehicular traffic, with partial control of
access.
(d) Residential Collector Streets – Streets designed, planned and intended to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic within residential areas and from the minor
streets to the arterial, primary and secondary streets.
(e) Minor Streets – Streets which carry low volumes of traffic and are used
primarily to provide access to the abutting properties.
(f) Marginal Access or Service Streets – Minor streets parallel with and adjacent
to arterial, primary and secondary streets which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from rapid through traffic.
(g) Cul-de-sacs – Short Streets having one end open to traffic, the other end being
permanently terminated by a vehicle turn around.
(h) Rural Road – Any county road five miles or more from any incorporated city
or town boundary or any existing county right-of-way open for public use.
Prior to the filing of a subdivision for primary plat where rural rock roads are
requested a written request to permit rural rock roads must be submitted to the
Town of Chandler at least two weeks prior to any Town Council meeting. The
request must explain in detail the reasons and facts supporting the request
setting forth location, number of lots proposed, approximate acreage of lots,
sketch of proposed subdivision. Justification for rural roads may include
6
unusual conditions of the plat such as, but not limited to, unusual
topographical conditions or other exceptional conditions peculiar to the site
which would result in extra ordinary hardship or deny the reasonable use and
value of said land.
(39) SUBDIVIDER
Person or persons who own all or any part of the real estate included within the pat at
the time of the final approval of said plat.
(40) SUBDIVISION OF LAND AND SUBDIVIDE
The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plats or
interest, whether for residential or non-residential use, for the purpose of offer, sale,
lease or development.
The term subdivision includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
includes the process of subdividing and the land subdivided.
(41) ZONING ORDINANCE
An Ordinance and Zone Map now or hereafter adopted which divides the jurisdiction
of the Town of Chandler into districts, with regulations and requirements and
procedures for the establishment of land use controls.
7
CHAPTER III PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS
Section 1 PRE-APPLICATION INVESTIGATION
The subdivider, owner of record and registered land surveyor proposing to subdivide or plat
land into a subdivision shall schedule a pre-application investigation with the Plat Review
Committee (of the Plan Commission) for technical review before submitting a written
application for plat approval. At this consultation, a sketch plan of the proposed plat,
containing the following information, shall be submitted.
(1) A proposed layout of the streets, lots, and other elements basic to the proposed use in
relationship to site conditions.
(2) Location of parks, recreational and other public and semi-public sites existing and
proposed within or near the area proposed to be platted.
(3) Proposed methods for handling sewage disposal, drainage, water supply and other
utility problems.
The sketch plan may be a pencil drawing superimposed upon a print of a topographic survey
of the area proposed to be platted or may be in any other graphic medium and form
containing and accurately depicting the above information. The pre-application does not
require formal application fee or filing of a plat with the Plan Commission.
During the pre-application investigation, the Plat Review Committee will make a
determination regarding whether or not the proposed division of land constitutes a
“subdivision” as used herein. After reaching conclusions informally about his general
program and the objectives of this chapter the subdivider may proceed with his formal
application for the proposed subdivision.
Section 2 APPLICATION AND FEES
(1) A subdivider desiring approval of a plat of a subdivision of any land lying within the
jurisdiction of the Plan Commission, shall submit a written application for a certificate
of approval and six (6) copies of a plat of the subdivision in accordance with Section 7
hereof, to the Plan Commission. The form for said written application is attached as an
exhibit to this Ordinance and by reference is made a part hereof.
(2) No land shall be subdivided for residential use unless adequate access to the land over
approved streets or thoroughfares exists or will be provided by the subdivider or if
such land is considered by the Town to be unsuitable for such use by reason of
flooding or improper drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation, topography, or
any other feature harmful to the health and safety of future residents and of the
community as a whole.
8
(3) No land shall be subdivided for residential use unless it is in conformance with the
Zoning Ordinance, now or hereafter adopted.
(4) At the time of filing an application for primary plat approval of the plan, the
application shall be accompanied by an application fee set forth by the Plan
Commission.
The fees shall be made payable to the Plan Commission to cover the cost of
advertising, checking and verifying the proposed plat. No application fee shall be
refunded.
(5) Street Construction Plans shall be initially reviewed under the Primary Plat Filing Fee.
Section 3 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application by the Plan Commission, the
Executive Director shall announce a date for a public hearing before the Commission by
giving written notification to the applicant and by general publication of the date of said
hearing. The date for said hearing shall not be scheduled later than thirty (30) days after the
announcement. At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, written notice
shall be given by the applicant to all abutting property owners. The applicant shall give
notice by certified mail with return receipt using a prescribed form furnished by the Plan
Commission. An affidavit which lists the adjoining property owners and attests that notice
has been duly given to said property owners must be filed with the Commission along with
all return receipts prior to the date set for the hearing.
Section 4 PREPARATION FOR PRIMARY APPROVAL
(1) The Plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and duly signed and sealed in
form, content and detail prescribed hereinafter.
(2) The Plat shall be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as detailed under
Chapter IV General Regulations, Design and Chapter V Street and Utility
Improvements of this Ordinance, and pursuant to the Public Works Design Standards
adopted by the Town.
Section 5 FORM OF SUBMISSION
The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1)
inch on a sheet or sheets twenty four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches or multiples
thereof, except that, when the drawing at that scale requires more tan two (2) sheets, the plat
may be drawn at a scale of two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch.
Section 6 VICINITY PLAN
The plat application for primary plat approval must include the following information:
9
(1) Vicinity Plan – A vicinity plan drawn to a scale of not less than 1,000 feet to one inch
showing the relationship of the plat to its general surroundings and showing and
identifying the following details.
(a) Existing or mapped streets within 1,000 feet of the subdivision.
(b) Proposed streets with connection to existing streets.
(c) Proposed direction of flow for storm water in relation to natural drainage of
channels..
(d) Major water and sewer lines within 1,000 feet of the tract. Only those
necessary for a connection or connections need be shown.
Section 7 REQUIRED PRIMARY PLAT INFORMATION
The plat must include the following in order to be considered for primary plat approval:
(1) Contents
(a) Proposed name of subdivision. The name shall not duplicate the spelling or
pronunciation of any other recorded subdivision.
(b) Location by section, quarter section, township, range, city, town or civil
township and complete metes and bounds or other legally recorded boundary
description.
(c) Name and addresses of the owner, subdivider if other than the owner and seal
of registered land surveyor preparing the plat.
(d) Scale of plat including graphic scale, north point and date.
(2) Existing Conditions
(a) Boundary lines of proposed subdivision indicated by a heavy line with
bearings and distance and the approximate acreage.
(b) Location and description of all monuments with references by distance and
bearings to quarter section and quarter quarter section corners.
(c) Location, width and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other
public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open
spaces, permanent buildings or structures, and section and municipal
corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract.
(d) In case of a replat creating additional lots, all descriptive lines and lot numbers
of the original plat being vacated shall be shown by dotted lines in their proper
10
position in relation to the new arrangement of the plat, the new plat being
clearly shown in solid lines so as to avoid ambiguity or confusion.
(e) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and right-of-way width and location;
type, width and elevation or surfacing; and legally established center-line
elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
(f) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: location, size and invert elevation of
sanitary, storm or combined sewers; location and size of water mains; location
of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and street lights; if
water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the
direction, distance to, and size of nearest water mains and sewers showing
invert elevation of sewers.
(g) Existing contours with intervals of not more than five (5) feet where the slope
is greater than ten percent (10%) and not more than 2 feet where the slope is
less than ten percent (10%). Elevations shall be based on U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey adjusted datum if practicable. If not practicable, an assumed
datum to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer may be used.
(h) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Plan Commission:
location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground
water conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of
five feet.
(i) Other conditions on the tract: water courses, high water line, 100 year flood
contour line from FIRM map, legal drains, areas subject to inundation,
marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or
more in diameter, houses, barns, shacks, and other significant features.
(j) Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and gradient of
ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and
location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby
nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted
land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name, recording data
and number, and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot size and
dwelling type.
(k) Current zoning and, if applicable, proposed zoning on the tract plus zoning on
abutting tracts.
(l) Proposed public improvements; highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
(3) Proposed Conditions
11
(a) Streets; names; right-of-way and roadway widths; approximate grades and
gradients; similar date for alleys, if any.
(b) Other rights-of-way or easements; location, width and purpose.
(c) Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
(d) Lot lines with adequate dimensions, including area, lot numbers and block
numbers. If proposed subdivision is a non-residential subdivision, this
condition may be waived by the Plan Commission if the subdivider certifies to
a minimum lot size and meets all other conditions of this ordinance.
(e) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other public
uses.
(f) Minimum building setback lines and distances at proposed building lines on
any curved streets.
(g) Site data, including number of residential lots, type, typical lot size, and acres
in parks, open spaces or school sites.
(h) Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
(i) Parcels of land to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use or set
aside for the use of property owners in the subdivision. Land to be dedicated
for parks or other public uses shall be set forth as shown on the plat under the
appropriate heading such as “Park” or “Out Lot for Public Use”.
(j) If a residential subdivision, house numbers obtained from records of the Area
Plan Commission Office.
(4) Accompanying Plans, Specifications and Certifications
The application for primary plat approval must be accompanied by the following:
(a) A certificate from the municipality serving the subdivision certifying approval
of the sanitary sewer connections from all lots.
(b) The subdivider shall submit to the Plan Commission, four (4) sets of drainage
plans for the proposed subdivision.
(c) The subdivider shall submit to the Plan Commission, four (4) sets of detailed
plans and specifications for street and sidewalk construction. The detailed
plans shall consist of cross sections and profiles of streets showing grades.
The profiles shall be drawn to standard scales and elevations and shall be
based on U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum plane or on a datum plane
pre-approved by the Town Engineer. The plans must be accompanied by a
12
certificate of compliance, a prescribed form available from the Plan
Commission, which said certificate shall contain the following:
(i) Estimated date for the commencement of construction;
(ii) Estimated date of construction completion;
(iii) Project Location;
(iv) Detailed description of the type of construction;
(v) Location and typical street sign design if different from standard
design.
(1) Traffic Control Devices which include, but are not limited to, stop
signs at intersections, yield signs at intersections, dead end signs,
warning signs, and speed control signs shall be located and
designed per the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and highways subject to approval by the Town
Engineer and Town Council respectively reserving the right to
make additions or changes. The Certificate of Compliance must
detail the type devices, how many, and dollar amount of each
device.
(vi) Name, length and estimated cost of construction for each street;
(vii) Location of required sidewalks together with estimated cost of
construction;
(viii) Total estimated cost of all street and sidewalk construction;
(ix) A certificate by the subdivider that the construction will be completed
in accordance with the plans submitted;
(x) A certificate of a registered engineer or land surveyor that the
specifications meet the minimum requirements of the Plan
Commission’s Subdivision Control Ordinance;
(xi) A certificate of a registered engineer or land surveyor that he will
perform periodic job site inspections to determine that construction is
completed in accordance with the plans and specifications.
(5) Prior to primary approval being granted by the Plan Commission, the following
certifications must be obtained:
(a) A certificate by the Town Engineer attesting that approval of the subdivisions drainage
plan has been granted.
13
(b) A certificate by the Town Engineer attesting that he has reviewed and approved the
street plans and specifications.
(c) A certificate by the Town Council attesting that said Council has reviewed and
approved the street plans and specifications.
The Plan Commission staff will take the necessary administrative action to schedule the
appropriate reviews by the Town Engineer and the Town Council.
Provided the street plans and specifications meet all applicable provisions of this Ordinance,
the Town Engineer and the Town Council shall have no course than to grant approval of the
plans and specifications and to so certify.
To establish the cost estimates referred to in subsection VII above, a cost breakdown must
be submitted by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor. If
inconsistent with current development costs, the Plan Commission may require a copy of the
construction contract. Said cost estimates may be used for the purpose of establishing the
amount of the bond or other financial instruments(s) for guaranteeing completion of
improvements as required by Section 13 of this Chapter.
Section 8 OPTIONAL PRIMARY PLAT INFORMATION
At the discretion of the Plan Commission or Executive Director, the following information
shall be disclosed on the plat:
(1) Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including
extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision;
typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway, pavement and sidewalk; and
preliminary plans of proposed sanitary and storm water sewers with grades and sizes
indicated; where required, proposed location and type of lot sewage disposal facilities.
(2) Proposed Restrictive Covenants properly prepared and legally sound which may be
deemed essential to the sound development of the proposed area. At the discretion of
the subdivider and/or Plan Commission, restrictive covenants may be proposed to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development.
Said covenants shall not be less restrictive than any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Plan Commission shall have no authority to enforce said covenants. Enforcement
shall be the responsibility of the property owners.
Section 9 PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL
(1) Following the Public Hearing the Plan Commission may render primary approval or
disapproval of the plat with or without conditions. Primary approval is strictly
tentative, involving the general acceptability of the layout submitted and shall be
14
effective for a maximum period of two (2) years unless, upon application of the
subdivider, the Plan Commission grants an extension. If the plat has not been
submitted for secondary approval within this time limit, the primary plat shall be
considered null and void and no further action shall be taken except by re-application
as hereinbefore provided.
(a) If, after the hearing, the Plan Commission determines the application and plat
comply with the standards in the Subdivision Control Ordinance, it shall make
written findings granting primary approval to the plat in triplicate form signed
by the President and Secretary of the Plan Commission and certified by the
Executive Director.
(b) If, after the hearing the Plan Commission disapproves the plat, it shall make
written findings that set forth its reasons denying primary approval and provide
the applicant with a copy.
(c) The legislative body, may waive any condition that is imposed upon primary
approval of a plat by the Plan Commission. A notice of appeal shall be
completed, filed with the Plan Commission within 10 days after hearing and
placed on the next available agenda of the legislative body (Town Council) for
review and/or action.
(d) Primary approval of a plat, with or without conditions, shall in no way
constitute approval of the plat required prior to being filed with the auditor and
recorder. However, the Plan Commission, Executive Director or Town
Council may not impose any additional terms, conditions or commitments after
primary approval.
Section 10 FINAL PLAT
(1) Within two (2) years after primary approval, or within the time limit of any extension
granted, with or without conditions, the subdivider shall submit a plat prepared by a
registered professional land surveyor in conformance with the primary plat for
secondary approval.
(2) The secondary plat shall conform substantially to the approved primary plat, reflecting
all terms, conditions and commitments given by the subdivider or required by the Plan
Commission and it may constitute only that portion of the approved primary plat which
the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion
conforms with all the requirements and standards of this Ordinance. The approved
primary plat may be submitted as the secondary plat if it meets all the necessary
requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Under no circumstance shall a secondary plat be recorded unless said plat has received
secondary approval and a plat release has been duly executed as set forth in Sections
11 through 14 of this Chapter.
Commented [ACP2]: Are these titles correct???
Commented [ACP4]: Was County Commissioners.
15
Section 11 REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS PRIOR TO CONSIDERATION OF
SECONDARY APPROVAL
(1) Timing and form of Submission: At least two (2) weeks prior to the date of meeting at
which it is to be considered by the Plan Commission or Executive Director , certain
reproductions of the secondary plat, which may include all or only a portion of the
approved primary plat; shall be submitted to the Plan Commission office according to
the following instructions:
A replat, limited to changing lot lines not increasing the numbers of lots, or adding
additional area, or a subdivision with no substantial change from the approved primary
plat, may be approved by the Executive Director after obtaining a sign-off by the Town
Engineer that the subdivision meets all the approved street construction plans and the
Town Surveyor that the subdivision meets all the approved drainage plan approvals. It
is at the discretion of the Executive Director if the secondary plat must be presented to
the Commission.
All plats shall be drawn with black drawing ink on a sheet(s) twenty-four (24) inches
by thirty-six (36) inches. “Stick-on” lettering or sheets are not acceptable. The plats
may be prepared on paper using “stick-on” from which a permanent mylar is made.
Ammonia process mylars are not acceptable. The left margin shall be a minimum of
two (2) inches. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch,
except that when drawing at the scale requires more than one (1) sheet, the plat may be
drawn at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. The six (6) reproductions of
the final plat and the original reproducible mylar transparencies shall become the
property of the Plan Commission.
(2) Required secondary plat Information: The secondary plat shall contain the following
information:
(a) Name of Subdivision.
(b) Location by range, section, quarter section, township, city, town or civil
township with legal boundary description or by other legal description.
(c) The name, address, and certification of the licensed surveyor preparing the plat
and his signature and seal.
(d) Scale shown graphically and numerically, north point and date.
(e) Boundaries of the tract with accurate dimensions and bearings as determined
by an accurate survey in the field which has been balanced and closed, as well
as physically located by monumentation.
(f) A note indicating the basis of all bearings used in the boundary survey and
shown on the plat. Reference to true meridian is encouraged.
16
(g) Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearings and length of
every lot line, block line and boundary line. Dimensions of lots shall be given
as total dimensions, corner to corner, and shall be shown in feet and
hundredths of a foot. No ditto marks shall be used. All lots must show square
footage of lot area.
(h) Location and description of all monuments with references by distance and
bearing to quarter sections and quarter quarter sections.
(i) Right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property
lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves.
(j) Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
(k) On cul-de-sacs and on any curved street, angles at the center thereof between
markers on the perimeter shall be shown. No lot shall be dimensioned to
contain any part of an existing or proposed public right-of-way.
(l) The plat shall show clearly what markers, monuments or other evidence were
found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the subdivision. The
adjoining subdivision shall be identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision
name, place of record, or other proper designations.
(m) Township and range and quarter-section lines shall be accurately tied to lines
of the subdivision by distance and bearing.
(n) At least two (2) bench marks shall be located in the subdivision and so
indicated with their elevations shown on the plat. All elevations shall be based
on the same datum as shown on the primary plat.
(o) Show the center and side lines of all streets, the total width of all streets, width
of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedications, and the
widths each side of the center line; also, the width of railroad rights-of-way
appearing on the plat.
(p) Easements must be clearly labeled, identified, the side line shown, and, if
already recorded, their recorded reference given. Easements shall be denoted
by fine dotted lines. The widths of easements and the lengths and bearings of
the lines thereof, and sufficient ties thereto definitely locating the easement
with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being
dedicated by the plat, it shall be so stated in the owner’s certificate of
dedication.
(q) Numbers or letters for all lots or other areas.
17
(r) If a residential Subdivision, house numbers obtained from records of the Plan
Commission Office.
(s) Building set-back lines and distances at proposed building lines on any curved
streets.
(t) Restrictions, dedications, and private covenants to be made a part of the
secondary plat by inclusion or reference.
(u) The following certificates shall appear on the secondary plat:
(i) A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record
title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and
recording of said plat.
(ii) An acknowledgment certificate signed by a Notary Public.
(iii) A certificate by the registered land surveyor responsible for the survey
and final plat and his signature and seal.
(iv) A certificate for execution by the Plan Commission.
(v) A certificate from the Town Engineer concerning drainage approval.
(3) In the event all basic and street improvements have been installed prior to secondary
approval, the following certificate must accompany the secondary plat:
(a) A certificate of completion by a registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor attesting that all basic improvements have been installed in
conformance with the primary plat and applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
(4) In the event application for secondary approval is made prior to completion of all basic
improvements, proof of financial responsibility must be filed with the Plan
Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 13(2), et seq. of this
Chapter.
Section 12 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS DURING CONSTRUCTION
(1) Street Improvements Inspection by Town Engineer
Installations of all street improvements shall be inspected by the Town, at lease a twentyfour
(24) hour notice shall be given the Town Engineer prior to the installation of any
pavement for street construction. Such inspections are required in all instances regardless of
whether the work is performed before or after the subdivision plat has been recorded.
Commented [ACP6]: What office should house numbers
be obtained from?
18
Failure to request inspection of work performed after may be cause for denial of acceptance
of the streets by the Town for maintenance.
(2) Basic and Street Improvements Inspection by Registered Engineer or Land Surveyor.
The installation of all basic and street improvements shall be inspected during construction
by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor at the expense of the
subdivider. If, on the basis of this (these) inspection(s) and a final inspection upon
completion of construction, the engineer or land surveyor finds that all basic and street
improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance,
the said engineer or land surveyor shall provide the Plan Commission with a certificate to
that effect. By this rule, the Plan Commission hereby prescribes the principal procedure for
determining whether all non-street improvements and installations have been constructed
and completed as required by this Ordinance.
Section 13 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
(1) If the subdivider elects to install all improvements, including Traffic Control Devices,
before he applies for secondary plat approval and it is shown to the satisfaction of the
Plan Commission that the conditions of this Ordinance have been met, and if the
secondary plat conforms substantially to the plat that received primary approval, the
subdivider is exempt from the remaining provisions of this section of the Ordinance
provided, however, that said application for secondary approval is made within twelve
(12) months of primary plat approval without the granting of extensions. Moreover, if
the above conditions are met, the Plan Commission shall have no other course than to
give secondary plat approval within thirty (30) days after application for secondary
approval.
(2) If the subdivider elects to apply for secondary approval prior to the complete
installation of all basic and street improvements that received primary approval, then in
lieu thereof, the subdivider shall file with the Plan Commission a bond guaranteeing
that the improvements will be completed or other proof of financial responsibility, as
hereinafter set forth.
(a) If the subdivider elects to file a bond with the Plan Commission to assure
completion of all basic and street improvements required by the Plan
Commission, such bond shall:
(i) Be securable to the Town of Chandler, Indiana.
(ii) Be in an amount determined by the Plan Commission to be sufficient to
complete the improvements required.
(iii) Provide surety satisfactory to the Plan Commission.
(b) Any funds received from these bonds shall be used by the Plan Commission
only for the purpose of making the improvements and installations for which
19
the bond was provided. The proceeds of the bond may be used for these
purposes without appropriation.
(c) Such performance bonds shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall
be satisfactory to the Plan Commission Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and
manner of execution. The period within which required public improvements
must be completed shall not exceed two (2) years from date of secondary
approval. Such bond shall be approved by the participating jurisdiction as to
amount. The Plan Commission may upon proof of difficulty, grant an
extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period
of one (1) additional year, provided that the bond submitted for this extension
period meets all other requirements herein. The Plan Commission may at any
time during the period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or
sureties on the bond as hereinafter provided.
(3) The subdivider shall have the option of providing proof of financial responsibility to
the Town of Chandler by means of any of the following courses of action in lieu of
providing the bond as specified in subsection (2) hereof:
(a) The subdivider may deposit cash money with the Town Clerk or submit a
certified check to the Town Clerk, made payable to the Town of Chandler in
an amount equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost to
complete the improvements as determined by Plan Commission. In this event,
the subdivider shall be entitled to receive progress payments from the funds
deposited by the subdivider of not more than 90% of the value of any work
completed; provided, however, that all such work completed shall have been
inspected and approved by the registered professional engineer or land
surveyor responsible for inspecting the basic and street improvements. The
remaining 10% of the cash deposit over and above the 90% progress payments
shall be paid by the Town Clerk upon receipt by the Plan Commission of a
certificate of completion of basic and street improvements as provided in
Section 12 of this Chapter. Any payments or releases of funds by the Town
Clerk shall be made only upon receipt of an approval certificate signed by the
President of the Plan Commission and attested by its Secretary.
(b) The subdivider may file bonds obtained by the contractors who are to carry out
the several phases of the work in installing the improvements, provided that
the amounts of such bonds are in amounts satisfactory to the Commission for
the particular work to be done.
(c) The subdivider may submit an Irrevocable Letter of Credit issued by a
financial institution acceptable to the Commission on behalf of the subdivider
and securable to the Plan Commission in an amount equivalent to one hundred
20
percent (100%) of the estimated cost of completion of the uncompleted portion
of street improvements.
In the event an Irrevocable Letter of Credit is used, it shall be written for a
minimum period of one (1) year for street improvements other than sidewalks
and two (2) years for sidewalks and a maximum of two (2) years for street
improvements other than sidewalks and three (3) years for sidewalks. Tow (2)
months prior to the expiration date of the Irrevocable letter of Credit, the Plan
Commission shall determine if the street improvements have been completed
and accepted for maintenance and/or acknowledgment of completion by the
County or other units of government having jurisdiction over them, and if they
have not been accepted or acknowledged shall so notify the subdivider of his
options, which are:
(i) If the subdivider has not exceeded the allowed maximum two (2) years
for street improvements other than sidewalks and three (3) years for
sidewalks, he may have his engineer submit a certified report of
percentage of street construction and sidewalk completion yet to be
finished and the dollar amount required to complete the work. This
submittal must be made to the Plan Commission office a minimum of
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the Irrevocable Letter of
Credit. The Town Engineer shall make an inspection to verify said
engineer’s certification. Once the Town Engineer gives his written
approval, the subdivider may submit a new Irrevocable Letter of Credit
a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the expiration date of the one being
replaced. This new Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall not be for a
period less than one (1) year.
(ii) Should the developer not submit a replacement irrevocable letter of
credit in the manner previously described, the Plan Commission shall
secure the funds pledged by the expiring irrevocable letter of credit.
(iii) At the discretion of the Town Council of the Town of Chandler, they
may grant an extension of one (1) additional year upon written request
of the subdivider and provided he follows the procedure as previously
mentioned for the submittal of a new irrevocable letter of credit.
(iv) In the event the subdivider can demonstrate that due to some
unforeseen circumstance or hardship beyond his control and not self
created, he may request a second (2) and final extension to be granted
by the Town Council. At the discretion of the Town Council, they may
grant the extension for such period of time they deem adequate,
however, not to exceed one (1) year. In the case of sidewalks, at least
one (1) side of each street must be installed for pedestrian safety and
convenience by this time, certified to by his engineer and verified by
the Town Engineer.
21
There shall be no reduction in the dollar amount of any irrevocable letter of credit during its
term.
At such time all street construction has been completed and streets accepted for maintenance
and sidewalk construction acknowledged completed, any irrevocable letter of credit
guaranteeing the construction shall be released.
(d) The subdivider may submit a certificate of deposit or negotiable stock
certificates acceptable to the Plan Commission, made out to the subdivider and
the Town of Chandler, to be held by the Town Clerk and in an amount
equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required basic improvements. If the subdivider is
named singly or jointly on such certificates, then the subdivider must endorse
it before submitting it to the Plan Commission to that the Town may secure the
funds.
(e) The subdivider may submit any combination of bond, cash, letter of credit,
certificate of deposit or stock to the Plan Commission in an aggregate amount
equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements.
(f) If water and/or sewer lines are required per this Ordinance, proof of financial
responsibility provided by subdivider to the municipality furnishing water
and/or sanitary sewage may be accepted as the proof of financial responsibility
required by this section provided the Plan Commission has received written
assurances from such municipality which furnishes such services.
(i) With respect to the installation or extension of water, sewer, or other
utility service the applicant may show by written evidence that he has
entered into a contract with the political subdivision providing the
service; and
(ii) The Plan Commission determines based on written evidence that the
contract provides satisfactory assurance that the service will be installed
or extended in compliance with the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
(g) Any means of financial responsibility submitted by the subdivider in lieu of a
bond shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to
the Plan Commission’s Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of
execution.
(4) All improvements to be installed in a subdivision shall comply with the requirements
of Chapters IV and V.
(5) Upon certification of completion of all basic and street improvements as required in
Section 12 of this Ordinance, the Plan Commission shall release any bond that has
22
been posted to guarantee completion of the improvements and discharge the subdivider
and surety from further liability or responsibility thereunder. Any funds or financial
instruments used by the subdivider in lieu of a bond shall likewise be released with a
discharge of further liability or responsibility for completion of the improvements.
Section 14 SECONDARY PLAT APPROVAL
(1) The Plan Commission shall examine the secondary plat and all accompanying
documentation to determine whether they conform with the primary plat and with all
changes permitted and all requirements of this Ordinance imposed as a condition of the
secondary plat’s acceptance. If the Commission shall determine not to approve said
plat, it shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made before
approval will be granted, and shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide
the applicant a copy. If the Commission shall determine to approve the plat, it shall
affix the Plan Commission’s seal upon the plat, together with the certifying signatures
of its President and Secretary.
(2) Plat Release
Provided the Plan Commission has granted secondary approval, the plat release shall
be executed by the Executive Director upon receipt of a plat release fee.
(3) Secondary approval of any subdivision shall be valid for a period of five years from
date of such approval to date of recording of entire plat, provided that a section of the
plat comprising not less than one block or a comparable area approved by the Plan
Commission shall be recorded within one (1) year of the date of secondary plat
approval.
Section 15 COMPLETION OF STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF
MAINTENANCE BY TOWN
(1) The subdivider shall:
(a) Complete all street construction in accordance with the subdivision street plans
and specifications previously reviewed by the Town Council by the time that
the Improvement Location permits have been issued for at least seventy-five
percent (75%) of the subdivision lots or by the time that two (2) years has
elapsed from the issuance of the subdivision plat release (or three (3) years in
the event an extension has been granted), whichever event shall occur first; and
(b) Make application to the officer of the Plan Commission for the acceptance of
the subdivision streets for maintenance by the time that Improvement Location
Permits have been issued for at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the
subdivision lots or by the time that two (2) years has elapsed from the issuance
of the subdivision plat release (or three (3) years in the event an extension has
been granted), whichever event shall occur first.
23
(2) The application for acceptance of maintenance shall be accompanied by a filing fee.
(a) Four (4) copies of the secondary plat;
(b) Pursuant to Chapter III, Section 12(2), a certificate from a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor attesting that all required non-street
improvements have been installed in accordance with all applicable provisions
of this Ordinance.
Subsequent to receipt of the application for acceptance of maintenance, the Town
Engineer shall conduct a field inspection of the subdivision’s street improvements and
make a report of said inspection as well as previous inspections during construction
(pursuant to Section 12 of this Chapter) to the Town Council.
(3) If the findings of the report do not reveal any deficiencies, the Town Council shall
have no other course than to accept the subject roadways for maintenance.
(4) Whenever a subdivider receives a subdivision plat release, he shall, in addition to all
other requirements,
(a) Maintain the streets as laid out and established on the subdivision plat in
accordance with the minimum standards for subdivision street maintenance
established by the Design Manual and the Town Council until such time as the
streets are accepted for maintenance.
(5) Whenever a subdivider, his agents, employees or assigns, conveys lots in a
subdivision, in which the streets have not been accepted for maintenance by the Town
Council, he shall cause to be printed in bold print across the face of the deed of
conveyance the following:
“STREET, ROAD AND OTHER MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS IN THIS
SUBDIVISION HAVE NOT BEEN MADE AND THE TOWN WILL NOT
ACCEPT THE SAME FOR MAINTENANCE UNTIL THE OWNERS OF THE
VARIOUS LOTS HEREIN IMPROVE THE SAME UP TO SAID MINIMUM
STANDARDS.”
In like manner, the Executive Director shall cause the same language to be stamped or
printed on the Secondary Plat regardless of whether or not lots are being conveyed in the
subdivision.
24
CHAPTER IV GENERAL REGULATIONS AND DESIGN
Section 1 GENERAL
(1) No land shall be subdivided for residential use if such land is considered by
the Plan Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or
improper drainage, or objectionable earth or rock formations, topography or
other features harmful to the health, safety and welfare of future residents
and the community as a whole.
(2) The subdivision plan shall conform to the principles and standards which
are generally exhibited in the Chandler Master Development Plan as is now
or hereafter shall be adopted, in whole or in part; and, specifically with that
part of the plan which deals with land use and thoroughfares.
Section 2 STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
(1) If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a portion of the right-of-way to
be acquired for an expressway or arterial highway and the Plan Commission
shall determine the boundaries of the right-of-way to be acquired, the
subdivider shall either dedicate or withhold from subdivision all the area
included in said right-of-way.
(2) All streets shall, as far as practicable, be in alignment with existing adjacent
streets by continuations of the center lines thereof or by advantageous
development of the area in which the subdivision lies.
(3) Residential streets shall be designed to discourage rapid through traffic.
(4) Where it is desirable in the opinion of the Plan Commission to provide
street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by
dedication to the boundary of such property.
(5) Proposed streets and highways shall be adjusted to the contour of the land
as far as practicable so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable
gradient.
(6) Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
Expressway or Arterial Highway, the Plan Commission may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear
service alleys, or other treatment necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
25
(7) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited access highway right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park
purposes in residential district, or for commercial or industrial purposes in
appropriate districts. Such distance shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(8) Refer to Section 6.0010 of the Design Standards for other general design
requirements.
(9) Minimum Street and Highway Right-of-Way Widths.
(a) All street and highway rights of way, measured from lot line to lot
line, are set forth in section 6.0011 of the Design Standards Manual.
(b) Subdivisions platted along both sides of an existing street shall
provide the entire minimum right-of-way.
(c) Subdivisions platted along only one side of an existing street shall
provide one-half of the minimum right-of-way measured from the
center line of such existing street.
(d) Regulations for half streets are set forth in section 6.0015 of the
Design Standards Manual.
(10) Intersection requirements are set forth in section 6.0014 of the Design
Standards Manual.
(11) Requirements for street grades are set forth in section 6.0023 of the Design
Manual.
(12) Street alignment regulations are set forth in section 6.0020 of the Design
Manual.
(13) Regulations for determining street names and house numbers are set forth in
section 6.0092 of the Design Manual.
(14) See section 6.0000 for further regulations concerning streets and through
fares.
26
Section 3 ALLEYS AND PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL STREETS/ACCESS
WAYS
(1) Regulations for alleys and private residential streets/access ways are set
forth in section 6.0130 of the Design Manual.
Section 4 EASEMENTS
(1) Regulations for easements are contained in sections 3.0024, 4.0024, and
5.0024 of the Design Manual.
Section 5 BLOCKS
(1) Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320)
feet.
(2) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of
appropriate depth.
(3) Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, shall be required
where deemed essential by the Plan Commission to provide adequate
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, or other
community facilities.
Section 6 LOTS
(1) Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall abut on to a
dedicated public street or right-of-way.
(2) Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines.
(3) Excessive depth in relation to width should be avoided. The proportion of 3
to 1 shall not be exceeded.
(4) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. An easement at least ten (10) feet wide, across which there
shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting
arterial or major roads.
(5) In any subdivision or part of a subdivision proposed for residential use, the
width and area of lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the
Town of Chandler Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the
subdivision is located.
27
(6) The minimum building setback lines established in the Town of Chandler
Zoning Ordinance shall be observed for all lots in each subdivision.
(7) Residential lots fronting on arterial, primary or secondary roads or
residential collector streets should have extra depth to permit deeper
building setbacks from such traffic arteries.
(8) No lot shall be divided by a municipal boundary line.
(9) When terrain so requires, easements for sanitary sewers along lot lines other
than the rear lot lines shall be provided subject to approval of the Plan
Commission.
Section 7 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
(1) Whenever a park, recreation area, school site, or other public use shown on
the Chandler Master Development Plan as now or hereafter adopted in
whole or in part is located in whole or in part within the proposed
subdivision, such proposed public space, if not dedicated to the appropriate
public agency, may be required by the Plan Commission to be reserved for
a period of one (1) year for later acquisition by the public agency. In the
event of a government agency or unit passing a resolution expressing its
intent to acquire the land so reserved within the reservation year, the
reservation period shall be extended for an additional six (6) months.
Section 8 PARKING
(1) Regulations concerning parking are contained in section 6.0050 of the
Design Manual.
Section 9 LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENTS
(1) When the proposed subdivision is a large-scale development, in the nature
of a neighborhood unit, and the area being platted is in excess of 160 acres,
the Plan Commission can consider the entire development and weigh it
against the standards enumerated in these regulations with respect to light,
air, space, recreation and circulation. The subdivider may be allowed at the
discretion of the Plan Commission more freedom and relaxation in the
arrangement of the streets and lots, consistent with the convenience, health,
welfare and safety of the future residents and users of the development, as
well as the character of the surrounding property and the general welfare of
the entire Town.
28
(2) The modification of standards by the Plan Commission in instances of the
foregoing nature to provide community facilities and open space shall be in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance nor or hereafter adopted and is
contingent on the definite assurance that the means are present to bring the
plans to a point of actual accomplishment within a time period
establishment by the Plan Commission.
Section 10 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
(1) The street and lot layout of a non-residential subdivision shall conform
generally to the Master Development Plan as is now or hereafter adopted, in
whole or in part, and specifically with that part of the plan which deals with
zoning, land use and thoroughfares.
(2) Types of Non-Residential Subdivision Non-Residential subdivisions shall
include industrial tracts, and may include neighborhood and community
commercial tracts.
(3) Principles and Standards
In addition to the principles and standards in this Ordinance which are
appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the subdivider shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel and
block patter proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and
takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and
standards shall be observed:
(a) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to
the types of industrial development anticipated.
(b) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereon.
(c) Special requirements may be imposed by the Plan Commission with
respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
(d) Special requirements may be imposed by the Plan Commission with
respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and
storm drainage.
(e) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from
potential nuisance from the proposed non-residential subdivisions,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing
or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently
landscaped buffer strip where necessary.
29
(f) Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not
normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential
residential areas, or connected to streets intended for predominantly
residential traffic.
(g) Subdivisions for proposed commercial development shall take into
account and specifically designate all areas proposed for vehicular
circulation and parking, for pedestrian circulation, and for buffer strips
and other landscaping.
30
CHAPTER V STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
Section 1 STANDARDS AND APPROVALS
(1) Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans and profiles for such work
have been submitted to and approved by the Commission. Such plans may be
required before approval of the final pat. All such plans and profiles shall be
prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Town.
(2) Improvement work shall not be commenced until the Town has been notified in
advance. If the work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be
continued until notice is again given.
(3) All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of any subject
to the approval of the Town.
(4) All underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed initially in
streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing
of such streets, service roads, alleys or highways. Service connections for all
underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to such length as will
obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or alley or sidewalk improvements
when service connections thereto are made. Utilities and sewers should be
installed under paved areas of streets only when absolutely necessary.
(5) The subdivider, his engineer or land surveyor shall develop plans and complete all
improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Design
Manual and to the approval of the Commission.
Section 2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(1) The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the general
requirements set forth in this section and in the Design Manual provided that the
Commission may permit changes in typical section and details if unusual
conditions arise during construction to warrant such change.
Section 3 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
(1) All monuments may be of concrete or stone and not less than six (6) inches
diameter or four (4) inches square and 36 inches long. The center shall be marked
on the top by either a copper dowel, set flush with the top, 3/8 inch in diameter and
2 1/2 inches long or by crossed scores at least 1/2 inch deep. Monuments shall be
set so that the top is level with the adjoining established grade and shall be installed
at the following points:
(a) At the intersection of street and alley right-of-way lines.
31
(b) At the intersection of all angles in the subdivision boundary line.
(c) At the beginning and ending of all street curves on both right of way lines.
(2) The corners of all lots not marked by monuments required above shall be marked
by galvanized or wrought iron pipe, or steel bars at least two (2) feet in length and
no less than five-eighths (5/8) inch in diameter, the top of the pipe or bar to be set
level with the established grade adjoining it.
Section 4 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY
CONSTRUCTION
(1) Streets and highways shall be constructed as set forth in the Design Manual.
Section 5 CURBS AND GUTTERS
Requirements for curbs and gutters are set forth in section 6.0040 of the Design
Manual.
Section 6 SIDEWALKS
(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed as set forth in section 6.0060 of the Design Manual.
Section 7 STORM DRAINAGE
(1) Regulations for storm drainage sewers and systems are set forth in section 3.0000
of the Design Manual.
Section 8 SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND SANITARY SEWERS
(1) Regulations for sewage disposal and sanitary sewers are set forth in section 4.0000.
Section 9 RAILROAD CROSSINGS
(1) Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossing necessary to provide
access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation
of all documents necessary for application to the Indiana State Public Service
Commission for the establishment and improvement of such crossing. The cost of
such railroad crossing improvement shall be borne by the subdivider.
32
Section 10 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES/PAVEMENT MARKINGS
The subdivider shall be required to provide traffic control devices in all new subdivisions.
The devices shall include, but not be limited to stop signs at intersections, yield signs at
intersections, dead end signs, warning signs, and speed control signs. Location of
devices shall be shown on the street construction plans, as a separate sheet, submitted to
the Area Plan Commission as a part of the primary plat application and must receive
approval by the Town.
The approved sheet with the location of the devices shall be provided to the Town upon
delivery of the Traffic Control Devices, prior to Secondary Plat Approval.
These devices shall be installed in accordance to the provisions of the Indiana Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The cost of all devices shall
be borne by the subdivider and shall be installed prior to any street being constructed
either completely or partially, and opened to the public.
Where deemed necessary by the Town Engineer pavement markings shall be included in
designing of all subdivisions and entrances. Thermo Plastic Stop Bars, Lane Stripings
and any other stripings deemed necessary shall be shown on the Street Construction Plans
to be approved by the Town Engineer and the Town.
33
CHAPTER VI MODIFICATIONS
Section 1 Where the rigid enforcement of the requirements, standards, and
specifications imposed by this Subdivision Control Ordinance and/or
the Design Manual, because of the unusual conditions of an individual
plat, through unusual topographical and/or other exception conditions
peculiar to the site would result in extraordinary hardship or deny the
reasonable use of the land involved therein, the Commission may
modify said requirements, standards, and specifications as to the use
and value of said land, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as altering or conflicting with the power and duties of the
Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to I.C. 36-7-3-900, et seq.
Application for any modification from these regulations shall be filed
simultaneously with the application for primary plat approval for the
subdivision and shall explain in detail the reasons and facts supporting
the application.
Any modification thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in
the minutes of the Commission and the reasoning on which the
departure was justified shall be set forth.
34
CHAPTER VII ADMINISTRATION
These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the Municipal Plan
Commission of the Town of Chandler or its designates.
35
CHAPTER VIII VALIDITY
If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, clause, word, provision,
or portion of this Ordinance, shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding or decision shall not affect or
impair the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than
the section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, clause, phrase, word,
provision, or portion so held to be unconstitutional or invalid.
36
CHAPTER IX ENFORCEMENT
Any person who violates a provision of this Ordinance, or any regulation
herein contained, shall be guilty of a Class C Infraction for each day’s
violation.
No Improvement Location Permit shall be issued for any property subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance until the appropriate requirements are met and
the approvals required by this Ordinance are granted.
Any land within the territorial limits of the Town of Chandler, Indiana
subdivided in violation of the terms of this Ordinance after the effective date
hereof, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and the owner of such
land shall be liable for maintaining a common nuisance, which may be
restrained, enjoined or abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.
37
CHAPTER X CERTIFICATES
Each plat submitted to the Commission for secondary approval shall contain or be
accompanied by the following certificates, acknowledgments and descriptions in
substantially the following forms:
Section 1 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
UNDER THE AUTHORITY PROVIDED TITLE 36, ARTICLE 7, CHAPTER 4,
SECTION 700, ET SEQ., OF THE INDIANA CODE AND ALL ACTS
AMENDATORY THERETO, A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THIS
PLAN COMMISSION HAVE GIVEN SECONDARY APPROVAL TO THIS
PLAT IN THE MANNER PRESCRIBED IN THE CHANDLER SUBDIVISION
CONTROL ORDINANCE, AT A MEETING HELD ON THE ____ DAY OF
______________, 20__.
THE TOWN OF CHANDLER PLAN COMMISSION
SEAL __________________________, President
__________________________, Secretary
Plat Release:
________________________ _______________________
Date Secretary
Section 2 LAND SURVEYORS CERTIFICATE
Each Final Plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry a certificate signed
by a registered Professional Land Surveyor in substantially the following form:
“I, _______________________, hereby certify that I am a Professional Land Surveyor,
of the State of Indiana; that this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on
_____________, 20__; that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that
their location, size, type and material are accurately shown, and comply with the
provisions of the Subdivision control Ordinance.”
Seal ____________________________
Signature
38
Section 3 LEGAL DESCRIPTION CERTIFICATE
The plat submitted to the Commission for secondary approval shall contain a metes and
bounds legal description prepared by the registered Professional Land Surveyor of the
outside boundary of the completed survey.
Section 4 DEDICATION CERTIFICATION
Each plat submitted to the Commission for secondary approval shall carry a deed of
dedication, either of said plat or incorporated therein by reference, in substantially the
following form:
“We, the undersigned owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby
lay off, plat and subdivide said real estate in accordance with the herein plat.
This subdivision shall be know and designated as _________________, an addition to
the Town of Chandler,Warrick County, State of Indiana. All streets and alleys and
public open spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the
public.
Front and side yard building setbacks lines are hereby established as shown on this plat,
between which lines and the property lines of the streets, there shall be erected or
maintained no building or structure.
Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are
reserved as shown on the recorded plat and over the rear ten feet of each lot. Within
these easements, no structure planting or other material shall be placed or permitted to
remain which may damage or interfere with the installation and maintenance of utilities
or which may change the direction of flow of drainage channels in the easements, or
which may obstruct or retard the flow of water through drainage channels in the
easements. The easement area of each lot and all improvements in it shall be maintained
continuously by the owner of the lot, except for those improvements for which a public
authority or utility company is responsible.
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right to cause the
removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof erected or maintained in
violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public, and reserve to the several owners of
the several lots in this subdivision and to their heirs and assigns:”
WITNESS OUR HAND AND SEALS THIS ___ DAY OF ________, 20__.
___________________________
Signature
___________________________
Signature
39
Section 5 ACKNOWLEDGMENT CERTIFICATE
State of Indiana
County of Warrick
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State, personally
appeared _______________________ and each separately and severally acknowledged
the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the
purposes therein expressed.
WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal this ___ day of ______________, 20__.
Seal ____________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires _____________, 20__.
Section 6 TOWN ENGINEER
Each final plat submitted to the Commission shall carry a certificate from the Town
Engineer in substantially the following form:
“I _________ hereby certify that I am the Town Engineer; that on _____________,
20__, the drainage plan was approved by said Town Engineer. The drainage easements
shown on the plat will not be under the continuing jurisdiction of the Town Engineer,
which has no authority over the construction or subsequent maintenance of such drains.
The drainage easements inure solely for the benefit of the landowners in the subdivision,
and no dedication thereof to the Town of Chandler or this Engineer is to be implied by
this approval.”
Seal _______________________
Signature
Date___________________
Section 7 OTHER CERTIFICATES
Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or documents as may be required by the
Commission in the enforcement of these regulations.
40
CHAPTER XI ENACTMENT
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
approval and publication by the Town Council of the Town of Chandler, State
of Indiana.
APPROVED THIS ____ DAY OF ___________, 20___.
, PRESIDENT
, COUNCIL MEMBER
, COUNCIL MEMBER
ATTEST:
, CLERK-TREASURER
CERTIFICATION AND ACCEPTANCE DATES
1. DATE OF Presentation to Date___________________
Area Plan Commission By ____________________
President
2. Date of Public Hearing by Date Advertised_________
Area Plan Commission _________
_________
_________
Date of Hearing_________
_________
_________
_________
3. Date of Acceptance by Date__________________
Area Plan Commission By ___________________
President
41

 
 
 
 
 




 



 


