
Chesterton, IN Code of Ordinances


CHESTERTON, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Local legislation current through Ordinance 2017-18, passed 11-13-2017



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   1-1   How code designated and cited



   1-2   Rules of construction and definitions



   1-3   Catchlines of sections



   1-4   Unauthorized alterations or tampering with code



   1-5   Recording, proof of publication of ordinances



   1-6   Effective date of ordinance



   1-7   Effect of repeal of ordinances



   1-8   Severability of parts of code



   1-9   General penalty



   1-10   Offenses punishable under separate provisions



   1-11   Supplementation of code



   1-12   Ordinances saved from repeal generally



   1-13   Ordinance Violations Bureau



   1-14   Utility Service Violations Bureau



   1-15   Storm Water Utility Violations Bureau



§ 1-1  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the “Chesterton Town Code” and may be so
cited.



§ 1-2  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.



   A.   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the
rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town
Council. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not
be applied to any section of this code which shall contain any express
provisions, excluding such construction or where the subject matter or
context of such section may be repugnant thereto.



   B.   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the Town Council may be fully carried out.



   C.   In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this
code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of the code imposes greater restrictions upon
the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the code,
the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed
to be controlling.



   D.   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the
last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded and the next day shall be included.



   E.   Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common
and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall
be construed and understood according to such meaning.



   F.   A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing, and
a word importing the plural shall include the singular.



   G.   Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department
or some other town officer to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be
construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or
perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify
otherwise.



   H.   A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.



   I.   All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.



   J.   Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.



   K.   Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as
“Clerk-Treasurer”, “Chief of Police” and the like, such reference
shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the Town of
Chesterton”.



   L.   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CORPORATE LIMITS or TOWN LIMITS. The legal boundaries of the Town
of Chesterton, except as otherwise provided by law.



      COUNCIL or TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of
Chesterton.



      COUNTY. The County of Porter, in the State of Indiana.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words
“swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and
“affirmed”.



      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant,
tenant by the entirety or any holder of a beneficial interest in the whole or
in a part of such building or land.



      PERSON. Associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships,
trustees, bodies politic and corporate or any other group acting as a unit as
well as to individuals.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except
real property, as herein described.



      PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street or highway, sidewalk, park, schoolyard
or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.



      QUORUM. A majority of the members of the Council, board,
commission or committee holding office, unless otherwise specifically
provided in this code.



      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenement and hereditaments.



      REASONABLE TIME or REASONABLE NOTICE. In all cases where any
provision shall require any act to be done in a “reasonable time” or
“reasonable notice” to be given to any person, such REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary in the
prompt execution of such duty or compliance with such notice.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street dedication between the curbline
and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Indiana.



      STREET. Streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, viaducts and
all other public highways in the town.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include
any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.



      TOWN. The Town of Chesterton, Indiana.



      WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes any representation of words,
letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year.



§ 1-3  CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.



   The catchlines or headings of the several sections of this code printed
in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of
the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections,
nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall
they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted.



§ 1-4  UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATIONS OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the town to be
misrepresented thereby.



§ 1-5  RECORDING, PROOF OF PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the Town Council shall be recorded by the Town
Clerk-Treasurer in a book of ordinances. The original shall be filed in the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office, and due proof of publication of all ordinances
requiring publication by the affidavit of the printer or publisher, shall be
procured by the Clerk-Treasurer and attached thereto, or written and attested
thereto, or written and attested upon the face of such ordinances.



§ 1-6  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE.



   A.   All ordinances passed by the Town Council, requiring
publication, shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof,
unless therein otherwise expressly provided.



   B.   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage and upon being signed and attested to, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



§ 1-7  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   A.   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to
revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein
so expressly provided.



   B.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.



   C.   Wherever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the part of the ordinance
thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication
of the ordinance repealing or modifying the same, when such publication shall
be required to give effect thereto. When publication is not required, the
repealing or modifying ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage.



§ 1-8  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.



   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code
are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the
valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code.



§ 1-9  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance of the town, or rule or
regulation promulgated by an officer or an agency thereof under the authority
invested by law or ordinance, any act as prohibited, required, or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense, or no specific penalty is provided
therefore, the violation of any such provision of this code, ordinance, rule
or regulation shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500 for a first
violation, and by a fine not to exceed $7,500 for a second or subsequent
violation. Every day any violation of this code or any such ordinance, rule
or regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2006-20, passed 8-14-2006)



§ 1-10  OFFENSES PUNISHABLE UNDER SEPARATE PROVISIONS.



   In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or may be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the town, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.



§ 1-11  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   A.   By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Town
Council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts or ordinances passed by the Town Council during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages
of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the
code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or
partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that when they
have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption
of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   B.   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the
code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   C.   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning
the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances
included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody
them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      1.   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      2.   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;



      3.   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers;



      4.   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article”, “this division”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections           to    
      ” (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code
which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the
code); and



      5.   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but, in no
case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.



§ 1-12  ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL GENERALLY.



   A.   Nothing contained in this code or the ordinance adopting this
code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the following:



      1.   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the effective date of this code;



      2.   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town’s indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the town;



      3.   Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of
the town not inconsistent with such code;



      4.   Any appropriation ordinance;



      5.   Any right or franchise granted by the Town Council to any
person, firm or corporation;



      6.   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating or in any way
affecting any street or public way in the town;



      7.   Any ordinance providing for local improvements or
assessing taxes therefor;



      8.   Any ordinance establishing traffic regulations for
specific streets or portions thereof;



      9.   Any ordinance providing for the boundaries of the town or
of any ward or district therein;



      10.   Any ordinance annexing property to the town;



      11.   Any ordinance levying taxes, not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of this code; and



      12.   Any ordinance enacted on or after 6-24-2002.



   B.   All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.



§ 1-13  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   The Town Council establishes, pursuant to I.C. 33-36-2 et seq. as the
same may be amended from time to time, an Ordinance Violations Bureau. The
Clerk-Treasurer or his or her designee shall be appointed Violations Clerk of
the Ordinance Violations Bureau to be the administrator of the Bureau. The
schedule of ordinance and code provisions of the town are subject to
admission of violation before the Violations Clerk and the amount of civil
penalty to be assessed a violator who elects to admit a violation under the
provisions of this section is attached hereto and marked as Appendix B to
this code of ordinances. All provisions of I.C. 33-36-2, §§ 1 through 4, as
they exist now and may be amended in the future are adopted as part of this
section as if the same were reprinted herein in its entirety.



§ 1-14  UTILITY SERVICE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   The Town Council establishes, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, a Utility
Service Violations Bureau for the purpose of enforcing violations in Ch. 25
of this code of ordinances. The Utility Service Board established by Ch. 25
of this code of ordinances shall hear and determine charges that users of the
Utility have violated Ch. 25 of this code of ordinances and shall, on a
showing of a violation by proof by a preponderance of the evidence, impose a
penalty in the form of a fine not to exceed the amount set forth in I.C.
36-1-3-8(10), as may be amended from time to time. After hearing evidence and
allowing the user an opportunity to cross-examine the evidence presented, the
Board shall issue a determination in writing no later than 30 days after the
hearing. The determination shall be final unless an appeal is made to the
county’s Superior Court no later than 30 days after the date the
determination is rendered.



(Ord. 2006-01, passed 1-9-2006)



§ 1-15  STORM WATER UTILITY VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   The Town Council establishes, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, a Storm Water
Utility Violations Bureau for the purpose of enforcing violations of Ch. 24
of this code of ordinances. The Storm Water Management Board established by
Ch. 24 of this code of ordinances shall hear and determine charges that users
of the Storm Water Utility have violated Ch. 24 of this code of ordinances
and shall, on a showing of a violation by proof by a preponderance of the
evidence, impose a penalty in the form of a fine not to exceed the amount set
forth in I.C. 36-1-3-8(10), as may be amended from time to time. After
hearing evidence and allowing the user an opportunity to cross-examine the
evidence presented, the Board shall issue a determination in writing no later
than 30 days after the hearing. The determination shall be final unless an
appeal is made to the county’s Superior Court no later than 30 days after
the date the determination is rendered.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



CHAPTER 2:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



Article I. In General



   2-1   Promotional fund



   2-2   Claim payments



Article II. Town Council



Division 1. Generally



   2-16   Election of President and Vice-President; terms



   2-17   President’s powers and duties



   2-18   Vice-President to act in absence of President; election of
Chairperson Pro Tem



Division 2. Meetings



   2-31   Regular



   2-32   Special



   2-33   Quorum



   2-34   Robert’s Rules to govern; exception



   2-35   Call to order; reading of minutes



   2-36   Preservation of order; appeal from decision of chair



   2-37   Voting on questions



   2-38   Matters affecting members collectively and individually in
official capacity



   2-39   Order of business



   2-40   Minutes to be kept



Article III. Officers and Employees



Division 1. Generally



   2-56   Reserved



Division 2. Town Manager



   2-66   Authorized; compensation and terms of employment; limitation
on term



   2-67   Qualifications



   2-68   Bond



   2-69   Acting Manager authorized



   2-70   Issuance of warrants or execution of notes or bonds prohibited



   2-71   Powers and duties



Division 3. Town Attorney



   2-81   Office created



   2-82   Qualifications



   2-83   Appointment; term



   2-84   Compensation



   2-85   Duties



Division 4. Personnel Policy



   2-96   Personnel Policy



Division 5. Public Purchases



   2-100   Purchasing Agency



   2-101   Purchasing Agent



   2-102   Supplies manufactured in the United States



   2-103   Purchases less than $25,000



   2-104   Purchase of services



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 2-1  PROMOTIONAL FUND.



   A.   Established. A fund, the “Chesterton Promotional Fund”, is
hereby established. The Town Council is hereby authorized to budget and
appropriate funds from the General Fund to pay the expenses incurred in
promoting the betterment of the municipality.



   B.   Permissible expenditures. Expenditures from this Fund may
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:



      1.   Membership dues in local, regional, state and national
associations of a civic, educational or governmental nature, which have, as
their purpose, the betterment and improvement of municipal operations;



      2.   Direct expenses for travel, meals and lodging in
conjunction with municipal business or meetings or organizations to which the
municipality belongs;



      3.   Expenses incurred in the promotion of economic or
industrial development for the municipality, including meeting room rental,
decorations, meals and travel;



      4.   Commemorative plaques, certificates or objects such as
commemorative keys; and



      5.   Other purposes which are deemed by the Town Council to
directly relate to promotion of betterment of the town.



   C.   Town Council’s approval prerequisite to expenditures; claims
for expenses. No expenses shall be allowed from this Fund without prior
authorization and approval of the Town Council. Claims for expenses under
this section shall be allowed as prescribed by law.



§ 2-2  CLAIM PAYMENTS.



   A.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is authorized to make claim
payments in advance of Council allowance for the following kinds of expenses:



      1.   Property or services purchased or leased from the United
States government, its agencies or its political subdivisions;



      2.   Licenses or permit fees;



      3.   Insurances premiums;



      4.   Utility payments or utility connection charges;



      5.   Federal grant programs where advance funding is not
prohibited and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the
amount advanced;



      6.   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;



      7.   Maintenance or service agreements;



      8.   Leases or rental agreements;



      9.   Principal and interest payable on bonds;



      10.   Payroll;



      11.   State, federal or county taxes;



      12.   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency
circumstances;



      13.   Expenses described in an ordinance; and



      14.   Fuel bills.



   B.   Each payment of expenses must be supported by a fully itemized
claim.



   C.   The Town Council or board having jurisdiction over the
allowance of the claim shall review and allow the claim at its next regular
or special meeting following the pre-approved payment of the expense.



(Ord. 2002-27, passed 10-28-2002; Ord. 2008-07, passed 4-28-2008)



ARTICLE II. TOWN COUNCIL



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



§ 2-16  ELECTION OF PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT; TERMS.



   At the first regular meeting of the calendar year, the Council shall
elect one Council member to serve as President of the Council and one Council
member to serve as Vice-President. Council members so elected shall hold such
office until the election at the first meeting of the following calendar year.



§ 2-17  PRESIDENT’S POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The President shall also have the following powers and duties by virtue
of his or her office.



   A.   He or she shall sign the minutes after the Council has approved
them.



   B.   He or she has the right to order the police to remove from the
meeting such person or persons as are necessary to maintain order.



§ 2-18  VICE-PRESIDENT TO ACT IN ABSENCE OF PRESIDENT; ELECTION OF
CHAIRPERSON PRO TEM.



   A.   In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall
assume the duties and powers of the President.



   B.   In the absence of the President and Vice-President, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall call the meeting to order and the Council members shall
immediately proceed to elect a Council member to serve as Chairperson Pro Tem.



DIVISION 2. MEETINGS



§ 2-31  REGULAR.



   The Town Council shall meet in regular session (except in case of
emergency or extraordinary circumstances) on the second and fourth Monday of
each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. in the Town Hall or other room selected. Any
regular meeting may be adjourned to a designated future day and hour. At such
adjourned meeting, any business may be transacted at the regular meeting of
which the adjourned meeting is a continuation. At such adjourned meeting, the
Town Council shall not be limited to the completion of particular items of
business that had actually been entered upon and left unfinished at the
regular meeting unless the order of adjournment of such meeting expressly
limits the work of the adjourned meeting.



§ 2-32  SPECIAL.



   Special meetings or executive sessions of the Town Council may be held
by the Council at any time at the request of any Town Council member upon
proper notice. The call of a special meeting or executive session shall be by
the Clerk-Treasurer who shall give notice to the Town Council following the
state’s Open Door Law. The minute records shall show the issuance of the
call. Special meetings may be called at a regular or adjourned meeting. Where
the call is made at such a meeting, no notice need be served on any Council
member present at such meeting.



§ 2-33  QUORUM.



   A majority of all the elected members of the Town Council shall
constitute a quorum. Official action of the Town Council shall consist of a
majority vote of the quorum present, except where a state statute or rule of
the Council provides differently.



§ 2-34  ROBERT’S RULES TO GOVERN; EXCEPTION.



   Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the meetings of the Town Council
where such are not inconsistent with this division.



§ 2-35  CALL TO ORDER; READING OF MINUTES.



   The President of the Town Council shall take the chair at the hour
fixed for the opening of the meeting and shall immediately call the same to
order. Reading of the minutes shall be dispensed with unless a motion passed
by a majority of those present calls for such reading.



§ 2-36  PRESERVATION OF ORDER; APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CHAIR.



   A.   The President shall preserve order and decorum. He or she may
speak to points of order in preference to other members, and shall decide
questions of order, subject to an appeal by any member. Upon the appeal, no
member shall speak more than twice without leave of the chair.



   B.   The question on an appeal shall be in the following form:
“Shall the decision of the Chair stand as the decision of the Council?”.



§ 2-37  VOTING ON QUESTIONS.



   The President shall put questions that are in order, to a vote in the
following form: “All those in favor of the motion please say ‘aye’”.
After the affirmative vote is expressed, the President shall direct all those
opposed to say ‘no’.



§ 2-38  MATTERS AFFECTING MEMBERS COLLECTIVELY AND INDIVIDUALLY IN OFFICIAL
CAPACITY.



   Matters affecting the Town Council collectively and any Council members
individually in their official capacity shall have preference over all other
questions, except motions to adjourn.



§ 2-39  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business shall be as follows unless this rule is suspended
by a two-thirds vote of the Council:



   A.   Call to order and pledge to the flag;



   B.   Roll call;



   C.   Approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting;



   D.   Consideration of claims;



   E.   Petitions and comments from the floor;



   F.   Reports from town officers and departments:



   G.   Public hearings, bid openings and remonstrances;



   H.   Ordinances or resolutions;



   I.   Communications;



   J.   Old business;



   K.   New business;



   L.   Comments from the Council; and



   M.   Adjournment.



§ 2-40  MINUTES TO BE KEPT.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a written record of the minutes of all
meetings of the Council, including adjourned and special meetings.



ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



§ 2-56  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2. TOWN MANAGER



§ 2-66  AUTHORIZED; COMPENSATION AND TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT; LIMITATION ON
TERM.



   A.   The Town Council may employ a Town Manager to be the
administrative head and economic development coordinator of the town
government and may fix his or her compensation and terms of employment.



   B.   The Manager may be employed to serve:



      1.   At the pleasure of the legislative body; or



      2.   For a definite tenure not to exceed the longest remaining
term in office of a member of the legislative body, in which case he or she
may be dismissed only for cause.



(Ord. 2008-09, passed 7-28-2008)



§ 2-67  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Town Council may not employ one of its members as the Manager.



§ 2-68  BOND.



   The Manager must, in the manner prescribed by I.C. 5-4-1, execute a
bond for the faithful performance of his or her duties.



§ 2-69  ACTING MANAGER AUTHORIZED.



   The Town Council may appoint a qualified person to perform the duties
of the Manager whenever he or she is absent or unable to perform his or her
duties.



§ 2-70  ISSUANCE OF WARRANTS OR EXECUTION OF NOTES OR BONDS PROHIBITED.



   The Town Council may not authorize the Manager to issue or execute
bond, notes or warrants of the town.



§ 2-71  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   A.   The Manager, under the direction of the Town Council, is
responsible for the administrative duties of the Council.



   B.   Unless a written order of the Town Council or further ordinance
amending this section provides otherwise, the Manager:



      1.   Shall be the lead/contact person for the Town Council in
regards to economic development initiatives and issues, planning functions,
citizen issues, public relations and any other duties designated by the Town
Council. Additionally, the Town Manager shall seek out, obtain and administer
grants for all departments of the town;



      2.   Shall attend the meetings of the Town Council, the
Advisory Plan Commission, Redevelopment Commission and any other board,
commission or committee meetings as directed by the Town Council and shall
recommend actions he or she considers advisable;



      3.   Shall supervise and coordinate the operations of town
departments. Personnel matters involving department heads are to be
determined by the Town Council, with the advice of the Town Manager;



      4.   To the extent it does not conflict with Indiana state
law, the Town Manager shall hire, after receiving the recommendation of the
applicable department head, town employees who are authorized to be hired by
the Town Council according to pay schedule and standards fixed by the Town
Council;



      5.   To the extent it does not conflict with state law, the
Town Manager shall suspend, discharge, remove and transfer town employees
after receiving the recommendation of the applicable department head, if
necessary or desirable for the welfare of the town. It is understood that the
discipline of certain town employees is governed by state law, including, but
not limited to, police officers and firefighters. The provisions of this
subsection B.5. shall in no way interfere with the appropriate procedures set
forth in state law for disciplinary matters in such cases;



      6.   Shall administer and enforce all ordinances, orders and
resolutions of the Council;



      7.   Shall see that all statutes that are required to be
administered by the Town Council or a town official subject to the control of
the Town Council are faithfully administered;



      8.   The Town Manager shall become qualified and assume the
role of the NIMS Coordinator for the town;



      9.   Shall see that town budget estimates are prepared by all
departments and shall submit them to the Town Council for review,
consideration and ultimate adoption;



      10.   Shall execute contracts on behalf of the Town Council
for materials, supplies, services or improvements, after completion of the
appropriations, notice and appropriate compliance with state bid statutes;



      11.   Shall assist in the enforcement of the town’s
Comprehensive Plan, town code and any other applicable laws, rules and/or
regulations;



      12.   May receive service of summons on behalf of the town; and



      13.   Shall update, modify and keep current the town website.



(Ord. 2008-09, passed 7-28-2008)



DIVISION 3. TOWN ATTORNEY



§ 2-81  OFFICE CREATED.



   There is hereby created and established the position of Town Attorney.



§ 2-82  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The position of Town Attorney shall be filed and held by an attorney
licensed to practice law in the state.



§ 2-83  APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   The Town Attorney shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Council.



§ 2-84  COMPENSATION.



   The Town Attorney shall receive compensation based upon a contract with
the town and the salary ordinance and shall receive additional compensation
for the prosecution and defense of legal actions in an amount to be from time
to time determined by the Town Council.



§ 2-85  DUTIES.



   The Town Attorney shall draw all contracts, ordinances and legal
documents that may be required of him or her by the Town Council and other
town boards and he or she shall prosecute or defend, as the case may require,
all actions brought by or against the town or any political subdivision or
agency thereof. The Town Attorney shall be the legal advisor of all the board
officers, officials or appointees of the town in relation to their official
acts.



DIVISION 4. PERSONNEL POLICY



§ 2-96  PERSONNEL POLICY.



   A.   The Town Council adopts a “Personnel Policy Handbook, Town of
Chesterton Employees” that is attached as Appendix C to this code of
ordinances.



   B.   The Personnel Policy Handbook may be amended at any time by the
Town Council by a motion made, seconded and approved by a majority of the
entire Council.



DIVISION 5. PUBLIC PURCHASES



§ 2-100  PURCHASING AGENCY.



   The Town Council is the purchasing agency for the town and the Utility
Service Board is the purchasing agency for the town’s utility with all of
the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22, entitled “Public
Purchasing”.



§ 2-101  PURCHASING AGENT.



   The town department heads and the Utility Superintendent shall be the
purchasing agent for the Town Council and Utility Service Board respectively
with all the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22, entitled “Public
Purchasing”.



§ 2-102  SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.



   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all
town purchases and shall be purchased, unless the Town Council, for town
purposes, or the Utility Service Board, for utility purposes, determines that
any of the following apply:



   A.   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;



   B.   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceed by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;



   C.   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States
is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available
supplies manufactured elsewhere; or



   D.   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.



§ 2-103  PURCHASES LESS THAN $25,000.



   The Purchasing Agent may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of
less than $25,000 on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes or
bids so long as the purchase is in the Purchasing Agent’s budget or the
Purchasing Agent receives the express authority from the Purchasing Agency.



§ 2-104  PURCHASE OF SERVICES.



   The Purchasing Agencies of the town may purchase services in whatever
manner they determine to be reasonable.



CHAPTER 3:  NON-SMOKING AREAS



Section



   3-1   Definitions



   3-2   Smoking prohibited in town facilities



   3-3   Reasonable distance



   3-4   Enforcement



   3-5   Other applicable laws



   3-6   Chapter to be broadly interpreted



   3-7   Effective date



   3-8   Violations and penalties



   3-9   Reserved



   3-10   Reserved



   3-11   Reserved



   3-12   Reserved



   3-13   Reserved



   3-14   Reserved



   3-15   Severability



Cross-reference:



   Fire Prevention and Protection, see Ch. 8



   Health and Sanitation, see Ch. 11



§ 3-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between floor and ceiling that is enclosed on
all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend
from the floor to ceiling.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   SMOKE or SMOKING. The act of lighting, carrying, inhaling from or
leaving a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-2  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN TOWN FACILITIES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities owned, leased or
operated by the town, including buildings and vehicles. The Town Department
of Parks and Recreation shall enact rules concerning non-smoking areas in the
town’s parks. Any violation of the rules adopted by the Town Department of
Parks and Recreation shall subject the offender to the penalty provisions
contained in § 3-8 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-3  REASONABLE DISTANCE.



   Smoking shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from an area
where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, but in no event any closer than
15 feet so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter into facilities
designated smoke-free under this chapter through entrances, windows,
ventilation intakes or other means.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-4  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   This chapter shall be enforced by the Town Police Department,
Building Commissioner, Fire Department, Town Attorney or an authorized
designee of the aforementioned.



   B.   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this
chapter may initiate enforcement with the Town Police Department or Building
Commissioner.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-5  OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.



   This chapter shall not be interpreted to permit smoking where it is
otherwise restricted by other applicable laws or to supercede any federal,
state or local laws which are more restrictive.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-6  CHAPTER TO BE BROADLY INTERPRETED.



   This chapter shall be construed broadly to effectuate the purposes
described in the preamble of Ord. 2011-05.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-7  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect from and after its adoption and
publication as required by law, however, in no event shall it take place
prior to 4-1-2011.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-8  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   A.   Any employee of the town who violates this chapter shall be
subject to disciplinary action pursuant to subsection D. of the non-smoking
policy in the Personnel Policy Handbook, located in Appendix C of this code
of ordinances.



   B.   1.   Any person, who is not an employee of the town and
violates this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of $50 for a first
violation; $200 for a second violation; and $500 for a third violation; all
of which shall be paid within 30 days of said violation to the Town Ordinance
Violation Bureau. Any failure to pay the prescribed fine for said
violation(s) within 30 days of the violation, or any subsequent violations of
this chapter by the same person, shall subject the offender to a fine of not
less than $200, nor more than $2,500, for each violation along with court
costs imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction in the county.



      2.   Each day in which a violation of this chapter occurs
shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



§ 3-9  RESERVED.



§ 3-10  RESERVED.



§ 3-11  RESERVED.



§ 3-12  RESERVED.



§ 3-13  RESERVED.



§ 3-14  RESERVED.



§ 3-15  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section or sentence, or provision of this chapter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall be declared
unconstitutional or invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any of the
sections, sentences, provisions or applications of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to this end,
the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.



(Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-28-2011)



CHAPTER 4:  ANIMALS AND FOWL



Section



   4-1   Running at large prohibited



   4-2   Leashes, muzzles and the like required



   4-3   Keeping, harboring and the like noisy animals or fowl
prohibited



   4-4   Capture, destruction of animals at large authorized



   4-5   Confinement, observation of animals biting persons



   4-6   Impoundment of animals and fowl captured running at large;
notice to owners; registry of impounded animals



   4-7   Redemption of impounded animals and fowl



   4-8   Reserved



   4-9   Reserved



   4-10   Nuisance declared



   4-11   Keeping of certain animals prohibited



   4-12   Racing pigeons



   4-13   Chickens



Cross-reference:



   Health and Sanitation, see Ch. 11



   Nuisances, see Ch. 15



§ 4-1  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby declared a nuisance, for
the owner, keeper, custodian or possessor of any dog, horse or any
four-legged animal or domestic fowl to permit such animal or fowl to roam or
run at large in the town.



§ 4-2  LEASHES, MUZZLES AND THE LIKE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
for the owner, keeper, custodian or possessor of any such animal or fowl to
permit or take such animal or fowl upon any public highway, street, alley or
ground unless such animal or fowl shall be securely and effectually
controlled by means of a leash, muzzle, halter, bridle, collar or other
device as the size and type of animal or fowl shall dictate.



§ 4-3  KEEPING, HARBORING AND THE LIKE NOISY ANIMALS OR FOWL PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
for any person to keep, harbor or possess any animal or fowl, which by loud
and frequent barking, howling, yelping or other animal noises disturbs the
peace and quiet or which shall disturb or interrupt other persons in the full
use and enjoyment of their property.



§ 4-4  CAPTURE, DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS AT LARGE AUTHORIZED.



   The County Animal Control Officer or any police officer of the town
shall have the right to capture any animal or fowl found running at large or
which is insecurely or ineffectually controlled upon any public street,
highway, alley or ground. The destruction of any animal or fowl shall be in
accordance with the rules and procedures established by the County Animal
Control Department and pursuant to any contract between the town and the
County Animal Control.



§ 4-5  CONFINEMENT, OBSERVATION OF ANIMALS BITING PERSONS.



   Any animal or fowl that bites or inflicts injury upon a human being
shall be confined and observed for a period of time established by procedures
of the County Animal Control.



§ 4-6  IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS AND FOWL CAPTURED RUNNING AT LARGE; NOTICE TO
OWNERS; REGISTRY OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   The County Animal Control Officer or Police Department shall impound
any such animal or fowl found running or roaming at large and shall
immediately give notice of such impoundment to the owner if known and if such
owner can be found. A record of animals captured by the Police Department
shall be maintained providing a description of such animal and location where
animal was found or captured.



§ 4-7  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS AND FOWL.



   While any animal or fowl is being held at the Police Department,
pursuant to § 4-6 of this chapter, the owner thereof, upon proof of
ownership, immunization and animal license tag necessary under the laws of
the state for keeping and possessing of such animal has been paid and are
current, may redeem it. However, if such animal or fowl has been transferred
to the custody of the County Animal Control pursuant to any contract, then
the conditions of release of such animal or fowl shall be established by the
rules established by that agency.



§ 4-8  RESERVED.



§ 4-9  RESERVED.



§ 4-10  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
for the owner, keeper, custodian or possessor of any animal or fowl to allow
the same to defecate or leave its waste on any public or private property
other that the property of its owner. Any person as previously described who
permits any animal or fowl to defecate or leave its waste upon an
unauthorized place shall be required to immediately remove the excrement, or
be subject to the penalties contained in § 1-13 of this code of ordinances.



§ 4-11  KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain
any other types of animals not specifically mentioned in this section other
than the common types of pets such as parakeets, canaries, turtles, tropical
fish, hamsters, gerbils, cats and dogs.



   B.   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any animal that is
commonly known as a wild animal as a pet. For purposes of this section, a
WILD ANIMAL is one that is generally known to roam at large in regions of its
origin and would not be harbored by any person were it not for said
animal’s capture.



   C.   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any dangerous or
vicious animal as a pet. For purposes of this section, a DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS
ANIMAL shall mean any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or other animals, or any animal that is known to have attacked or
injured a person or other animal on a previous occasion, or any animal that
has known vicious propensities attributed to its species.



   D.   It shall be unlawful and the same is hereby declared to be a
nuisance for any person to keep, harbor or possess any farm animals in the
town on any premises which has open land of less than one-half acre in lot
area, whether or not the premises is also used as a residence; this section
shall not apply to 4-H projects. For purposes of this section, FARM ANIMALS
shall mean cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine, lambs, goats, poultry, rabbits
and any other animals generally considered as indigenous to agriculture.



§ 4-12  RACING PIGEONS.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 4-11 of this chapter, racing
pigeons shall be allowed to be kept in the town in strict accordance with the
following guidelines.



   A.   A RACING PIGEON is a bird that is a member of the family
Columbidae, which through selective past breeding has developed the
distinctive physical and mental characteristics as to enable it to return to
its home after having been released a considerable distance therefrom, and
which is accepted as such by the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., or the
International Federation of Racing Pigeon Fanciers. Also, commonly known as
RACING HOMER, HOMING PIGEON or CARRIER PIGEON.



   B.   There shall be no more than 75 racing pigeons kept on any
parcel of land one-half acre or larger.



   C.   There shall be no more than 20 racing pigeons on any parcel of
land less than one-half acre in size.



   D.   The racing pigeons are not allowed to be set outside their home
structure during the day or night, except for two short exercise periods
which shall not take place if the pigeons have been fed without four hours
prior to the exercise period.



   E.   Racing pigeons shall be kept in a loft of sufficient size and
design and constructed of such material that it can be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, which at least one square foot of floor space in any
loft for each pigeon kept therein. Additionally, all pigeons shall be fed
within the confines of the loft.



   F.   Racing pigeons shall not be permitted to perch or set on
property of others.



   G.   All feed for said pigeons shall be stored in containers so as
to protect against intrusion by rodents and other vermin.



   H.   The loft shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in
compliance with all applicable health regulations of the state, the county
and the town.



§ 4-13  CHICKENS.



   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 4-11 of this chapter,
chickens shall be allowed to be kept in the town in strict accordance with
the following guidelines.



      1.   A chicken is a gallus gallus domesticus, a domestic bird
typically kept on a farm. This definition does not include other fowl, such
as, but not limited to, peacocks, turkeys or waterfowl.



      2.   No roosters (male chickens) shall be kept under the
provisions of this section.



      3.   There shall be no more than four chickens on any parcel
of land less than one-half acre in size.



      4.   Chickens must be kept completely and securely enclosed
and under the control of the owner and on the owner’s property at all times.



      5.   A chicken coop, an enclosed structure for housing
chickens that provides shelter from the elements, shall be provided. The
chicken coop must provide adequate sun, shade and ventilation and must be
impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators, including cats and dogs and
must provide at least ten square feet or space per chicken kept therein. The
chicken coop shall be situated a minimum of ten feet from the property line.



      6.   Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean
water at all times.



      7.   All feed for said chickens shall be stored in containers
so as to protect against intrusion by rodents and vermin.



      8.   The chicken coop shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition and in compliance with all applicable health regulations of the
state, the county and the town.



      9.   Chickens and chicken coops shall be confined to the rear
yard of the property.



      10.   Any chickens kept in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall be for non- commercial, personal use only and may not be
slaughtered on the property.



   B.   Any violations of this section shall be subject to § 1-9 of
this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2014-18, passed 12-22-2014)



CHAPTER 5:  BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Article I. Building Commissioner



   5-1   Office created; appointment; term



   5-2   Duties; right-of-entry



Article II. In General



   5-22   Maintenance and clean up of sidewalks and streets during
construction



   5-23   Establishment of final grade prerequisite to issuance of
occupancy permit



   5-24   Cleanup of site and removal of waste prerequisite to issuance
of occupancy permit



   5-25   Permit no defense



   5-26   Town standards; municipal improvements



Article III. Building Code



   5-36   Title



   5-37   Purpose



   5-38   Authority



   5-39   Scope



   5-40   Adoption of rules by reference



   5-41   Application for permits



   5-42   Permit; required



   5-43   Same; compliance with other ordinances; minimum standards for
municipal improvements



   5-44   Same; fees; duration of permits



   5-45   Same; review of application



   5-46   Inspections; by Building Commissioner; requirement of
as-built site plan drawing prior to occupancy



   5-47   Same; by Fire Chief



   5-48   Town’s right of entry



   5-49   Stop work order



   5-50   Certificate of occupancy



   5-51   Work standards



   5-52   Violations



   5-53   Remedies



   5-54   Effective date



   5-55   Definitions



   5-56   Applicability



   5-57   Identification required



   5-58   Disclosure required on permit application



   5-59   Tags



   5-60   Inspections



   5-61   Penalties



Article IV. Building Contractors



   5-81   Registration required



   5-82   Building contractor



   5-83   Industrial



   5-84   Bond required



   5-85   Reserved



   5-86   Issuance; posting same; revocation of permits; appeals



   5-87   Reserved



   5-88   Duties of holder



   5-89   No defense to violations



   5-90   Enforcement



Article V. Moving Buildings



Division 1. Generally



   5-101   Sidewalks and curbs to be protected



   5-102   Move to be made without reasonable delay; not be parked on
street at night, exception



Division 2. Permit



   5-116   Required; bond



   5-117   Application; fee



   5-118   Prerequisite conditions to issuance



Article VI. Unsafe Buildings



   5-166   Short title



   5-167   Definitions



   5-168   State law adopted by reference



   5-169   Declared public nuisances; abatement required



   5-170   Enforcement



   5-171   Officer’s authority of enforcement



   5-172   Work standards



   5-173   Fund established



   5-174   Violations; penalties



Article VII. Numbering of Buildings



   5-175   Multi-family dwelling structures



   5-176   One- and two-family dwellings



   5-177   Public accommodations



Article VIII. Vacant and Abandoned Real Property Program



   5-178   Purpose



   5-179   Definitions



   5-180   State law adopted by reference



   5-181   Rules and procedures; continuing maintenance; mandatory and
involuntary registration



   5-182   Property manager



   5-183   Information required with registration



   5-184   Standards of maintenance



   5-185   Registration fees



   5-186   Liability insurance



   5-187   Penalties



ARTICLE I. BUILDING COMMISSIONER



§ 5-1  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   There is hereby created and continued in the town, the office of
Building Commissioner. The Chief Fire Inspector of the Fire Department shall
assume all duties, rights, powers and responsibilities of the Building
Commissioner set forth in the code.



§ 5-2  DUTIES; RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner or his or her
designee to approve all building permits in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and to have charge of and enforce all ordinances now in force
and/or which may hereafter be established, together with all town, state and
federal laws and regulations, pertaining to the erection, construction,
alteration, repair or removal of buildings and other structures in the town
or pertaining to the use and occupancy of real estate in the town and to
perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him or her by the Town
Council. He or she shall examine and inspect buildings in the course of
erection, alteration, repair or removal throughout the town as often as
practicable and see that all ordinances, laws and regulations in relation
thereto are complied with. Whenever violation of or failure to comply with
any ordinance of the town or any state or federal law or regulation comes to
the attention of the Building Commissioner or his or her designee, he or she
shall take all steps necessary to enforce the applicable provisions of the
pertinent ordinances, laws and regulations. For the purpose of carrying out
his or her duties, the Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall
have the right at all times to enter buildings and premises in the town for
the purpose of inspecting the same and ascertaining whether or not applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations are being complied with.



ARTICLE II. IN GENERAL



§ 5-22  MAINTENANCE AND CLEAN UP OF SIDEWALKS AND STREETS DURING
CONSTRUCTION.



   A.   1.   At all times during construction, the person owning the
property shall maintain the sidewalks and streets in front of and adjacent to
the building site so as to prevent damage thereto by construction vehicles as
well as to maintain the same free from accumulations of dirt and debris.



      2.   To this end, silt retention structures must be erected
and maintained at all building or construction sites until the Building
Commissioner has determined that adequate ground cover has been established,
even if occupancy permit has been given.



      3.   For purposes of this section, a SILT RETENTION STRUCTURE
is defined as a structure that must prevent sediment from washing onto
roadways or adjoining properties by restricting the storm water runoff from
the site.



      4.   All silt retention structures shall required approval of
the Building Commissioner.



   B.   1.   The Building Commissioner is authorized and empowered
to refuse to make periodic inspections and approvals, as well as to instruct
the Plumbing Inspector and Electrical Inspector to refrain from making
inspection approvals if the sidewalks and streets, as aforesaid, have not
been maintained as herein set forth.



      2.   In no event shall an occupancy permit be granted until
any damage to sidewalks or streets contiguous to or adjacent to the building
site has been repaired and cleaned.



      3.   The Building Commissioner is also explicitly authorized
and empowered to issue a stop work order in accordance with § 5-49 of this
chapter for any violation of subsection A. above.



(Ord. 2005-03, passed 4-10-2005)



§ 5-23  ESTABLISHMENT OF FINAL GRADE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF OCCUPANCY
PERMIT.



   The Building Commissioner shall not issue an occupancy permit for any
structure the subject of a building permit until the final grade for such
structure and building site has been completed and established in accordance
with applicable ordinances of the town.



§ 5-24  CLEANUP OF SITE AND REMOVAL OF WASTE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF
OCCUPANCY PERMIT.



   The Building Commissioner shall not issue an occupancy permit for any
structure the subject of a building permit until the building site on which
such structure is located has been cleaned and waste and discarded
construction material have been removed therefrom.



§ 5-25  PERMIT NO DEFENSE.



   In any action or prosecution brought in any court to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter or to convict any person for violation of any part
of this chapter, the fact that a permit may have been issued shall not
constitute a defense nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on
the part of the Building Commissioner constitute a defense, but each and all
of the terms and provisions of this chapter shall, at all times, be strictly
enforced and complied with.



§ 5-26  TOWN STANDARDS; MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   The town adopts the “Chesterton Town Standards” by reference and
these standards are incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-26-2015; Ord. 2015-08, passed 5-26-2015)



ARTICLE III. BUILDING CODE



§ 5-36  TITLE.



   This article, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Building Code of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana”,
may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code”.



§ 5-37  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare,
and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.



§ 5-38  AUTHORITY.



   A.   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code.



   B.   Whenever in this code it is provided that anything must be done
to the approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner
or any other officer of the town, this shall be construed to give such
officer only the discretion of determining whether this code has been
complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what this code shall be, or power to require
conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce this code in an
arbitrary or discriminatory manner.



   C.   Any variations from adopted building rules are subject to
approval under I.C. 22-13-2-7.



§ 5-39  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alterations,
repair, use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to all buildings and
structures, other than industrialized building systems or mobile structures
certified under I.C. 22-15-4 in the town.



§ 5-40  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   The following building rules, codes and standards are hereby adopted by
reference.



   A.   Building rules of the state’s Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following articles of I.A.C. Title 675
are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include later
amendments to those articles as the same are published in the Indiana
Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed
therein:



      1.   Article 13, Building Codes:



         a.   Fire and Building Safety Standards (675 I.A.C.
13-1);



         b.   Indiana Building Code, 1998 Edition (1997 UBC, Vol.
1, 2 and 3 CABO/ANSI A117.1 - 1972) (675 I.A.C. 13-2.6 or latest edition); and



         c.   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code (675 I.A.C.
13-2.3-13).



      2.   Article 14, One- and Two-Family Dwelling Codes:



         a.   Indiana Residential Code 2001 Edition (675 I.A.C.
14-4.3 or latest edition) (IRC 2000 Edition); and



         b.   Standard for Permanent Installation of Manufactured
Homes (675 I.A.C. 14-4.3-262 or latest edition).



      3.   Article 15, Industrialized Building Systems and Mobile
Structure Systems:



         a.   Special Administrative Rules for Industrialized
Building Systems and Mobile Structure Systems (675 I.A.C. 15-1.1 or latest
edition); and



         b.   Indiana Mobile Structures Code (675 I.A.C. 15-2).



      4.   Article 16, Plumbing Codes: Indiana Plumbing Code 1999
Edition (UPC 1997 Edition) (675 I.A.C. 16-1.4 or latest edition);



      5.   Article 17, Electrical Codes: Indiana Electrical Code
(NFPA 70-1999) (675 I.A.C. 17-1.8 or latest edition);



      6.   Article 18, Mechanical Codes: Indiana Mechanical Code
1997 Edition (IMC, 1996 Edition) (675 I.A.C. 18-1) (675 I.A.C. 18-1.6 or
latest edition);



      7.   Article 19, Energy Conservation Codes: Indiana Energy
Conservation Code (CABO 1992 Edition) (675 I.A.C. 19-4 or latest edition);



      8.   Article 20, Swimming Pool Codes:



         a.   General Provisions and Definitions (675 I.A.C.
20-1.1);



         b.   Public Swimming Pools (675 I.A.C. 20-2);



         c.   Public Spas (675 I.A.C. 20-3); and



         d.   Residential Swimming Pools (675 I.A.C. 20-4).



      9.   Article 22, Flammable and Combustible Liquids and Gases:



         a.   Flammable and Combustible Liquids and Gases Code
(675 I.A.C. 22-2.5-37 Chapter 57 or latest edition); and



         b.   Indiana Fire Code 1998 Edition (675 I.A.C. 22-2.5
or latest edition) (UFC 1997 Edition).



   B.   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on
file in the office of the Building Commissioner.



§ 5-41  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   A.   1.   Applications for building permits shall be filed with
the Building Commissioner of the town. The application shall include:



         a.   Legal description of property included in the
application;



         b.   Site plan showing the structure, or improvement,
and meeting with the requirements listed herein;



         c.   Sanitary sewer permits as required by the utility;
and



         d.   Dedication of right-of-way when and where it is
required. Such dedications shall be acceptable to the Town Council or Utility
Service Board, whichever is applicable.



      2.   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing
purpose, unless the application for the permit is accompanied by a plat or
sketch of the proposed location showing lot boundaries with plans and
specifications showing the work to be done. In addition, the following
“Affidavit on Plan Authentication” shall be provided.



      3.   The Building Commissioner or his designated
representative may revoke a building permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this chapter in the event there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based, including, but not limited to, those set
forth in subsection A.2. above.



      4.   A copy of construction plans showing elevations, floor
plans and all plumbing and electrical with dimensions for all.



      5.   All street name and regulatory signs must be installed
per town standards prior to any building permits being issued for development.



   B.   The site plan submitted as part of the application for review
shall include and conform to the following:



      1.   Be submitted in triplicate for all uses other than
single- or two-family dwelling;



      2.   Be drawn in scale sufficient to show the required details
with clarity. The preferred scale shall be one inch equals 20 feet;



      3.   Show all property lines and right-of-way dimensions;



      4.   Show the location of all existing and all proposed
improvements on the property, the front, side and rear yard setback
dimensions, and distances-between structures;



      5.   Show existing and proposed easements, their purposes and
their widths;



      6.   Show what provisions will be made to handle storm water
runoff. Single- or two-family homes may show direction of flow by arrows on
site plan. Business, industrial or multi-family dwellings not included above
will show existing and proposed surface elevations, finished floor elevations
and the engineering calculations for surface water runoff;



      7.   The site plan will show proposed connections to sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and water, and location, size and depth of same;
business and industrial structures shall also show the type and location of
the sediment-grease traps, the type and location of backflow devices for
water and the location of fire protection devices such as hydrants;



      8.   Business and industrial sites shall designate all uses to
be conducted within said sites and the items to be stored within the
boundaries of same;



      9.   Show means and access to and from town rights-of-way;



      10.   In multi-family, business or industrial sites the number
and location of parking spaces shall be shown, including all disability
parking spaces;



      11.   Site plans adjacent to or located in a flood plain area
shall be prepared by a professional engineer, licensed in the state. Forms
are available from the Town Engineer for this;



      12.   Business and industrial site plans shall show the
proposed landscaping, fencing and/or walls and location of all utilities; and



      13.   Show the name, address and telephone number of the
person responsible for the preparation of the site plan.



 

AFFIDAVIT ON PLAN AUTHENTICATION

 

                                                   
                              , being first duly sworn upon
his or her oath says:

 

As the person eligible and responsible for obtaining a permit or permits as
required in § 5-41A.2. of the Chesterton Town Code, and based upon
information contained within these plans, I certify that these plans are
identical to those released for construction by the Indiana Department of
Fire and Building Services. I also understand that if it is determined that
these plans are not identical, all permits obtained as a result of their
submittal may be revoked as stated in § 5-41A.3. of the Chesterton Town
Code, and that I will be subject to penalties for perjury.

 

 

                                                   
                         

Affiant’s Signature

 

                                                   
                         

Printed Name

 

Subscribed and sworn to before me, a Notary Public, this              
  day of                         , 20         

 

                                                   
                         

Notary Public

 

My Commission Expires:

 

                                                   
                 

 

Resident of                                          
County



 



§ 5-42  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   A permit shall be obtained before beginning excavation, construction,
alteration or repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds
$1,000 and not involving any change of use or additional lot coverage. A
permit is required for all plumbing and electrical construction, alteration
or repair to any structure or building regardless of cost. Ail permits shall
be issued by the Building Commissioner using forms furnished by the Building
Commissioner and all fees provided for herein shall be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 5-43  SAME; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES; MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR
MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   A.   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with
all other ordinances pertaining thereto and, in addition to the fees for
permits, there shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances.



   B.   A town’s minimum standards for municipal improvements, two
copies of which are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public
inspection, shall be used for the design, layout and construction of streets,
curbs, sidewalks, storm sewers, water facilities, sewer lines and other
public facilities as described therein. In addition, these standards shall
apply to all construction in the town, not simply those for subdivisions and
planned unit developments.



   C.   All requests for waivers of the town’s minimum standards for
municipal improvements shall be made on a petition for waiver of minimum
standards, which petition form shall be made available by the
Clerk-Treasurer. The completed petition shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable filing fee of $50 to cover the administrative expenses
associated with processing and reviewing the petition. Upon receipt of a
completed petition and payment of the filing fee, the request for waiver
shall be forwarded to the Town Council. The Town Council shall make a
preliminary determination whether to consider the waiver. If the Town Council
determines to consider the waiver, it shall forward the request to the
department heads for a recommendation and shall place the matter on the
agenda for the next Town Council meeting. In considering a request for
waiver, the Town Council may impose reasonable conditions on the property for
which the waiver is sought. The decision to grant or deny or to conditionally
grant a request for waiver of town standards is a matter within the sole
discretion of the Town Council.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed 6-26-2006)



§ 5-44  SAME; FEES; DURATION OF PERMITS.



   A.   1.   Building permits required by § 5-42 of this chapter
shall be issued upon prior payment of application and inspection fees
according to the following schedule:



 

Building or Permit Type
 
Permit Fee
 
Minimum Permit Fee




Accessory structures commercial
 
$0.20 sq. ft.
 
$50


Accessory structures residential
 
$0.16 sq. ft.
 
$50


Cell tower/antenna tower
 
$350
 


Commercial addition
 
$0.27 sq. ft.
 
$200


Commercial new construction
 
$0.27 sq. ft.
 
$500


Commercial remodel
 
$0.20 sq. ft.
 
$100


Commercial repair/replace
 
$0.03 per dollar of job cost (not to exceed $1,000)
 
$100


Decks/porches
 
$30
 


Demolition
 
$100
 


Driveway residential
 
$30
 


Fences
 
$50
 


Industrial addition
 
$0.28 sq. ft.
 
$200


Industrial new construction
 
$0.28 sq. ft.
 
$500


Industrial repair/replace
 
$0.03 per dollar of job cost (not to exceed $1000)
 
$150


Mechanical equipment furnace, A/C, boiler, air handler, hood exhaust
 
$30 per unit
 


Multi-family new construction
 
$0.29 sq. ft.
 
$750


Parking lot commercial/industrial
 
$50
 


Parking lot seal coating
 
$25
 


Pools
 
$50
 


Residential addition
 
$0.22 sq. ft.
 
$100


Residential remodel
 
$0.15 sq. ft.
 
$ 50


Residential repair/replace
 
$0.02 per dollar of job cost (not to exceed $750)
 
$50


Signs
 
$0.65 sq. ft.
 
$35


Single-family new construction
 
$0.22 sq. ft
 
$400


Temporary structures
 
$50
 




 



      2.   When calculating square footage, the total square footage
shall include the living area, basement and crawl space.



      3.   A non-refundable deposit shall be paid upon submission of
a building permit application for all new construction in the following
amounts:



 

New residential
 
$200


New multi-family
 
$300


New commercial
 
$300


New industrial
 
$300



 



      4.   This non-refundable deposit shall be deducted from the
total building permit cost as a credit at the time the building permit is
issued.



      5.   Any builder, owner or contractor requesting more than the
13 standard inspections, the same being stake, pre-pour foundation, backfill,
underground electrical, electrical service, underground plumbing, rough
plumbing, rough framing, rough mechanical, insulation and occupancy, shall
pay a fee of $40 for each of the additional inspections required.



      6.   A reinspection fee of $50 per reinspection must be paid
before reinspection of any rejected residential construction and $85 for
rejected commercial or industrial construction.



      7.   For any structure that has been declared a total loss,
whether by fire, tornado, flood or otherwise, a permit will be issued and
permit fees calculated, as if new construction.



      8.   For residential remodel, residential and commercial
accessory structures, there will be a $25 inspection fee for each inspection.



   B.   An occupancy permit fee of $40 shall be assessed.



   C.   Temporary occupancy permits may be issued provided a fee of $25
has been paid prior to issuance.



   D.   There will be in addition to the fees set forth above, a $35
plumbing permit application fee, inspection fee of $6 per fixture in the
structure with a minimum charge of $50 for all plumbing in structure.



   E.   Before any electrical permit is issued for installation or
alteration of the electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment, the
persons making application for such permit shall pay to the Clerk- Treasurer
the following fee.



      1.   One- and two-family residential.



 

Service Type
 
Application Fee
 
Inspection Fee


Temporary electric
 
$30
 
$50


100 amp
 
$30
 
$50


200 amp
 
$30
 
$50


400 amp
 
$50
 
$85


All other service
 
$30
 
$50



 



         a.   Rejected one- or two-family residential electrical
work shall be reinspected at a cost of $50 per inspection.



         b.   Miscellaneous residential electrical work (room
additions and remodeling) shall be inspected at a cost of $50 per inspection.



         c.   Miscellaneous commercial electrical work shall be
inspected at a cost of $85 per inspection.



      2.   Multi-family/business/industrial.



 

Service Type
 
Application Fee
 
Inspection Fee


Temporary electric
 
$50
 
$30


100 amp
 
$30
 
$95


200 amp
 
$30
 
$95


400 amp
 
$50
 
$175


3 phase
 
$75
 
$250


All other service
 
$50
 
$210



 



         a.   Rejected multi-family/business/industrial
electrical work shall be reinspected at a cost of $85 per hour with a minimum
charge of $85.



         b.   Any builder, owner, contractor requesting more than
the four standard inspections, underground, service, rough and final, shall
pay a fee of $85 per hour for each inspection with a minimum charge of $85
for each additional inspection requested.



      3.   Upgrades of existing service.



 

Service Type
 
Application Fee
 
Inspection Fee


60 - 100 amp
 
$20
 
$40


60 - 200 amp
 
$20
 
$40


100 - 200 amp
 
$20
 
$40


200 - 400 amp
 
$30
 
$50


400 - 3 phase
 
$50
 
$125



 



   F.   Every permit issued by the town pursuant to this chapter shall
expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 60 days from the date of such permit or has not been
completed within 180 days from the date of such permit except that new
residential, business and industrial structures shall have 18 months to be
completed from the date of such permit before the permit expires. Before any
uncompleted work can be recommenced after the expiration of a permit, a new
permit shall be first obtained and a new fee shall be paid in accordance with
this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-24, passed 9-11-2006)



§ 5-45  SAME; REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall:



   A.   Review all building permit application to determine full
compliance with the provisions of this code;



   B.   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding;



   C.   Review building permit applications for major repairs within
the floodplain area having special flood hazards to determine that the
proposed repair:



      1.   Uses construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage; and



      2.   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



   D.   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the floodplain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes):



      1.   Is protected against flood damage;



      2.   Is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, flood damage; and



      3.   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



§ 5-46  INSPECTIONS; BY BUILDING COMMISSIONER; REQUIREMENT OF AS-BUILT SITE
PLAN DRAWING PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY.



   After the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work being done as
are necessary to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this code and
the terms of the permit. Reinspections of work found to be incomplete or not
ready for inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as
prescribed in this code. Prior to the Prepour Foundation Walls inspection, a
written document signed and sealed by a registered state land surveyor must
be submitted certifying the top of the footing elevation.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 5-47  SAME; BY FIRE CHIEF.



   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her designated
representative, shall assist the Building Commissioner in the inspection of
fire suppression, detection and alarm systems and shall provide reports of
such inspection to the Building Commissioner.



§ 5-48  TOWN’S RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or
his or her duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure or premises in the town to perform any duty imposed upon
him or her by this code.



§ 5-49  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be
done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by
the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.



§ 5-50  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   A.   Prior to an occupancy permit being issued, the parkway area
(area between the curb edge of the road pavement and the sidewalk) shall be
sodded. If the lot does not have a parkway area, then no less than eight feet
of sod shall be placed between the curb edge of the road pavement and the
building or structure.



   B.   Prior to an occupancy permit being issued, an as-built site
plan drawing must be submitted signed and scaled by a registered state land
surveyor, meeting all of the requirements of § 5-41 of this chapter and
identifying all of the improvements including, but not limited to, the
following: building layouts; infrastructure; top of the footing elevation;
top of the foundation walls elevation; finished garage floor elevation; final
grading elevations for the parcel and extending at least 20 feet into
surrounding parcels; and drainage flow arrows.



   C.   1.   No certificate of occupancy for any building or
structure erected, altered or repaired after the adoption of this code shall
be issued unless such building or structure was erected, alter or repaired in
compliance with the provisions of this code.



      2.   It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or
structure unless a full, partial or temporary certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Commissioner.



   D.   Carbon monoxide detector requirement: For all buildings of a
Class 2 structure (as defined by I.C. 22-12-1-5, or any subsequent statute)
designed for residential use and having a fireplace, attached garage, or
fossil fuel burning appliance, and for which a building permit is issued for
new construction after the date that this section is in full force and
effect, shall have at least one operational carbon monoxide detector (as
defined in § 8-2 of the code of ordinances) per residential unit.
Installation of the carbon monoxide detector shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications and recommendations.



(Ord. 2007-14, passed 6-25-2007; Ord. 2017-12, passed 7-24-2017)



§ 5-51  WORK STANDARDS.



   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



§ 5-52  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure, in the town, or cause or permit the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this code.



§ 5-53  REMEDIES.



   The Building Commissioner may in the name of the town bring actions in
the Superior or Circuit Courts of the county, for mandatory and injunctive
relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or
orders made by the Building Commissioner, and any such action for mandatory
or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this code.



§ 5-54  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This code shall be in full force and effect from and after its
adoption, approval by the state’s Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission and publication as required by law.



§ 5-55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 5-55 through 5-61 of this chapter, the
following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.



   MANUFACTURED FLOOR. Any floor support system, including I-beam joists,
trusses, rim boards or headers, constructed in whole or in part with
manufactured or engineered wood products as opposed to conventional or
natural wood products.



   MANUFACTURED ROOF. Any roof support system, including I-beam joists,
trusses or rafters, constructed in whole or in part with manufactured or
engineered wood products as opposed to conventional or natural wood products.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 5-56  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of §§ 5-55 through 5-61 of this chapter shall apply to
all commercial and residential new construction and to alterations of
structures and accessory structures, as such alterations are defined by this
chapter, located within the town and for which a final occupancy permit has
not been issued as of the effective date of §§ 5-55 through 5-61 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 5-57  IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   The builder or owner of any structure containing a manufactured floor
or manufactured roof shall clearly identify the existence of such
manufactured floor or manufactured roof within the structure. In all such
cases, it shall be a condition of the issuance of a final occupancy permit
that fire resistant tags be conspicuously posted on the gas or electric
utility meter located on the outside of the structure. Structures containing
manufactured floors shall be designated with a tag indicating “F”, and
structures containing manufactured roofs shall be designated with a tag
indicating “R”, structures containing both manufactured floors and
manufactured roofs shall be designated with a tag indicating “RF”.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 5-58  DISCLOSURE REQUIRED ON PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Builders and owners shall disclose the use of manufactured floors or
manufactured roofs on the application for an improvement location permit.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 5-59  TAGS.



   The town’s Building Department shall make available the tags required
by this chapter, which shall be purchased by the builder or owner and
installed prior to occupancy. The applicant shall be responsible for paying
for the actual cost of the tag to the Building Department. Any individual who
removes a tag installed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a fine
in accordance with § 5-61 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 5-60  INSPECTIONS.



   All structures and accessory structures for which an improvement
location permit is applied for after the effective date of §§ 5-55 through
5-61 of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the town’s Building
Commissioner to ensure compliance with the provisions of §§ 5-55 through
5-61 of this chapter. In order to ensure compliance with §§ 5-55 through
5-61 of this chapter, the Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall
have the right of entry into any structure or accessory structure subject to
the provisions of §§ 5-55 through 5-61 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 5-61  PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates §§ 5-57 or 5-59 of this chapter shall be
fined $250 for a first violation and up to $2,500 for any second or
subsequent violation. Each violation of §§ 5-57 or 5-59 of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not be
construed as limiting any remedy available to the town, including injunctive
relief or § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 9-28-2015)



ARTICLE IV. BUILDING CONTRACTORS



§ 5-81  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every building contractor who desires to engage in business as a
building contractor in the town shall apply in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer for a “contractor registration” and shall pay a
registration fee of $100, payable to the town for a new registration. The
registration shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of
issuance and all renewals of the registration, if done within 30 days of the
expiration date of the registration, shall be at the rate of $50 per renewal.
If a renewal of registration is not completed within 30 days after
expiration, the registration fee will be $100 for a new registration. All
registrations in existence at the time of passage of this section shall be
required to pay the $50 registration renewal fee at the expiration of their
present registration; provided that, the registration is renewed within 30
days from its expiration date. It shall be unlawful for any building
contractor to engage in business as a building contractor in the town without
having procured the aforementioned registration. This section applies to, and
registrations are only required for, any job that requires a building permit
as the same may be required under the code.



§ 5-82  BUILDING CONTRACTOR.



   The term BUILDING CONTRACTOR shall mean and include any person who, for
a fixed sum price, fee percentage or any compensation, shall build,
construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from or erect any building or
structure within the town. The terms shall include, but not be limited to,
all ancillary contractors, including carpentry, concrete, cement finishing,
masonry, demolition, electrical, plumbing, escalator, excavating, fencing,
garage, heating and air conditioning, insulators, painter, pavers, plastering
and dry wall, roof and siding, sewers, well installers, steel, sheet metal,
but shall not include any private person doing the above work on his or her
own private home or accessory structure for same.



§ 5-83  INDUSTRIAL.



   Any person registering as a manufacturer or processor of portable goods
or products or registering as the power, light or telephone utility serving
the town and desiring to do electrical work in their own establishments shall
be issued and “industrial permit” as prescribed in form by the Council
upon payment of permit fees as set forth in § 5-44 of this chapter.



§ 5-84  BOND REQUIRED.



   All building contractors in the town shall file with the
Clerk-Treasurer a recorded unified licensed bond in the sum of $5,000 to
ensure the compliance with the code in performing his or her duties as a
licensed contractor. All building contractors shall furnish to the
Clerk-Treasurer certificates of insurance showing compliance with Indiana
workers’ compensation and occupational disease laws, certificates of
insurance illustrating minimum combined single limits of $500,000 per
occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The unified licensed bond
required and such insurance policies shall be maintained so long as the
licensee continues to do business in the town. Any violation of this section
shall cause the Building Commissioner to issue a stop work order at each
place the building contractor is engaging in business in the town until this
section is complied with.



§ 5-85  RESERVED.



§ 5-86  ISSUANCE; POSTING SAME: REVOCATION OF PERMITS: APPEALS.



   Every permit shall be in writing signed by the Clerk-Treasurer or his
or her designee, but the Clerk- Treasurer shall not sign or issue any permit
without the written approval of the Building Commissioner. Every permit after
issuance shall be posted in plain view at all times at the location of the
construction or other work. The issuance of a permit in any case shall not be
construed under any circumstances as a waiver of any of the requirements of
any ordinances of the town. All ordinances, laws and regulations applicable
thereto shall, at all times, be strictly kept and complied with. If, at any
time, the Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall discover that
the applicant to whom such permit was issued has, in any way, violated his or
her rights thereunder or any law or regulation the Building Commissioner, or
his or her designee shall forthwith revoke such permit and, after any such
revocation, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
proceed directly or indirectly with any building work in the town. Any
interested party may appeal any revocation order made by the Building
Commissioner to the Town Council at its next regular meeting.



§ 5-87  RESERVED.



§ 5-88  DUTIES OF HOLDER.



   A.   It shall be the duty of a permit holder under this division to
notify the Building Commissioner as to the progress of all electrical work.



   B.   The permit holder shall not conceal any of the electrical work
until an inspection is made.



   C.   The contractor will make arrangements for electrical
inspections 24 hours in advance.



§ 5-89  NO DEFENSE TO VIOLATIONS.



   In any action or prosecution brought in any court to enforce any of the
provisions of this article or to convict any person for violation of any part
of this article, the fact that a permit may have been issued shall not
constitute a defense nor shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on
the part of the Electrical Inspector constitute a defense, but each and all
of the terms and provisions of this article shall at all times be strictly
enforced and complied with.



§ 5-90  ENFORCEMENT.



   The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee.



ARTICLE V. MOVING BUILDINGS



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



§ 5-101  SIDEWALKS AND CURBS TO BE PROTECTED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to move any building across
or on a sidewalk or curb without securely planking or bridging the same in
such manner that the sidewalk or curb shall not be injured.



   B.   Such planking or bridging shall be done at the sole cost of the
person doing such moving.



§ 5-102  MOVE TO BE MADE WITHOUT REASONABLE DELAY; NOT BE PARKED ON STREET
AT NIGHT, EXCEPTION.



   A.   Any person moving any building or similar structure on any
street, alley or public place in the town shall proceed without unreasonable
or unnecessary delay. No building shall be left standing on any street,
alley, sidewalk, curb or public grounds within the town overnight. If it
becomes necessary for the person making such move to leave the building
standing overnight, the mover shall make arrangements at his or her expense
to park such building in a place other than on a street, alley, sidewalk or
public ground unless the Town Council specifies otherwise in such permit.



   B.   Any building or similar structure left standing on any street,
alley or public ground without permission as provided in subsection A. above
may be towed away at the owner’s expense.



DIVISION 2. PERMIT



§ 5-116  REQUIRED; BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to move any building or similar
structure on, along or upon any street, alley or public ground of the town
without first obtaining a written permit from the Town Council and providing
an indemnifying bond as hereinafter provided.



§ 5-117  APPLICATION; FEE.



   A.   Any person desiring to move any building or similar structure
on any street, alley or public ground of the town shall file a written
application for a permit with the Council at least 15 days in advance of such
moving.



   B.   Such application shall identify the building (or structure) to
be moved, designate the starting point and destination of such move and the
proposed route, and provide the date and time such moved is desired.



   C.   The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $140.



§ 5-118  PREREQUISITE CONDITIONS TO ISSUANCE.



   A.   Before any application for a permit required by this division
shall be granted, the applicant shall:



      1.   File an indemnity bond in favor of the town in such
amount as the Council shall direct;



      2.   Provide for adequate traffic direction and control at the
cost of the applicant; and



      3.   File a copy of the applicant’s liability insurance
policy with the Council illustrating a minimum combine single limit for
bodily injury and property damage of $500,000 per occurrence, with the town
named therein as an additional insured. Such indemnity bond shall be returned
intact within 60 days of the date of such moving unless the town shall notify
the applicant in writing that it has incurred damage as a result of such
move, in which case such bond shall be retained by the town until such damage
is rectified.



   B.   In granting such permit, the Council shall specify the route,
date and time of such move. The Council may make such changes in the route,
date and time of such move as specified in the application, as the Council
deems necessary.



ARTICLE VI. UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 5-166  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Chesterton
Unsafe Building Law”.



§ 5-167  DEFINITIONS.



   A.   The definitions of “substantial property interest” set
forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2 is hereby incorporated by reference herein as if
copied in full.



   B.   The description of an “unsafe building” and unsafe
premises” contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is incorporated by reference herein as
if copied in full and reads as follows.



      1.   For purposes of this chapter, a building or structure, or
any part of a building or structure, that is as follows is an UNSAFE BUILDING:



         a.   In an impaired structural condition that makes it
unsafe to a person or property;



         b.   A fire hazard;



         c.   A hazard to the public health;



         d.   A public nuisance;



         e.   Dangerous to a person or property because of a
violation of a statute or ordinance concerning building condition or
maintenance; or



         f.   Vacant and not maintained in a manner that would
allow human habitation, occupancy, or use under the requirements of a statute
or an ordinance.



      2.   For purposes of this article, the following are
considered UNSAFE PREMISES:



         a.   An unsafe building; and



         b.   The tract of real property on which the unsafe
building is located.



§ 5-168  STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 is hereby adopted by reference as the
town’s Unsafe Building Law. All proceedings within the town for the
inspection, repair and removal of unsafe building shall be governed by such
law and the provisions of this article. If the provisions of this article
conflict with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, the
provisions of the state statute shall control. Two copies of I.C. 36-7-9-1
through 36-7-9-28 are on file for public review in the office of the Clerk-
Treasurer.



§ 5-169  DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCES; ABATEMENT REQUIRED.



   All buildings or portions thereof within the town that are determined
after inspection by the Building Commissioner to be unsafe, as defined in
this article, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated
by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.



§ 5-170  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Building Commissioner, as chief administrative officer of the
Building Department, is the enforcement authority and shall be authorized to
administer and to proceed under the provisions of the unsafe building law in
ordering the repair or removal of any buildings found to be unsafe as
specified therein or as specified hereafter. The Town Council shall be the
hearing authority under the provisions of the unsafe building law for all
proceedings that may be held under I.C. 36-7-9.



§ 5-171  OFFICER’S AUTHORITY OF ENFORCEMENT.



   Whenever in the building regulations of the state’s or the town’s
Unsafe Building Law, it is provided that anything must be done to the
approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner, or any
other officer of the town, this shall be construed to give such officer only
the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established by
ordinance have been complied with; and no such provisions shall be construed
as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or
standards shall be, power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance
or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discretionary manner.



§ 5-172  WORK STANDARDS.



   A.   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or
demolition of buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good,
workmanlike manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the
trade.



   B.   The provisions of the rules pertaining to construction,
plumbing, electrical, mechanical and one- and two-family dwellings,
promulgated by the state’s Administrative Building Council, shall be
considered standard and acceptable practice for all matters covered by this
article or orders issued pursuant to this article by the Building
Commissioner.



§ 5-173  FUND ESTABLISHED.



   An Unsafe Building Fund is hereby established in the operating budget
of the town in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.



§ 5-174  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish,
equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
the article or I.C. 36-7-9-28. Any violation of this article shall be subject
to § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



ARTICLE VII. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS



§ 5-175  MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURES.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) or manager(s) of every
multi-family dwelling structure in the town to identify by letters or
numbers, the number of such multi-family dwelling. The letters or numbers
shall not be less than three inches high and not more than five inches high,
and placed on contrasting material so as to be visible from the street. The
numbers shall not be spelled out or placed in Roman numbers.



   B.   In the event that more than one such multi-family dwelling
structure is located on a single zoning lot or within a development bearing a
common name, each separate multi-family dwelling structure shall have a
separate and distinct number or letter. The letters or numbers shall not be
less than three inches high and not more than five inches high, and place on
contrasting material so as to be visible from the street. The numbers shall
not be spelled out or placed in Roman numerals.



§ 5-176  ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of each
one- and two-family dwelling hereafter erected in the town to have placed on
such structure, at the time of occupancy thereof, letters or numbers not less
than three inches high and not more than five inches high, and placed on
contrasting material so as to be visible from the street. The numbers shall
not be spelled out or placed in Roman numerals.



   B.   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of each
one- and two-family dwelling existing as of 8-11-1975, in the town to have
placed on such structure letters or numbers not less than three inches high
and not more than five inches high, and placed on contrasting material so as
to be visible from the street. The numbers shall not be spelled out or placed
in Roman numerals.



§ 5-177  PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of each structure
of public accommodation in the town to have placed on such structure, letters
or numbers not less than three inches high and not more than five inches
high, and placed on contrasting material so as to be visible from the street.
The numbers shall not be spelled out or placed in Roman numerals.



ARTICLE VIII. VACANT AND ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY PROGRAM



§ 5-178  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is as follows:



   A.   To establish a program for ongoing identification and
registration of buildings and structures which have been vacant or abandoned;



   B.   To establish the responsibilities of owners of these vacant or
abandoned buildings; and



   C.   To provides for administration and enforcement of standards
related to vacant or abandoned buildings.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-179  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED STRUCTURE. Any of the following:



      1.   Commercial real property or a vacant structure on
commercial real property that is used or was previously used for industrial
or commercial purposes, and:



         a.   The owner of the property or structure has declared
in writing to be abandoned; or



         b.   For which the owner of the property or structure
has been given a written order by an enforcement authority to rehabilitate or
demolish, and the owner:



            1.   Has not applied for a permit to rehabilitate
or demolish the property or structure; or



            2.   Applied for and was granted a permit, but
rehabilitation or demolition work has not commenced on the property or
structure within 30 days after the date the permit was granted.



         2.   Real property that has not been used for a legal
purpose for at least six consecutive months and:



         a.   In the judgment of an enforcement authority. Is in
need of completion, rehabilitation or repair, and completion, rehabilitation
or repair work has not taken place on the property or at least six
consecutive months;



         b.   On which at least one installment of property taxes
is delinquent; or



         c.   That has been declared a public nuisance by a
hearing authority.



      3.   Real property that has been declared in writing to be
abandoned by the owner, including an estate or a trust that possesses the
property;



      4.   Vacant real property on which a municipal lien has
remained unpaid for at least one year; or



      5.   Real estate that a court has determined to be abandoned
under I.C. 32-30-10.6



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Building Commissioner as set forth in I.C.
36-7-9-2 and § 5-170 of this chapter.



   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Chesterton Town Council as set forth in I.C.
36-7-9-2 and § 5-170 of this chapter.



   OWNER. A person that holds a substantial interest in property in the
form of a known or recorded fee interest, life estate or equitable interest
as a contract purchaser.



   VACANT STRUCTURE. A structure or building that is not being occupied by
an owner, tenant or other authorized by the owner.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-180  STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   A.   I.C. 36-7-36 et seq., as it maybe amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference by the town.



   B.   All proceedings within the town relating to the vacant and
abandoned real property program shall be governed by such law and the
provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-181  RULES AND PROCEDURES; CONTINUING MAINTENANCE; MANDATORY AND
INVOLUNTARY REGISTRATION.



   The town hereby adopts the following rules and procedures for the
enforcement of this article.



   A.   Upon finding a structure vacant and abandoned, the Building
Commissioner may issue to the structure owner an order for continuing
maintenance pursuant to the Unsafe Building Act, I.C. 36-7-9, as it may be
amended from time to time, or pursuant to similar authority granted by state
statute, this code or other statutes, ordinances and regulations.



   B.   The owner of a structure that is abandoned, as defined, shall
register it with the town’s Building Department.



   C.   The owner of a structure that is vacant but not abandoned,
within the meaning of this section may opt to register the structure it with
the town’s Building Department, so as to notify town officials of the
property manager and exchange other information pertinent to the condition of
the building.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-182  PROPERTY MANAGER.



   A.   The owner of a structure required to be registered pursuant to
§ 5-181 of this chapter must appoint a property manager residing within 30
miles of the property. The failure to appoint a property manager is a
separate violation of this section. The property manager may be the owner or
an agent of the owner.



   B.   An agent acting as the property manager must be at least 21
years of age.



   C.   The property manager must be available to town officials by
telephone 24 hours a day. The owner’s failure to make certain that such a
property manager is available and maintains the property is a separate
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-183  INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH REGISTRATION.



   The owner of a structure that is required to be registered pursuant to
§ 5-181 of this chapter shall register the property on a form provided by
the Building Department Registration on a form provided by the Building
Department, shall be verified under the penalties of perjury and shall
include the following information:



   A.   The street address of the property;



   B.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons or
entities which hold an ownership, land contract, mortgage or other lien
interesting the property, and all beneficiaries of any land trust which owns
the property;



   C.   A copy of the most recently executed deed used to transfer
title to the property and the most recently prepared sales disclosure form,
if the disclosure form is reasonably available from the owner;



   D.   The names and residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers of the property manager;



   E.   The names and addresses of all persons or entities which hold a
lien interest or a substantial property interest in the property;



   F.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the insurance
agent and the carrier providing insurance coverage for the property as
required by this section;



   G.   The owner’s plan for maintenance and repair of the property,
including the time within which the owner anticipates completion of all
repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances. However, the owner’s statement of plan does not
relieve the owner of any orders issued pursuant to the Unsafe Building Law,
or of any obligations imposed by statute, ordinance or regulation governing
the maintenance of property. The Building Department’s receipt of a plan
does not constitute approval of the owner’s plan, or of any violation of
property maintenance standards; and



   H.   The owner is responsible for providing an updated registration
form to the Building Department within five business days of any change of
ownership or any information provided by the registration. The failure of the
owner to provide such updated information within five business days of any
change is a violation of this section.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-184  STANDARDS OF MAINTENANCE.



   A.   At least once each week, the owner of a structure required to
be registered under this section must ensure that the property is inspected
and secured against unlawful entry, that the property is cleaned, vegetation
is mowed and that the property walkways and driveways have been adequately
cleared of snow and ice. Records of such inspections shall be provided to the
Building Department upon request.



   B.   The window and door opening of all buildings on the property
required to be registered shall be secured against unlawful entry by the use
of locks designed for such use.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-185  REGISTRATION FEES.



   A.   The owner of any structure required to be registered under this
article shall pay an annual registration fee to the town upon registration.



   B.   If the structure is used for or zoned for residential purposes
and contains not more than three residential units, the registration fee
shall be $250 per year.



   C.   If the structure is used or zoned for residential purposes and
contains more than three residential units, or if it is used or zoned for any
non-residential purposes, the registration fee shall be $500 for the first
year or any part thereof, $1,000 for the second year or any part thereof and
$1,500 for the third and each subsequent year or any part thereof that the
property is required to be registered pursuant to this article.



   D.   1.   The purpose of the registration fee is to reimburse the
town’s Building Department for the costs of monitoring the property and the
additional costs of responding to emergencies and property maintenance
requirements for a vacant or abandoned structure.



      2.   All fees collected shall be deposited into the town’s
General Fund.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-186  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   A.   The owner of any structure required to be registered by this
article must maintain a policy of liability insurance for the building, and
must provide to the Building Department the name, address and telephone
number of the insurance agent and carrier, along with a copy of the
certificate of or other proof of insurance coverage.



      1.   $200,500 minimum liability policy for residential
structures; and



      2.   $500,000 minimum liability policy for commercial
structures.



   B.   The policy of insurance must require the agent or carrier to
provide 15 days advance notice of cancellation to the town’s Building
Department.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 5-187  PENALTIES.



   A.   An owner of a property that remains a vacant structure or an
abandoned structure for at least 90 consecutive calendar days may be liable
for a civil penalty in the amount of $500 per vacant structure or abandoned
structure, not to exceed $5,000 per structure per year, unless:



      1.   Documentation has been filed and approved by the Building
Commissioner that indicates the owner’s intent to eliminate the vacant
structure or abandoned structure status of the property;



      2.   The owner is current on all property taxes and special
assessments; and



      3.   At least one of the following applies:



         a.   The structure is the subject of a valid building
permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is proceeding diligently
and in good faith to complete the repair or rehabilitation of the structure
as defined in the enforcement order;



         b.   The structure is:



            1.   Maintained in compliance with this article;
and



            2.   Actively being offered for sale, lease or
rent.



         c.   The owner can demonstrate that the owner made a
diligent and good faith effort to implement actions approved by the
enforcement authority.



   B.   If the structure continues to remain a vacant structure beyond
the initial 90 days described in subsection A. above and the owner does not
meet any of the exceptions set forth in this section, the enforcement
authority may continue to assess penalties each year on each structure in the
following amounts:



      1.   $100,000 for the second 90 calendar day period each
structure remains a vacant structure or an abandoned structure;



      2.   $1,500 for the third 90 calendar day period each
structure remains a vacant structure or an abandoned structure; and



      3.   $200,000 for the fourth and each subsequent 90 calendar
day period, thereafter each structure remains a vacant structure or an
abandoned structure.



   C.   A civil penalty under this section may not exceed $5,000 per
structure per year.



(Ord. 2015-13, passed 9-14-2015)



CHAPTER 6:  ELECTIONS



Section



   6-1   Division of town into districts for election purposes



   6-2   Same; filing with Circuit Court



   6-3   Same; effect



   6-4   Same; preparation of ballots



§ 6-1  DIVISION OF TOWN INTO DISTRICTS FOR ELECTION PURPOSES.



   A.   District boundaries. In accordance with I.C. 36-5-2, the
districts for the purpose of conducting elections of town officers, shall be
as follows:



      1.   District 1. Commencing at the centerline intersection of
Calumet Road and Broadway Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of
Calumet Road to the centerline of Conrail Railroad right-of-way; thence
easterly along the centerline of the Conrail Railroad right-of-way to the
centerline of SR 49 right-of-way; thence southerly along the centerline of SR
49 right-of-way to the centerline of Porter Avenue; thence easterly along the
centerline of Porter Avenue to the west right-of-way line of CR 250 E, also
known as Friday Road; thence following the corporate limits of the town to
the east, south and west, to the intersection of CR 1100 N and the extended
west line of the platted Ganz’s Addition to Chesterton subdivision; thence
west along the centerline of CR 1100 N to the centerline of Pope O’Connor
Ditch; thence continue northerly along the centerline of Pope O’Connor
Ditch to the intersection of the Pope O’Connor Ditch with the east line of
the platted Westchester South subdivision; thence north along said east line
to the centerline of Richter Street; thence west along the centerline of
Richter Street to the centerline of Second Street; thence north along the
centerline of Second Street to the centerline of Porter Avenue; thence east
along the centerline of Porter Avenue to the centerline of Calumet Road;
thence northerly along the centerline of Calumet Road to the point of
beginning;



      2.   District 2. Commencing at the centerline intersection of
Porter Avenue and Second Street; thence south along the centerline of Second
Street to the centerline of Richter Street; thence east along the centerline
of Richter Street to the east line of the platted Westchester South
subdivision; thence south along said east line to the centerline of the Pope
O’Connor Ditch; thence continue southerly along the centerline of the Pope
O’Connor Ditch to the centerline of CR 1100 N; thence west along the
centerline of CR 1100 N to the centerline of CR 50 E; thence south along the
centerline of CR 50 E to the centerline of CR 1050 N; thence west along the
centerline of CR 1050 N to the centerline of Eleventh Street, also known as
Meridian Road; thence north along the centerline of Eleventh Street to the
north line of the Abandoned Norfolk & Western Railroad right-of-way; thence
west along the north line of the Abandoned Norfolk & Western Railroad
right-of-way to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 11; thence north to the centerline of CR 1100 N;
thence west along the centerline of CR 1100 N to the intersection of Rose
Hill Drive; thence north along the centerline of Rose Hill Drive to the
centerline of Jacob Lane; thence west along the centerline of Jacob Lane to
the centerline of Maximilian Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of
Maximilian Drive to the centerline of Texas Street; thence easterly and
northerly along the centerline of Texas Street to the centerline of Griffin
Lake Avenue; thence north along the centerline of Griffin Lake Avenue to the
centerline of Washington Avenue; thence east along the centerline of
Washington Avenue to the centerline of 14th Street; thence north along the
centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Park Avenue; thence east along
Park Avenue to the centerline of 11th Street; thence north along the
centerline of 11th Street to the centerline of Porter Avenue; thence east
along the centerline of Porter Avenue to the point of beginning;



      3.   District 3. Commencing at the centerline intersection of
Calumet Road and Broadway Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of
Calumet Road to the centerline of Porter Avenue; thence west along the
centerline of Porter Avenue to the centerline of Eleventh Street; thence
south along the centerline of Eleventh Street to the centerline of Park
Avenue; thence west along the centerline of Park Avenue to the centerline of
14th Street; thence south along the centerline of 14th Street to the
centerline of Washington Avenue; thence west along Washington Avenue to the
centerline of Jackson Boulevard; thence north along the centerline of Jackson
Boulevard to the centerline of Porter Avenue; thence west along the
centerline of Porter Avenue to the centerline of 23rd Street; thence
following the corporate limits of the town to the north and east to the
intersection of Fifteenth Street and the south line of the Michigan Central
Railroad right-of-way; thence southerly along the centerline of Fifteenth
Street to the centerline of Broadway Avenue; thence east along the centerline
of Broadway Avenue to the point of beginning;



      4.   District 4. Commencing at the centerline intersection of
Porter Avenue and Jackson Boulevard; thence south along Jackson Boulevard to
the centerline of Washington Avenue; thence east to the centerline of Griffin
Lake Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Griffin Lake Avenue to
the centerline of Texas Street; thence westerly and southerly along the
centerline of Texas Street to the centerline of Maximilian Drive; thence
southerly along Maximilian Drive to the centerline of Jacob Lane; thence east
along the centerline of Jacob Lane to the centerline of Rose Hill Drive;
thence south along Rose Hill Drive to the centerline of CR 1100 N; thence
following the corporate limits of the town to the west, north and east, to
the centerline of the intersection of 23rd Street and Porter Avenue; thence
east along the centerline Porter Avenue to the point of beginning; and



      5.   District 5. All areas remaining within the corporate
limits of the town lying north of the northern boundaries of Districts 1 and
3 as depicted on the official district map of the town on file in the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



   B.   Election of Town Council generally. The Town Council shall
consist of one member for each district herein re-established. The members of
the Town Council are to be elected at large by the voters of the whole town.



   C.   Re-establishment of districts. The division of the town into
districts for election purposes shall be made during the second year after a
year in which a federal decennial census is conducted subject to I.C.
3-11-1.5-32; and when required to assign annexed territory to a municipal
legislative body.



(Ord. 2012-14, passed 12-10-2012)



§ 6-2  SAME; FILING WITH CIRCUIT COURT.



   A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Clerk of the Circuit
Court of the county no later than 30 days after its adoption.



(Ord. 2012-14, passed 12-10-2012)



§ 6-3  SAME; EFFECT.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and adoption as required by law.



(Ord. 2012-14, passed 12-10-2012)



§ 6-4  SAME; PREPARATION OF BALLOTS.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall cause the Voters’ Registration Board and
the Election Board of the county to cause appropriate ballots for voting
machines to be established for the election of the five Council members as
provided in § 6-1 of this chapter.



CHAPTER 7:  EXCAVATIONS



Section



Article I. Generally



   7-1   Permit; required



   7-2   Same; application



   7-3   Same; fee



   7-4   Same; indemnity bond



   7-5   Same; restrictions on issuance



   7-6   Same; issuance



   7-7   Restoration of surface



   7-8   Performance bond



   7-9   Precautions to be taken to prevent scattering of dirt and the
like



   7-10   Exemption from chapter



   7-11   Notification to owners and protection of adjacent property



Article II. Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places



   7-31   Permit; required



   7-32   Same; application; determination of cost of restoration



   7-33   Same; bond, insurance requirements



   7-34   Same; notification of Street Commissioner and Engineer;
issuance



   7-35   Same; fee



   7-36   Time limit on openings; extension of time; approval of Street
Commissioner or Engineer prerequisite to resurfacing



   7-37   Barriers and lights



   7-38   Removal of guards



Cross-reference:



   Buildings and Building Regulations, see Ch. 5



   Flood Damage Prevention and Control, see Ch. 9



   Health and Sanitation, see Ch. 11



   Nuisances, see Ch. 15



   Subdivisions, see App. A



   Zoning, see App. A



ARTICLE I. GENERALLY



§ 7-1  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate or remove any sand,
soil or earth from the surface of any land within the corporate limits of the
town for the purpose of gift, sale, offsite fill or other construction usage
unless such person shall first have procured from the Town Council, or its
designee, a permit for such purpose.



§ 7-2  SAME; APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to remove any sand, soil or earth within the
corporate limits of the town shall make application to the Town Council, or
its designees, such application to include a drawing showing the location and
elevation to which the proposed excavation will be made in relationship to
the elevation of adjoining streets, highways, if any, and/or adjoining
improved streets and highways within any reasonable distance, then the Town
Engineer shall determine the elevation below which no excavation shall be
made.



§ 7-3  SAME; FEE.



   Upon the approval of the application for a permit, the applicant shall
pay the sum of $50 per permit for each parcel of land to be excavated to the
Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 7-4  SAME; INDEMNITY BOND.



   Upon arrival of the application for a permit required by this chapter,
the applicant shall give bond with surety to be approved by the Town Council,
the form thereof to be approved by the Town Attorney, to be conditioned that
the person removing sand, soil or earth shall conform with the ordinances,
specifications, rules, regulations and conditions prescribed by the Town
Council, or its designee, and shall protect and save harmless the town from
any and all liability, damages and expenses which such town may sustain by
reason of granting of such permit.



§ 7-5  SAME; RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   No permit shall be issued for the removal of any such soil, sand or
earth, which shall be unduly detrimental to the adjoining or surrounding
properties or shall be unduly detrimental to the safety, health or general
welfare of the public.



§ 7-6  SAME; ISSUANCE.



   Upon compliance with §§ 7-1 through 7-5 of this chapter and the
obtaining of all approvals provided therein, the permit required by § 7-1 of
this chapter shall be issued, and the licensee named in said license may,
thereafter, conduct removal operations as per the terms of said license and
all applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and conditions prescribed as a
condition precedent to issuance thereof.



§ 7-7  RESTORATION OF SURFACE.



   Upon completion of the operation for which a permit required by the
chapter is granted or when the permit therefor has expired, by the passage of
time or otherwise, the permittee shall, within the time fixed by the Town
Council or its designee, cause such land to be restored to existing grade or
grade fixed by the Town Engineer in absence of existing grade. Such
excavation shall be filled with dirt or such other material as shall be
approved by the Council.



§ 7-8  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   Where the application for permit indicates that removal of material
will be below existing grade level, or below grade fixed by the Town Engineer
in the absence of existing grades, or below water table leaving an
excavation, then, and in that event, the applicant shall, in addition to the
indemnity bond required in § 7-4 of this chapter, furnish a performance bond
conditioned upon restoring the land to its former grade or to a grade
approved by the Town Engineer, and such amount to be fixed by the Council,
which shall not be less than the estimated cost of refilling the excavation
and bringing the land back to the original grade based upon the maximum
amount of sand or other material anticipated to be removed as set forth in
the application for permit. Such performance bond shall further provide that
as a condition thereof the permittee shall conform to the ordinances of the
town and any and all regulations and conditions prescribed by the Town
Council, or its designee.



§ 7-9  PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN TO PREVENT SCATTERING OF DIRT AND THE LIKE.



   All persons shall make reasonable provisions to prevent sand, dirt or
other loose earth from blowing or spilling over and upon the premises of
others or upon any public way during any excavation operation or while any
sand, dirt or loose earth is being transported from the site.



§ 7-10  EXEMPTION FROM CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter, other than § 7-11 of this chapter,
shall not apply to work necessary for the erection or alteration of a
building or structure pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the
Building Commissioner; provided that, such person shall diligently and
without unnecessary or unreasonable delay prosecute such improvement work to
completion.



§ 7-11  NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS AND PROTECTION OF ADJACENT PROPERTY.



   Whenever there shall be any excavation hereafter started upon any lot
or piece of land and there shall be a building or buildings on an adjoining
lot standing upon or near the boundary of such lot, the person making such
excavations shall notify the owner or agent of such building thereof in
writing at least ten days before commencing such excavation, except in cases
where the Building Commissioner declares an emergency to exist, then such
Building Commissioner shall have the right to name the length of time of
notice to adjoining property owners or agents. Any person who shall excavate
to a greater depth than ten feet below sidewalk grade in front of same shall,
at his or her own cost and charge, save and protect the owners of adjoining
property and adjoining sidewalk from injury or damage resulting from such
excavations. In case the excavation is ten feet or less below the sidewalk in
front of same, the owner or owners of adjoining property shall protect,
underpin or make perfectly stable his, her or their property, at his, her or
their own cost and expense. Permission to enter adjoining property in order
that work may be done must be granted by adjoining property owners; provided,
they shall be indemnified for any injury done to said property.



ARTICLE II. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



§ 7-31  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate in any of the streets,
alleys or public grounds of the town without first obtaining a permit as
provided in this article.



§ 7-32  SAME; APPLICATION; DETERMINATION OF COST OF RESTORATION.



   A.   Any person desiring to make any opening in any of the streets,
alleys or public grounds of the town’s, or to excavate therein, shall file
an application in triplicate, provided by the town, with the Clerk-Treasurer.



   B.   Such application shall include plans and specifications and
shall be filed 15 days in advance of the proposed date of excavation so that
the Town Engineer may review the plans and inspect the proposed site.



   C.   The Town Engineer shall determine the cost that would be
required to fill and/or repave the excavation if such should become necessary.



§ 7-33  SAME; BOND, INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   1.   No permit required by this article shall be issued
until the applicant desiring to make an opening and/or excavate has filed a
bond, approved by the Council or its authorized agent, equal to 125% of the
Town Engineer’s estimated cost of required filling and/or repaying or this
bond requirement is specifically waived, in writing, by the Council or its
authorized agent for one or more of the following reasons:



         a.   Town Engineer’s estimate of costs associated with
the filling and/or repaying the excavation is less than $1,000; and



         b.   The costs associated with the necessary filling
and/or repaying is included in a bond that may be required by other
ordinances of the town such as those involving the construction of sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, water mains, streets, curb and gutters, sidewalks and
the like.



      2.   Such bond, if required, shall be used to complete the
work should the permit holder fail to do so and to pay for any damages
occasioned by his or her failure to perform.



   B.   In addition to the bond requirements, proof of liability
insurance to save the town harmless for any injury or damage to persons or
property resulting directly or indirectly from the work must be provided with
the permit application.



   C.   Bond and liability insurance requirements shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of one year after such work is completed.



§ 7-34  SAME; NOTIFICATION OF STREET COMMISSIONER AND ENGINEER; ISSUANCE.



   Upon the filing of the application for a permit, as provided in this
article, the Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the Street Commissioner and Town
Engineer of such fact and, if such application is satisfactory and such bond
and liability insurance is sufficient as to form and surety, the Street
Commissioner and Town Engineer shall approve the application and the
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to such applicant a permit to do the work set
forth in the application.



§ 7-35  SAME; FEE.



   At the time of filing an application for a permit, as provided for in
the article, the applicant shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer an application
fee in the amount of $50 for a street cut permit and $35 for any necessary
sidewalk cuts that may be made, as set forth in the form provided by the
town, which fees shall become a part of the street fund of the town.



§ 7-36  TIME LIMIT ON OPENINGS; EXTENSION OF TIME; APPROVAL OF STREET
COMMISSIONER OR ENGINEER PREREQUISITE TO RESURFACING.



   No opening in any street, alley or public grounds of the town shall
remain open for a period of greater than ten consecutive days. The Street
Commissioner may grant an extension of time if for good and sufficient
reasons. The applicant shall resurface no area until he or she has obtained
approval of the Street Commissioner or the Town Engineer.



§ 7-37  BARRIERS AND LIGHTS.



   Any person who makes any excavation or trench within any street, alley
or sidewalk, shall erect and maintain, at the place of such excavation,
trench, obstruction or hindrance, sufficient guards and barriers to protect
all persons using the street, alley or sidewalk. All guards and barriers
shall conform to standards found in the most current edition of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



§ 7-38  REMOVAL OF GUARDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to take down or remove any barrier,
signal or light placed by any builder, contractor or any other person, at or
near any trench or excavation, for the purpose of giving notice or warning of
such obstruction.



CHAPTER 8:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



Article I. Obstruction of Fire Prevention Equipment



   8-1   Obstruction of fire prevention equipment



Article II. Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectors



   8-2   Definitions



   8-3   Installation



   8-4   Maintenance



   8-5   Responsibility



   8-6   Certificates of compliance



   8-7   Enforcement



Article III. Fire Lane



   8-8   Fire lane



Article IV. Hazardous Materials Spills



   8-9   Authorization



   8-10   Fees



   8-11   Report to State Fire Marshal



   8-12   Collection of money by town



   8-13   Reserved



   8-14   Report to Town Council



   8-15   Recovering of unpaid fees



   8-16   Fee changes



Cross-reference:



   Buildings and Building Regulations, see Ch. 5



   Health and Sanitation, see Ch. 11



   Non-Smoking Area, see Ch. 3



   Nuisances, see Ch. 15



ARTICLE I. OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE PREVENTION EQUIPMENT



§ 8-1  OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE PREVENTION EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall place or keep any post, fence, growth, trash, storage,
snow or other material or thing near any fire hydrant or Fire Department
connection of fire protection system control valve that would prevent such
equipment or hydrant from being immediately discernible or in any other
manner deter or hinder the Fire Department from gaining immediate access to
said equipment or hydrant. A minimum five-foot clear space shall be
maintained around the circumference of all fire hydrants, except as otherwise
required or approved by the Fire Chief. The provisions of this article shall
also apply to fire hydrants, Fire Department connections or fire protection
system control valves that are located on private property.



ARTICLE II. SMOKE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS



§ 8-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR.  A device that detects the presence of
carbon monoxide (CO) gas and emits an audible alarm of at least 85 decibels
at ten feet, and such alarm shall be capable of persisting for at least four
minutes, and conform to the NFPA 720 Standard for the Installation of Carbon
Monoxide (CO) Detection and Warning Equipment.



   CORRIDOR. A hallway or other area on each floor providing access to
individual dwelling areas within a multiple dwelling unit or rental unit.



   MOBILE HOME RENTAL. Any mobile home or trailer occupied by or offered
for occupancy to an individual or individuals as a residence on a rental
basis.



   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. Any building that contains living
quarters for two or more occupancies, and shall include hotels, motels,
boarding houses, sleeping room houses, buildings of mixed occupancy, having
any residential units, nursing homes, convalescent homes, licensed half-way
houses or lodging houses.



   SLEEPING AREA. The area of a unit in which bedrooms or sleeping rooms
are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another use area such as
a kitchen or living room are separate SLEEPING AREAS, but bedrooms or
sleeping rooms separated by a bathroom are not separate SLEEPING AREAS.



   SMOKE DETECTOR. A device which detects particles or products or
combustion other than heat, approved by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.,
or Factory Mutual, equipped with a test button, and may be either battery
powered, minimum nine-volt, or 110-volt A.C. and which conforms to the
Uniform Building Code Standard No. 43-6, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 2017-12, passed 7-24-2017)



§ 8-3  INSTALLATION.



   A.   Smoke detectors shall be installed in the following properties:



      1.   All new single- and multiple-family dwellings;



      2.   All existing two-family or multiple-family dwellings;



      3.   All rental dwellings, either single or multiple;



      4.   All new and existing trailer homes;



      5.   All new and existing apartment homes;



      6.   All new and existing hotels, motels and rooming houses;
and



      7.   All new and existing dwellings above business property.



   B.   When activated, all smoke detectors shall provide an audible
alarm of at least 85 decibels at ten feet, and such alarm shall be capable of
persisting for at least four minutes.



   C.   1.   If a smoke detector is alternating current powered, it
must be directly attached to a junction box not controlled by any switch
other than the main power supply.



      2.   The installation of alternating current powered detectors
shall conform to all electrical standards adopted by the town.



      3.   A smoke detector rewired under this article shall be
installed according to the directions and specifications of the manufacturer,
but if in conflict with any town electrical standard, the town electrical
standard shall take precedence.



   D.   Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in the following
properties:  at least one operational carbon monoxide detector (as defined
in § 8-2 of the code of ordinances), per residential unit, in all buildings
of a Class 2 structure (as defined by I.C. 22-12-1-5, or any successor
statute) designed for residential use and have a fireplace, attached garage,
or fossil fuel burning appliance, and for which a building permit is issued
for new construction after the date that this section is in full force and
effect.



(Ord. 2017-12, passed 7-24-2017)



§ 8-4  MAINTENANCE.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove
any smoke detector, except when it is necessary for maintenance or inspection
purposes.



   B.   Any smoke detector removed for repair or replacement must be
reinstalled or replaced so that it is in place during normal sleeping hours.



   C.   At every change of tenant in every multiple-family dwelling
unit or mobile home rental, smoke detectors shall be tested to see that they
are in operable condition.



§ 8-5  RESPONSIBILITY.



   A.   Every owner, manager or agent of any multiple-family dwelling
unit or mobile home rental shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of all smoke detectors.



   B.   This requirement applies to smoke detectors required by any
state or federal law as well as by this article, unless otherwise required by
state or federal law.



§ 8-6  CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.



   A.   Between January 1 and January 31 each year, the owner of each
dwelling unit and mobile home in which a smoke detector has been installed
shall certify in writing on forms prescribed by the town to the Fire
Inspection Division of the Fire Department that the required maintenance has
been performed on all detectors in the owner’s units and that the detectors
are in good working condition in the owner’s units and that the detectors
are in good working condition as of the date of certification.



   B.   Each owner shall certify to each new occupant of any dwelling
unit and mobile home covered by this article that all smoke detectors
required have been installed and are in proper working condition.



§ 8-7  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Building Department and the Fire Department of the town shall be
charged with the duty of enforcing the terms of this article.



ARTICLE III. FIRE LANE



§ 8-8  FIRE LANE.



   A.   Fire lanes may be established adjacent to businesses within the
town and in accordance with standards established by the Fire Chief.



   B.   Fire lanes will have signage clearly indicating that parking is
prohibited for any vehicle, except for fire vehicles.



   C.   Violators may be cited in accordance to I.C. 9-21-16-5.5.



ARTICLE IV. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SPILLS



§ 8-9  AUTHORIZATION.



   The Fire Department is authorized and directed to impose the charges
set forth in this article on the owner of a vehicle or responsible party (as
defined in I.C. 13-11-2-191) that is involved in a hazardous material or fuel
spill or chemical or hazardous material related fire (as defined in I.C. 13-1
l-2-96(b)) on a public highway, including a highway that is a part of the
interstate system, that is responded to by the Fire Department and that
members of the Fire Department assisted in extinguishing, containing or
cleaning up.



§ 8-10  FEES.



   The charges to be imposed pursuant to this chapter are as follows:



   A.   For initial response with a fire engine, a fire truck or a fire
apparatus, including a hazardous material response unit, or a fire rescue
unit dispatched on a fire or hazardous material incident: $250 per response
vehicle, except a command/control vehicle which is $100 per vehicle;



   B.   For each hour or fraction thereof as on-scene assistance: $150
per response unit and $50 per command/control vehicle;



   C.   For expendable materials such as absorption materials,
emulsifiers or other agents used in clean up operations: the actual
replacement costs of those materials; and



   D.   For collection of debris, chemicals, fuel or contaminated
materials resulting from a spill: the actual cost of removal and disposal at
an authorized location.



§ 8-11  REPORT TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL.



   The Fire Department shall include a copy of the fire incident report in
the form prescribed by the State Fire Marshal, if the services provided for
an event requires a fire incident report, with the bill for payment of the
service charge, and the billing must take place within 30 days after the
services are provided.



§ 8-12  COLLECTION OF MONEY BY TOWN.



   The Fire Department or an agent engaged on its behalf is authorized to
collect the charges imposed under this article. Any money that is collected
pursuant to this article may be used to pay principal and interest on a loan
under I.C. 22-12-6-1; or used for the purchase of equipment, buildings and
property, firefighting, fire protection and other emergency services.



§ 8-13  RESERVED.



§ 8-14  REPORT TO TOWN COUNCIL.



   The Fire Department shall submit a report to the Town Council before
April 1 of each year indicating the amount of service charges collected
during the previous calendar year and how those funds have been expended.



§ 8-15  RECOVERING OF UNPAID FEES.



   The Fire Department is authorized to maintain a civil action to recover
any unpaid service charges pursuant to this article and utilize the services
of the Town Attorney.



§ 8-16  FEE CHANGES.



   The Fire Department shall give notice pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1 of the
amount of the service charge for each service the Fire Department provides
before the schedule of service charges is initiated pursuant to this article
and when there is a change in the amount of a service charge.



CHAPTER 9:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND CONTROL



Section



   9-1   Statutory authorization



   9-2   Findings of fact



   9-3   Statement of purpose



   9-4   Objectives



   9-5   Definitions



   9-6   Lands to which this chapter applies



   9-7   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data



   9-8   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   9-9   Compliance



   9-10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   9-11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations



   9-12   Interpretation



   9-13   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   9-14   Penalties for violation



   9-15   Designation of Administrator



   9-16   Permit procedures



   9-17   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   9-18   General standards



   9-19   Specific standards



   9-20   Standards for subdivision proposals



   9-21   Critical facility



   9-22   Standards for identified floodways



   9-23   Standards for identified fringe



   9-24   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation
and/or floodways/fringes



   9-25   Standards for flood-prone areas



   9-26   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board



   9-27   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board



   9-28   Variance procedures



   9-29   Conditions for variances



   9-30   Variance notification



   9-31   Historic structure



   9-32   Special conditions



   9-33   Severability



§ 9-1  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The state’s legislature has, in I.C. 36-7-4, granted the power to
local government units to control land use within their jurisdictions.
Therefore, the Town Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain
management regulations.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-2  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   A.   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental sendees, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   B.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
flood-proofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-3  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed to:



   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;



   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damage;



   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands; and



   F.   Make flood insurance available for structures and their
contents in the town by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-4  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   A.   To protect human life and health;



   B.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   C.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   D.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   E.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas main, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains; and



   F.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood- prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood blight areas.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-5  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A ZONES, flood
waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant
threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones
A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are
presented below.



      1.   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.



      2.   ZONE AE and A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1%
annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps
in place of Zones A1-A30.)



      3.   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from details
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      4.   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are one to
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.



      5.   ZONE AR. Areas that result from decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection.



      6.   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor
area of 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation and be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow maybe
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.



   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   D ZONE. Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but
flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating
communities, but is not required by regulation in this zone.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      1.   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to:



         a.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         b.   Installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing
a site for a manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days;



         c.   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences,
construction of roads or similar projects;



         d.   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements and the like;



         e.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations;



         f.   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         g.   Storage of materials; or



         h.   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      2.   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation or the
construction of permanent structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls),
pilings or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance and floodplain management
requirements.



   FLOOD-PRONE AREAS. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood,
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA.



   FLOOD-PROOFING (DRY FLOOD-PROOFING). A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the flood- proofed design elevation
with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydro-dynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and
anticipated debris impact forces.



   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   HARDSHIP. As related to variances, the exceptional hardship that would
result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The town’s Advisory
Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual
and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship
alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical
handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these
problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance,
even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to
build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Site
and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required
to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local
flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal and
new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after
6-1-1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the
new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the
six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain
management regulations during the six-month period unless the community has
previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the
several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be
accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter
of Map Revisions (LOMR) and Letter of Map Revision (LOMR-F). The definitions
are presented below.



      1.   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located
in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA
is only issued by FEMA.



      2.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to
the currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood
zones, delineations and elevations.



      3.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An
official revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides
FEMA’s determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been
elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:



      1.   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      2.   The top of the basement floor;



      3.   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      4.   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars; and



      5.   The top of the floor level or any enclosure, other than a
basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         a.   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has
more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;



         b.   The total net area of all openings shall be at
least one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom
of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior
grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is
higher; and



         c.   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value) or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is two-fold: to protect people and structures; and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929 (NGVD) AS CORRECTED IN 1929. A
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced after the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other
than a boundary river.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88) AS ADOPTED IN 1993. A
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris earned by the flow of water or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas
or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      1.   Built on a single chassis;



      2.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the state’s Department of Natural Resources
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation
at any location is as defined in § 9-7 in this chapter. The REGULATORY FLOOD
is also known by the term BASE FLOOD, ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD and
100-YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the town subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the
town are generally identified as such on the Porter County, Indiana, and
Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated 9-30-2015 as well as any
future updates, amendments or revisions prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date. These areas are shown on a FIRM
as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99 or AO.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued; provided, the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual START means either the first placement or
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footing, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any
work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred a
“repetitive loss” or “substantial damage” regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures
to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety
code requirements or any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided
that, the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation
as a “historic structure”.



   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification or other evidence of compliance required in
tills ordinance is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C AND X. The areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities, but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-6  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood-prone areas
within the jurisdiction of the town.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-7  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.



   A.   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood.



   B.   The best available regulatory flood data is listed below.



      1.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe
limits for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the town shall be as
delineated on the 1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance
Study of Porter County, Indiana, and Incorporated Areas dated 9-30-2015 and
the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated 9-30-2015, as well as any
future updates, amendments or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date.



      2.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe
limits for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the town, delineated
as an “A Zone” on the Porter County, Indiana, and Incorporated Areas
Flood Insurance Rate Map dated 9-30-2015, as well as any future updates,
amendments or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date, shall be according to the best data available as
provided by the state’s Department of Natural Resources; provided, the
upstream drainage area from the subject sit is greater than one square mile.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to
replace existing data with better data that meets current engineering
standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the state’s
Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved.



      3.   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community’s known flood-prone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; provided, the upstream drainage area from
the subject site is greater than one square mile.



      4.   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD),
any more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall
be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective, less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-8  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-9  COMPLIANCE.



   A.   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations.



   B.   No land or stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   A.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.



   B.   However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-11  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.



   A.   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   B.   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   C.   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site
shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not
be applied. The property owner should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-12  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;



   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   C.   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-13  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the town, the state’s Department of Natural
Resources or the state, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-14  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   A.   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit
or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter. All violations should be considered a common nuisance and be treated
as such in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A of this code of
ordinances. All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500
for a first violation and $7,500 for a second or subsequent violation of this
chapter.



   B.   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   C.   The town’s Building Commissioner shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.



   D.   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-15  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Town Council hereby appoints the town’s Building Commissioner to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein
referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-16  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   A.   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made
to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures; earthen fill; storage of materials or equipment; drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing.



   B.   Specifically, the following information is required.



      1.   Application stage.



         a.   A description of the proposed development;



         b.   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



         c.   A legal description of the property site;



         d.   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



         e.   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD
88 or NGVD;



         f.   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; and



         g.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse
changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map
Revision. (See § 9-17F. of this chapter.)



      2.   Construction stage.



         a.   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an
elevated structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of
the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor as built. Said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor survey data
submitted. The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review
before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey
or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of
the elevation certification shall be at the applicant’s risk.



         b.   Upon establishment of the flood-proofed elevation
of a flood-proofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit
to the Floodplain Administrator a flood-proofing certificate. Certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered
professional engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the flood-proofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall
correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the flood-proofing certification or
failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project.



      3.   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction,
an elevation certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31, or any
future updates) which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor elevation is
required to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project
includes a flood- proofing measure, flood-proofing certification (FEMA
Flood-Proofing Certificate Form 81-65, or any future updates) is required to
be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-17  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   A.   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to:



      1.   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      2.   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      3.   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the state’s Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to §§ 9-22 and 9-24A. of this chapter and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment);



      4.   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;



      5.   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway;



      6.   Notify adjacent communities and the state’s Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;



      7.   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change
(LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents and “as-built” elevation and flood-proofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter;



      8.   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or
Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA
maps of the community;



      9.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;



      10.   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;



      11.   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 9-16 of this chapter;



      12.   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance
with § 9-16 of this chapter;



      13.   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that
all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been
installed. The first, upon the establishment of the flood protection grade
reference mark at the development site; the second, upon the establishment of
the structure’s footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and the final
inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished
construction elevation certificate. Authorized town officials shall have the
right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.



      14.   a.   Upon notice from the floodplain administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



         b.   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      15.   a.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material
fact in the application or plans on winch the permit or approval was based.



         b.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement
of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not
in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-18  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs and known flood-prone areas, the following provisions are
required.



   A.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.



   B.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or flame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces.



   C.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG.



   D.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   E.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters and other service facilities shall be located
at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other water-proofed
service facilities may be located below the FGP.



   F.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   G.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   H.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   I.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of “new construction”, as contained in this chapter.



   J.   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the
volume of space, which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume
of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least
equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1:1) due to the
fill or structure.



      1.   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in
the same immediate watershed in which the authorized fill or structure is
located.



      2.   Under certain circumstances, the excavation maybe allowed
to take place outside of, but adjacent to, the floodplain; provided that, the
excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the
same immediate property in which the authorized fill or structure is located,
will be accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to
ponding when not inundated by flood water and that it shall not be refilled.



      3.   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way
leading to the floodplain.



      4.   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the
excavated area is accessible to the regulatory flood water.



      5.   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed
stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and
shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.



      6.   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled
shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site
work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this article.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-19  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required.



   A.   General. In addition to the requirements of § 9-18 of this
chapter, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from
flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to
the following situations:



      1.   Construction or placement of any new structure having a
floor area greater than 400 square feet;



      2.   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure
where the cost of the addition improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the
value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land);



      3.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the existing structure
(excluding the value of the land);



      4.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days;



      5.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage;



      6.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss
structure; and



      7.   Addition or improvements made to any existing structure
with a previous addition or improvement constructed since the town’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   B.   Residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of subsection D. below.



   C.   Non-residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
flood- proofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls
be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of subsection D. below. Structures located in all A Zones may be
flood- proofed in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the
following.



      1.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 9-17L. of this chapter.



      2.   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   D.   Elevated structures.



      1.   a.   New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above FPG.



         b.   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas
formed by foundation and exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall
be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.



      2.   Designs for complying with this requirement must either
be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:



         a.   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a
minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area);



         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than
one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath
each opening, whichever is higher;



         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices; provided, they permit the automatic
flow of flood waters in both directions;



         d.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);



         e.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms;



         f.   The interior grade of each such enclosed area shall
be at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade;



         g.   Openings are to be not less than three inches in
any direction in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole
in the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical
foundation air vent device;



         h.   Property owners shall be required to execute a
flood openings/venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be
maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the
openings in any way will violate the requirements of this subsection D.
Periodic inspections will be conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to
ensure compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded in the office of the
County Recorder; and



         i.   Property owners shall be required to execute and
record with the structure’s deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that
the area below the lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure
exceeds six feet) shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the
community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area. The
non-conversion agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.



   E.   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent landfill in accordance with the
following.



      1.   a.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater
than one foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable
with the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method.



         b.   The results of the test showing compliance shall be
retained in the permit file.



      2.   The fill should extend ten feet beyond the foundation of
the structure before sloping below the FPG.



      3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.



      4.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      5.   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



      6.   Fill should be composed of clean granular or earthen
materials.



   F.   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements.



      1.   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood.



         a.   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



         b.   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living
space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in subsection D. above.



         c.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached
to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have
openings.



      2.   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that
has not been substantially damaged by a flood.



         a.   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



         b.   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living
space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in subsection D. above.



         c.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached
to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have
openings.



      3.   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         a.   Be on a site for less than 180 days;



         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         c.   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes”
as stated earlier in this section.



   G.   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry
flood-proofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



      1.   Shall not be used for human habitation;



      2.   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;



      3.   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;



      4.   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;



      5.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the FPG; and



      6.   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of
flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures in subsection D. above.



   H.   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas
or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-20  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   A.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   B.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   C.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   D.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.



   E.   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the
SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.



   F.   All subdivisions proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of
SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-21  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-22  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   A.   Located within SFHAs, established in § 9-7 of this chapter,
are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry debris, potential
projectiles and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified
floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward
the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
state’s Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit
for construction in a floodway from the state’s Department of Natural
Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for
any excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of
construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/ improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial
addition/ improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in a floodway from the state’s
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is
required from the state’s Department of Natural Resources.)



   B.   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway. Once a
permit for construction in a floodway or letter of authorization has been
issued by the state’s Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit; provided,
the provisions contained in §§ 9-18 through 9-25 of this chapter have been
met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive than the
permit for construction in a floodway issued by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources. However, a community’s more restrictive regulations (if
any) shall take precedence.



   C.   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, that will adversely affect
the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This
adverse effect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory
flood of at least fifteen-hundredths of a foot as determined by comparing the
regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that under the
natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.



   D.   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees), the town shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-23  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit; provided,
the provisions contained in §§ 9-18 through 9-25 of this chapter have been
met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-24  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   A.   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square
mile.



      1.   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
state’s Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      2.   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in the floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the state’s Department of Natural Resources.



      3.   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper
permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development,
a floodplain development permit maybe issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the state’s Department of Natural Resources and the
provisions contained in §§ 9-18 through 9-25 of this chapter have been met.



   B.   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile.



      1.   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and 1% annual
chance flood elevation for the site.



      2.   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit; provided, the provisions contained in
§§ 9-18 through 9-25 of this chapter have been met.



   C.   Cumulative effect. The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one
foot and shall not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-25  STANDARDS FOR FLOOD-PRONE AREAS.



   All development in known flood-prone areas not identified on FEMA Maps,
or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards
as required per §§ 9-18 through 9-25 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-26  DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The town’s Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals, as established by Town
Council, (“Board”), shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-27  DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the
county’s Circuit or Superior Court.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-28  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:



   A.   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   B.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   C.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   D.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   F.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   G.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   H.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   I.   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment of transport of the flood waters at the site; and



   J.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-29  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   A.   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; or



      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   B.   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to
§§ 9-22 or 9-24A. of this chapter may be granted.



   C.   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§ 9-22 or
9-24A. of this chapter will require a permit from the state’s Department of
Natural Resources.



   D.   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
9-19 of this chapter may be granted only when a new structure is to be
located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood
protection grade.



   E.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   F.   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration
of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.



   G.   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade
and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that
the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See § 9-30 of this
chapter.)



   H.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the state’s Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See §
9-30 of this chapter.)



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-30  VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.



   A.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the
lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade
shall be given written notice over the signature of a town official that:



      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and



      2.   Such construction below the flood protection grade
increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall by recorded
by the Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.



   B.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-31  HISTORIC STRUCTURE.



   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-32  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§ 9-26 through 9-32
of this chapter, and the purposes of this chapter, the town’s Advisory
Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 9-33  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of this chapter is held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then
said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-28-2015)



CHAPTER 10:  GARBAGE, RECYCLING, REFUSE AND RUBBISH



Section



   10-1   Purpose



   10-2   Definitions



   10-3   Containers to be provided by owners or occupants of premises



   10-4   Garbage and the like to be stored in containers



   10-5   Removal of refuse too large to fit in containers



   10-6   Owners, occupants to keep premises free from unreasonable
accumulations



   10-7   Special pickups



   10-8   Recycling containers and contents



   10-9   Dumping of grass clippings; recycling sites



   10-10   Pickup, disposal and recycling charges; addition to sewer
rates and charges



§ 10-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and
unsightly conditions in the town caused by the deposit and accumulation of
refuse, garbage and rubbish, and at the same time, in so far as practicable,
to limit the volume or bulk of the refuse, garbage and rubbish which the town
or its collector will be required to pickup and remove, thereby keeping at a
minimum the equipment and labor which the town or its collector will require
for these purposes.



§ 10-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTAINER. A container for the storage of garbage, refuse or rubbish,
which is:



      1.   Provided with a handle and tight-fitting cover;



      2.   Water-tight;



      3.   Substantially made of galvanized iron or other
non-rusting material; and



      4.   Of a size that may be conveniently handled by the
collector.



   GARBAGE. Animal, fruit, vegetable and other waste resulting from the
preparation of food and drink.



   RECYCLING MATERIAL. Includes, but is not limited to, newspapers,
aluminum, tin, metal cans, glass and plastic containers.



   REFUSE. Includes all garbage, rubbish, ashes or other substances
offensive to sight or smell, dangerous to the public health or detrimental to
the best interests of the community, except dead animals.



   RUBBISH. All other refuse not falling within the term “garbage”,
except those objects too large to be placed in cans.



§ 10-3  CONTAINERS TO BE PROVIDED BY OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS OF PREMISES.



   A.   All premises where garbage, refuse or rubbish accumulates
shall, by the owner or occupants thereof, be provided with a container or
containers for the storage of such refuse, garbage and rubbish. Such
containers shall be kept covered and reasonably clean at all times. They
shall be placed alongside of, but not in, the alley or street along which the
refuse truck will travel to collect the same and in a position readily
accessible to the collector, or at such other locations as the Street
Commissioner shall designate.



   B.   Refuse containers shall not be placed outside of the residence
for pickup earlier than one day prior to the scheduled pickup day. Refuse
containers shall not be left out more than one day after the scheduled pickup
day.



   C.   First time violations of this section shall be prosecuted
through the Ordinance Violations Bureau.



§ 10-4  GARBAGE AND THE LIKE TO BE STORED IN CONTAINERS.



   No person shall permit garbage, refuse or rubbish to accumulate upon
premises owned or occupied by him or her unless it is stored and kept in
containers.



§ 10-5  REMOVAL OF REFUSE TOO LARGE TO FIT IN CONTAINERS.



   In addition to refuse, garbage and rubbish placed in containers, the
town or its collector will pickup and remove such other types and classes of
refuse, too large to be placed in containers, as would ordinarily be
accumulated by an average family living on the ordinary lot or plot of
ground; provided, such refuse is neatly piled or stacked in a convenient
place to be picked up, in a manner so that the same may be easily handled and
is compressed in bulk. If the owner or occupant of any such premises desires
for the town to pickup any wooden boxes, paper boxes or cartons, or brush, he
or she shall break up and compress the same to as small a bulk as practicable
and cut such into lengths not exceeding four feet. All other out of the
ordinary accumulations of refuse, such as those resulting from the operation
of a business or from construction repair or remodeling work shall be removed
or disposed of by the owner or occupant of the premises at his or her own
expense and shall not be handled by the town.



§ 10-6  OWNERS, OCCUPANTS TO KEEP PREMISES FREE FROM UNREASONABLE
ACCUMULATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of premises in the
town to keep the same free at all times from unreasonable accumulations of
refuse, garbage and rubbish.



§ 10-7  SPECIAL PICKUPS.



   At the request of the owner and upon payment of the schedule of rates
established by the town or its collector, additional items shall be picked up.



§ 10-8  RECYCLING CONTAINERS AND CONTENTS.



   A.   As used in this section, the term RECYCLING CONTAINERS shall
mean 18-gallon yellow plastic containers stamped as “City of Chesterton”
or “Town of Chesterton” and issued by the town to its residents for the
purpose of holding recyclable items.



   B.   Town recycling containers are the property of the town and are
to be used for the sole purpose of housing recyclable items. The contents
within said containers become the property of the town at the time the same
are placed at the curbside for collection.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or
business, other than the successful bidder under contract with the town for
removal of recyclable items, to remove any items in or adjacent to the town
recycling containers, including, but not limited to, newspapers, aluminum
cans, plastic jugs and glass bottles or containers.



§ 10-9  DUMPING OF GRASS CLIPPINGS; RECYCLING SITES.



   A.   The dumping of grass clippings and other yard waste on any
public right-of-way shall be prohibited, except as otherwise provided in this
section. The dumping of grass clippings, leaves, brush and other yard waste
vegetation shall be permitted at the town yard waste recycling station
located at 1490 Broadway, or at any other place said yard recycling site
shall be hereafter maintained by the town. The dumping of all other
materials, including, but not limited to, refuse, construction debris,
concrete and metal shall be prohibited. The dumping of approved yard waste at
the town yard waste recycling station shall be limited to yard waste from
residences and other real property located within the town. It shall be a
violation of this section for any individual to dump grass clippings and
other yard waste from any residence or other real property located outside
the town.



   B.   The town hereby adopts the following rules concerning the
removal of brush.



      1.   The town will pick up and remove brush for residents that
do normal pruning of trees and bushes.



      2.   The town will pick up no more than six yards of chipped
brush from any one property. No more than six yards will be picked up at any
one property or may be dropped off from any one property at the yard waste
recycling station in a three-month period. The Street Department will not
accept any additional brush from a property once that limit has been reached.



      3.   Large volumes of brush from the removal of a tree or
trees shall be handled by the owner of occupant of the property. The brush or
logs shall not be brought to or dropped off at the yard waste recycling
station.



      4.   The town will not pick up or handle brush or other debits
from the removal of a tree that has been contracted for removal. It shall be
the property owner or occupant’s responsibility to arrange for the removal
of such material. The brush or logs shall not be brought to or dropped off at
the yard waste recycling station.



      5.   The town will not pick up or handle any brush or other
debris from the clearing of a property. The brush or logs shall not be
brought to or dropped off at the yard waste recycling station.



   C.   Initial violations of this section shall be prosecuted through
the Ordinance Violations Bureau as set forth in § 1-13 of this code of
ordinances. Subsequent violations shall subject the violator to § 1-9 of
this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2007-10, passed 4-22-2007; Ord. 2017-05, passed 5-8-2017)



§ 10-10  PICKUP, DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING CHARGES; ADDITION TO SEWER RATES
AND CHARGES.



   A.   Charges levied. There shall be added to the sewage rate
schedules as found in Ord. 92-08 charges for the service of providing garbage
pickup and disposal, including recycling pickup and disposal to all
structures containing four or less separate residential units in the town.



   B.   Contract for service by town. The garbage pickup and disposal
service, including recycling, to be provided shall be done by contract on an
annual basis or upon any other time interval deemed appropriate by the Town
Council to an outside entity that as a regular part of its business performs
the task of garbage pickup and disposal including recycling pickup and
disposal.



   C.   Service costs and charges. The charge for garbage pickup and
disposal, including recycling pickup and disposal, shall be $16.38 per month
in 2018, $16.69 per month in 2019 and $17.00 per month in 2020 per
residential household served. This contract price to the town which was let
in accordance to public bidding laws for garbage pickup and disposal,
including recycling, incidental costs associated with the providing of the
aforementioned services and other factors the Town Council deems necessary,
including assisting the defraying of some of the costs for composting, brush
and leaf pickup in residential areas. The per month charge per residential
household served is mandatory for all residential households contained in
structures that have four or less separate residential units in the town.
Units that are unoccupied for 30 or more continuous days and for which the
owners of said units give written notice to the town prior to the units being
unoccupied for said time frame, shall be exempt from the charge provided for
in this section for each full 30-day period that the unit is continuously
unoccupied. In the event a unit is unoccupied for only a portion of a 30-day
time period, there shall be no prorating of the exemption provided above and
the full monthly charge shall apply. All charges assessed in accordance with
this section are the ultimate responsibility of the owner of the property
served.



   D.   Billing and payment. The payment shall be invoiced and included
with the bimonthly sewer and utility bill. As provided for by I.C.
36-9-23-31, all rates and charges that are not paid within 20 days from and
after the billing date are declared delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the rates and charges shall attach thereto. The amount of the rates
and charges, the penalty and a reasonable attorney’s fee may be recovered
by the town in a civil action in its name. Additionally, payments and/or
penalties that have been due and unpaid for at least 90 days may be filed as
a lien against the real property in accordance with I.C. 36-9-23-33.



   E.   Deposit of fees into town fund. All fees collected pursuant to
this section, less the amount paid to the town’s Utility for billing and
collection, shall be deposited in the town’s General Fund and shall be used
exclusively to defray the expense of providing the services set forth in this
section, including administrative costs in accordance with I.C. 36-9-23-25.



(Ord. 2014-14, passed 11-10-2014; Ord. 2017-14, passed 9-25-2017)



CHAPTER 11:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



Article I. In General



   11-1   Reserved



Article II. Weeds



   11-16   Unlawful to allow growth in excess of ten inches



   11-17   Notice of violations



   11-18   Removal of weeds and rank vegetation; payment



   11-19   Administration



   11-20   Penalties



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 11-1  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II. WEEDS



§ 11-16  UNLAWFUL TO ALLOW GROWTH IN EXCESS OF TEN INCHES.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or occupants of
real estate within the town to permit weeds or other vegetation to grow and
mature on such real estate to a height in excess of ten inches.



   B.   Weeds and rank vegetation shall be defined as follows for the
purpose of this chapter: Any grass, weeds, or other rank or useless
vegetation that exceeds a height of ten inches, as measured from the ground
or any vegetation that harbors insects or disease that constitutes a hazard
to life, health or property. This definition shall not include trees and
shrubbery.



(Ord. 2006-19, passed 8-14-2006; Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 11-17  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   A.   If the Building Commissioner determines that an owner or
occupant of real estate is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall
prepare and forward to the property owner a written notice of violation
calling for the cutting and removal of such weeds and rank vegetation within
ten days of the date of the notice (“notice of violation”). The notice of
violation shall be served upon the property owner by first class mail or an
equivalent service permitted under I.C. 1-1-7-1, at the last known address as
indicated in the records of the County Auditor’s office.



   B.   If an initial notice of violation was provided by first class
mail or equivalent service permitted under I.C. 1-1-7-1, a continuous
abatement notice may be posted at the property at the time of abatement. A
continuous abatement notice serves as notice to the real property owner that
each subsequent violation during the same year for which the initial notice
of the violation was provided may be abated by the town or its contractors.



   C.   Any notice of violation or invoice issued pursuant to this
chapter may be appealed if written notice of appeal is served by the property
owner to the Clerk Treasurer within three days of the date of notice of
violation or invoice. Such matter shall be heard by the Town Council at its
next regular Town Council meeting unless otherwise determined.



(Ord. 2006-19, passed 8-14-2006; Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 11-18  REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION; PAYMENT.



   A.   If the property owner fails to remove such weeds and rank
vegetation within the prescribed time, the town or its designee shall enter
upon the property and abate the violations by removal of said weeds and rank
vegetation.



   B.   The Building Commissioner shall mail an invoice to the property
owner reflecting the total cost incurred by the town in abating the
violation, including administrative costs. The invoice shall be served upon
the property owner by first class mail or an equivalent service permitted
under I.C. 1-1-7-1, at the last known address as indicated in the records of
the County Auditor’s office.



   C.   If the property owner fails to pay the invoice or file a
written appeal within ten days, the Building Commissioner shall certify to
the County Auditor the amount incurred by the town to abate the violation,
including administrative costs of the violation. The Auditor shall place the
certified amount on the tax duplicate against such real estate and the amount
shall be collected as taxes are generally collected and when collected shall
be disbursed to the town for deposit in the General Fund.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 11-19  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Building Department shall be responsible for the administration of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 11-20  PENALTIES.



   Violations of this chapter shall be included on Appendix B of the code
of ordinances and processed, for first time offenders, through the Ordinance
Violations Bureau with a fine of $100 to be assessed. Subsequent violations
of this chapter by the violator shall subject said violator to the general
penalty provision of the code of ordinances found at § 1-9.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 6-26-2017)



CHAPTER 12:  LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



   12-1   Purpose and authority



   12-2   “Business” defined



   12-3   Prima facie evidence of doing business



   12-4   Business registration permit required and application



   12-5   Display of permit



   12-6   Permit required



   12-7   Records



   12-8   Exemptions



   12-9   Inspection of business



   12-10   Buildings and premises to comply with town regulations



   12-11   Issuance for unlawful activities prohibited



   12-12   Change of location



   12-13   Permit expiration



   12-14   Citations



§ 12-1  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   The Town Council hereby finds that a business registration procedure
should be established for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety
and welfare of the community. The town is authorized by I.C. 36-8-2-10 to
regulate the operation of businesses, crafts, professions and occupations
within it corporate boundaries. Additionally, I.C. 36-1-3-4 grants said town
all powers necessary or desirable to conduct its affairs.



§ 12-2  “BUSINESS” DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the term BUSINESS shall mean an
enterprise involving the selling, storing or processing of goods or
commodities or the rendering of services. BUSINESS shall include all
commercial (whether wholesale or retail) operations as well as industrial
enterprises engaged in the manufacture, processing or assembling of parts in
the finished or unfinished products, and the repair or reconditioning of
products, appliances, machines or other goods. Coin-operated centers shall be
included, such as laundromats, video games, pinball machines, pool tables and
the like. BUSINESS shall also include all home occupations that fit within
the above definition of business and apartment complexes. For the purposes of
this chapter, an “apartment complex” shall be any structure that contains
more than four separate residential units in the town.



§ 12-3  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS.



   The placing or permitting of any business sign or notice on or within
any premises; any publication of opening of any business by advertisement in
any newspaper or telephone book, or by any poster, circular, letter or card,
or by any other method of attracting public notice thereto; or by acquiring
or using any premises in the town for business purposes shall be prima facie
evidence of doing business and the liability of such person or entity to
obtain and pay for a business registration as required by this chapter.



§ 12-4  BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMIT REQUIRED AND APPLICATION.



   A.   All businesses conducted in any part of the town, unless
specifically exempted by this chapter, shall be required to have a business
registration permit. A separate business registration permit shall be
required for each location of a business that is conducted in multiple
locations in the town.



   B.   Forms for all business registration permits shall be prepared
and kept on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   C.   Upon receipt of an application for a business registration
permit, the office of the Clerk-Treasurer shall refer such application to the
proper department within said town for making required inspections.



   D.   All business registration permits issued by the Clerk-Treasurer
shall be for a term of one year, commencing February 1 and expiring January
31 of the following year. All business registration permits are required to
be renewed on an annual basis no later than January 31 of each year. In the
event the renewal is not done on a timely basis, the applicant shall be
subjected to being cited for a violation of this chapter and fined
accordingly. However, upon the publication date of this chapter, all existing
businesses in the town shall have a 60-day period in which to register their
business and therefore become in compliance with the chapter. All business
registration permits issued between the passage of this chapter and 1-30-1996
shall not be required to be renewed until 1-31-1997.



   E.   All business registration permits issued by the Clerk-Treasurer
are non-transferable.



§ 12-5  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   All persons or entities duly issued a permit shall display such permit
prominently at the business so permitted.



§ 12-6  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, either directly
or indirectly, to conduct or maintain any business or premises for which a
permit is required by this chapter, unless a valid permit is issued by the
Clerk-Treasurer and kept in effect at all times.



   B.   The permit requirement applies to residents and non-residents
alike; provided, however, no such permit shall be required of any person for
the mere delivery of merchandise into the town.



§ 12-7  RECORDS.



   All applications for permits issued by the town shall be kept and
maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 12-8  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the businesses covered by §§ 18-1
through 18-10 of this code of ordinances and the licensing of building
contractors that is found at §§ 5-81 through 5-84 of this code of
ordinances and businesses operated out of a home that do not involve the
storing or processing of goods or commodities.



§ 12-9  INSPECTION OF BUSINESS.



   The Clerk-Treasurer may have businesses inspected by designated town
officials to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



§ 12-10  BUILDINGS AND PREMISES TO COMPLY WITH TOWN REGULATIONS.



   No permit shall be issued for any business and no permit shall be
issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this chapter, the code
and all state or federal codes.



§ 12-11  ISSUANCE FOR UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   No permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which is in violation or which would involve a
violation of any ordinance of the town or law, rule or regulation of the
state or of the United States.



§ 12-12  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   The location of any business for which a permit has been issued may be
changed; provided that, ten days’ prior notice of the change of location is
given to the Clerk-Treasurer and the new location meets with all of the
requirements for the issuance of the original permit.



§ 12-13  PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
expire upon any of the following conditions:



   A.   Discontinuance of the permittee’s business; or



   B.   Transfer or sale of the business to another individual,
partnership, corporation or other legal entity, of the sale, assignment or
transfer, directly of indirectly, of at least 51% of the corporate stock from
any shareholder.



§ 12-14  CITATIONS.



   Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted through the Ordinance
Violations Bureau.



CHAPTER 13:  MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



Section



Article I. In General



   13-1   Minimum traffic accident report fee



   13-2   Motor inspection fee



   13-3   Impound fee



Article II. Operation of Vehicles



   13-15   Local ordinances; authority



   13-16   U-turns



   13-17   Entrance and exit at public parking areas



   13-18   Danger-double arrow signs



   13-19   Danger-slow-corner signs



   13-20   One-way streets and alleys



   13-21   Speeding



   13-22   Regulations for certain school premises



   13-23   Weight restrictions during certain periods



   13-24   Truck weight, parking and height restrictions



   13-25   Stop or yield intersections



   13-26   No passing zones



   13-27   Trucks prohibited



Article III. Taxicabs



   13-36   Definitions



   13-37   Required marking



   13-38   Insurance required



   13-39   Drivers to have written character references on file with
town



   13-40   Driver’s photograph to be displayed in vehicle



   13-41   License; required



   13-42   License; application



   13-43   Qualifications of applicants



   13-44   Fee



   13-45   Transferability



   13-46   Suspension or revocation



Article IV. Stopping, Standing and Parking



Division 1. Generally



   13-51   Two-hour parking



   13-52   Obedience to signs, markings



   13-53   Method of parking



   13-54   Prohibited parking areas



   13-55   Violations; penalty



Division 2. Snow Emergency Regulations



   13-66   Definitions



   13-67   When effective



   13-68   Parking restricted on certain streets



   13-69   Parking regulations for other streets



   13-70   Parking in alleys



   13-71   Street Commissioner’s authority to prohibit parking



   13-72   Towing of vehicles authorized



   13-73   Towing service’s liability for damages; charges; hours of
redemption



   13-74   Prima facie proof of violations



   13-75   Penalties



Article V. Bicycles



   13-85   Bicycle, definition



   13-86   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles and skateboards



   13-87   License; application; fee



   13-88   Same; issuance; denial; records



   13-89   Same; sticker; attachment



   13-90   Reserved



   13-91   Notice required upon transfer of ownership



   13-92   Parking



   13-93   Riding on sidewalks



   13-94   Violations



   13-95   Penalties



Article VI. Parking Facilities for Physically Disabled Persons



   13-110   Compliance with ADA



   13-111   Reservation of spaces and parking facility providing for
self-parking



   13-112   Size and location of parking spaces



   13-113   Physically disabled parking spaces



Article VII. Operation of Golf Carts



   13-121   Local ordinance; authority



   13-122   Definitions



   13-123   Use local ordinance; authority



   13-124   License



   13-125   Golf cart traffic regulations



   13-126   Exemptions



   13-127   Violations



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 13-1  MINIMUM TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORT FEE.



   The minimum fee for a traffic accident report shall be $5.



§ 13-2  MOTOR INSPECTION FEE.



   The town hereby established a fee of $5 for the inspection of motor
vehicles pursuant to I.C. 9-17-2-12 to be deposited in a fund of the town now
created called “Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund” to be used for
law enforcement purposes for the town’s Police Department.



§ 13-3  IMPOUND FEE.



   The town hereby establishes a fee of $15 to be collected from the owner
of any motor vehicle impounded by the town’s Police Department. The fee
shall be collected by the Police Department prior to release of the motor
vehicle. All fees received pursuant to this section shall be deposited into
the General Fund of said town.



(Ord. 2003-08, passed 5-27-2003)



ARTICLE II. OPERATION OF VEHICLES



§ 13-15  LOCAL ORDINANCES; AUTHORITY.



   A.   The Town Council has the authority pursuant to I.C. 9-21-1-2
and 3 to establish ordinances with respect to the control of local streets
and highways in the town regarding the listed items of the statutes and
future amendments thereto.



   B.   Any ordinance concerning traffic control shall adhere to the
guidelines established by the state’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways and any future amendments thereto.



§ 13-16  U-TURNS.



   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any public street in such a
manner as to cause it to make a turn of more than 90 degrees at any time, and
no “U” turns shall be permitted by any motor vehicle on any street or
intersection in town.



§ 13-17  ENTRANCE AND EXIT AT PUBLIC PARKING AREAS.



   No motor vehicle shall be driven into or from any public parking area,
except in conformity with the entrance and exit signs posted therein.



§ 13-18  DANGER-DOUBLE ARROW SIGNS.



   Signs with the word “Danger” and a double arrow thereon shall be
placed where a street or alley dead-ends, terminates or changes direction at
an angle greater than 45 degrees, and it shall be unlawful for a vehicle to
be driven beyond these signs at these two points.



§ 13-19  DANGER-SLOW-CORNER SIGNS.



   Signs with the words “Danger - slow corner” thereon shall be placed
approximately 100 feet back from intersections on such streets as the Town
Council may, from time to time, determine to be particularly hazardous. As
any person operating a motor vehicle approaches any such “Danger - slow
corner” sign, he or she shall reduce the speed of such vehicle to not more
than 20 mph and proceed across such intersection with caution.



§ 13-20  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   A.   At locations and areas determined by them to present special
traffic conditions or hazards, the Town Council may, from time to time, at
various locations, cause to be erected “One-Way Traffic” and “One-Way,
Do Not Enter” signs, with an arrow on the one-way traffic signs indication
the direction of traffic on such streets or alleys and from and after the
erection and display of such signs, it shall be unlawful to disregard,
disobey or travel in a direction other than that indicated on such sign. From
time to time, the Street Department may be required in the performance of its
duties to travel in a direction other than indicated on the sign as expressly
authorized by the sign.



   B.   1.   Violations of this section shall be included on
Appendix B to this code of ordinances and processed, for first time
offenders, through the Ordinance Violations Bureau with a fine of $50 to be
assessed. In the event the fine is not paid within 30 days from the offense,
the matter shall be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction and the
general penalty provision of said code found at § 1-9 of this code of
ordinances shall apply.



      2.   Any subsequent violations of this article by the violator
shall subject said violator to the general penalty provision of said code
found at § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



      3.   All amounts collected pursuant to this section shall be
deposited in the town’s General Fund.



(Ord. 2007-23, passed 8-27-2007)



§ 13-21  SPEEDING.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle at a speed greater than that established by the Town Council from
time to time for the town generally and for particular locations.



   B.   The Street Commissioner is herewith authorized and directed to
post speed limit signs for control of traffic upon both side of the public
highways upon which the Town Council has established speed limits in
conformity with state law.



(Ord. 2002-33, passed 10-28-2002; Ord. 2007-30, passed 10-22-2007; Ord.
2008-08, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 13-22  REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN SCHOOL PREMISES.



   A.   The administration of the Duneland School Corporation is
herewith authorized and directed to post signs for control of traffic in
conformity with the plats accompanying Ord. 80-2 relative to the parcels of
real estate comprising the premises of the Duneland School Corporation
located within town limits.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate any
motor vehicle at a speed greater than ten mph upon any driveway, parking
area, alley, fire lane, road or street within the confines of each of the
parcels of real estate described in subsection A. above.



   C.   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
motor vehicle in the direction of travel other than that posted upon any
driveway, parking area, alley, fire lane, road or street within the confines
of the real estate described in subsection A. above.



      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or remain
standing any motor vehicle in any area upon the real estate described in
subsection A. above posted as a fire lane, or in an area designated as a no
parking area.



   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle
and disregard and fail to heed and stop at any stop sign posted upon the real
estate described in subsection A. above.



   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle upon any lawn, grass or unimproved ground located with the confines
of the real estate described in subsection A. above.



§ 13-23  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS DURING CERTAIN PERIODS.



   A.   At all times during a period of days (not to exceed 90 days by
one calendar year) which shall be those days as designated by the Town
Council when, in the opinion and judgment of the Council, it becomes
necessary by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions
to prohibit the operation of vehicles or impose restrictions as to the weight
of vehicles to be operated on streets and highways within the town, it shall
be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, cause to be operated or be in
physical control, upon any public road, street or highway within the town
limits, excepting therefrom any highways in the state highway system and the
state-maintained routes thereof, any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles
having a combined total gross weight, including load, in excess of 10,000
pounds, unless a written permit therefor shall have been first obtained from
the Street Commissioner.



   B.   Any permit issued by the Street Commissioner as referred to in
subsection A. above shall specify and direct in writing the streets and
highways of the town that may be utilized by the permittee.



   C.   1.   The limitation of gross weight of vehicles operating on
the streets and highways as referred to in subsection A. above shall be
effective upon a directive from the Town Council to the Street Commissioner
to erect and maintain signs designating such gross weight limitations at each
end of that portion of any road, street or highway affected thereby and at
intersecting roads, streets or highways.



      2.   Such limitations of gross weight of vehicles shall cease
upon a directive from the Town Council to the Street Commissioner to remove
such signs.



§ 13-24  TRUCK WEIGHT, PARKING AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   A.   For the purposes of this section, the word TRUCK shall mean any
motor vehicle designed, used and maintained primarily for the transportation
of property, unless the vehicle has a maximum capacity of one and one-half
tons or less unloaded. Recreational vehicles, tow trucks and vehicles owned
and maintained by the town are not included as trucks for the purposes of
this section.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
drive, tow or pull upon or over the streets or alleys of the town, other than
those streets paved with concrete, Porter Avenue and Fifteenth Street, any
vehicle which at such time shall weigh over 30 tons with the load it is
carrying.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or driver to park or
cause to park any truck, semi- trailer or any combination of the two upon any
street or alley in an area zoned for residential use pursuant to Appendix A
to this code of ordinances, except for expeditious delivery, pickup of
materials or construction use.



   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or driver to park or
cause to be parked any truck, semi-trailer or any combination of the two upon
any lot zoned for residential use pursuant to Appendix A to this code of
ordinances, except for expeditious delivery, pickup of materials or
construction use.



   E.   Except for expeditious delivery, pickup of materials or
construction use at a residence in the following area all trucks which have a
height (measured from the ground) of ten feet or higher shall be banned from:



      1.   Wilson Street from Porter Avenue north to Indiana Avenue;



      2.   Landman from Porter Avenue north to Indiana Avenue;



      3.   Jeffery Street from Porter Avenue north to Indiana Avenue;



      4.   Bowser Avenue from Wilson Street east to Roosevelt Street;



      5.   Morgan Avenue from Wilson Street east to Roosevelt
Street; and



      6.   Indiana Avenue from Wilson Street east to Roosevelt
Street.



   F.   If a police officer of the town finds a vehicle in violation of
this section, such officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to remove such vehicle so that it is no
longer in violation of this section; if any such person so directed shall
fail or refuse to move such vehicle or vehicle is unattended, then the police
officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of the offending
vehicle to any nearby available garage or other place.



§ 13-25  STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   A.   Upon the receipt of an engineering and traffic investigations
report, the Town Council may, by motion, designate through highways and erect
stop or yield signs at specific entrances thereto or may designate any
intersection as a stop or yield intersection and erect like signs at one or
more entrances to such intersection.



   B.   Every stop sign and yield sign shall be manufactured and
installed in conformance with the state’s Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways as provided under I.C. 9-21-2 et seq. and
9-21-3-1.



   C.   The Street Commissioner of the town is hereby directed and
authorized to post signs according to law and in accordance with this section.



   D.   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield in obedience to
any such sign as the case may be in the town before entering such
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal.



   E.   The Ordinance Violations Bureau provision of the code shall
apply to violations of this section.



(Ord. 2005-11, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 2005-12, passed 8-22-2005)



§ 13-26  NO PASSING ZONES.



   No passing zones on 11th Street shall be established as follows.



   A.   A no passing zone shall be established on 11th Street for
northbound traffic beginning at the north edge of the intersection of 11th
Street and Country Road 1100 North and proceed north for 785 feet.



   B.   A no passing zone shall be established on 11th Street for
southbound traffic beginning 670 feet north of the north edge of the
intersection of Chestnut Boulevard and 11th Street and proceed south for 670
feet.



   C.   A no passing zone shall be established on 11th Street for both
northbound and southbound traffic 265 feet south of the center of the drive
for Westchester Intermediate School and shall proceed north for 635 feet.



§ 13-27  TRUCKS PROHIBITED.



   All trucks or motor vehicles in excess of three tons’ gross vehicle
weight (GVW) shall be prohibited from operation upon the alleyway located
between 107 and 109 South Calumet Road.



ARTICLE III. TAXICABS



§ 13-36  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle used for carrying passengers for hire within
the town limits and the immediate surrounding territory, to destinations
designated by the passengers, and not on regular routes.



   TAXICAB SERVICE. The business or occupation of operating taxicabs and
furnishing taxicab service to the public.



§ 13-37  REQUIRED MARKING.



   Every vehicle operated by the company shall have the name of the
company painted on the exterior body in letters of suitable size, so that the
vehicle can readily be identified when in motion.



§ 13-38  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab in the
town, unless such person is placed on file with the Clerk-Treasurer, prior to
the issuance of a license, a policy of insurance in full force and effect,
issued by a reputable insurance company authorized to conduct business in the
state, insuring the owner, operator and driver of the taxicab against
liability to the extent of $300,000 for one accident and $100,000 property
damage.



   B.   Such policy of insurance must remain in full force and effect
at all times, a copy of which will be retained by the Clerk-Treasurer and
said policy shall not be allowed to lapse or be cancelled without the consent
of the Town Council.



§ 13-39  DRIVERS TO HAVE WRITTEN CHARACTER REFERENCES ON FILE WITH TOWN.



   No taxicab shall be at any time operated by any driver until there
shall have been filed with the Clerk-Treasurer a written character reference,
stating that he or she is of good moral character, which reference shall be
signed by two or more reputable householders residing in the town, and not
related to the driver.



§ 13-40  DRIVER’S PHOTOGRAPH TO BE DISPLAYED IN VEHICLE.



   No taxicab shall be operated at any time unless a photograph of the
driver operating the taxicab is prominently displayed so as to be visible to
all passengers riding in the taxicab, under which photograph shall be printed
his or her name and address and the name of the owner of the taxicab.



§ 13-41  LICENSE; REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or propel, or cause to
be operated or propelled, any taxicab on or along any avenue, street or alley
within the corporate limits of the town, until such person shall have first
obtained a license, signed by the Clerk-Treasurer, to so operate such
taxicab, and shall have paid the fee therefor as provided in § 13-44 of this
chapter.



§ 13-42  LICENSE; APPLICATION.



   Any person operating taxicabs shall submit the name of the company at
the time of application for a license required by this division, and will
operate under one name only. The application for a license must be the bona
fide owner or owners of the of the vehicle, and the name of each person
owning or operating the vehicle shall be registered with the license, with
the Clerk-Treasurer, description, make and model of the vehicle and record of
inspections. This record shall be available to the public at any reasonable
time.



§ 13-43  QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.



   No license issued under this division to engage in the business of
operating a taxicab shall be issued to or held by anyone who is not a person
of good character, or who has been convicted of a felony, or whose license to
operate a motor vehicle has been revoked during the preceding year, nor shall
such license be issued to or held by any group of persons, firm or
corporation if any officer or shareholder thereof is ineligible for a license
under the foregoing conditions.



§ 13-44  FEE.



   A.   The initial fee for a license required by this division shall
be $50 per car used as a taxicab, to be paid upon the application for a
license herein provided, which said sum shall be refunded in the event that a
license is denied.



   B.   Thereafter, the license fee to be paid for each car used as a
taxicab licensed under this division shall pay the sum of $25 per year,
payable in advance on the first business day in the month of January.



   C.   No refund shall be allowed for any unexpired part of the period
for which any license is issued.



§ 13-45  TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this division shall be transferred from one
taxicab to another, of from one person to another, or from one firm or
corporation to another.



§ 13-46  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   A.   Any license issued under the terms of this division may be
suspended or revoked by the Town Council if such taxicab is found not to be
in a safe and clean condition, and not in compliance with inspection
requirements, and the terms of this article and the statutes and
administrative regulations of the state.



   B.   The Town Council shall have the further right, privilege and
power to revoke the license owned by any person operating one or more
taxicabs in violation of the terms of this article, where one or more of such
taxicabs fails to meet the requirements hereof.



ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



§ 13-51  TWO-HOUR PARKING.



   A.   When and where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for a period of time longer than
two hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in that area
designated as two-hour parking zone.



   B.   When and where signs area erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for a period of longer than two
hours in an area designated as a two-hour parking zone.



   C.   If any vehicle shall remain parked in any location set forth in
subsections A. or B. above for longer than two hours, the owner or driver of
such vehicle shall be subject to the penalties provided in this code and such
vehicle may be towed or removed from such location at the expense of the
owner of such vehicle.



§ 13-52  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS, MARKINGS.



   No motor vehicle shall be parked or permitted to remain stationary at
any location where official signs, painted roadway markings or painted curbs
prohibit such stopping or standing.



§ 13-53  METHOD OF PARKING.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 12
inches of the curb or the edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided
in the code.



§ 13-54  PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS.



   A.   No motor vehicle shall be parked or permitted to remain
stationary in any of the following prohibited areas:



      1.   On a sidewalk;



      2.   In front of a public or private driveway;



      3.   Within an intersection;



      4.   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      5.   On a crosswalk or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection;



      6.   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. This
does not apply to off-street parking spaces where parking does not block the
view of the stop sign;



      7.   Within 50 feet of the nearest railroad crossing;



      8.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street (double parking);



      9.   In any alley at any time or for any length of time,
except during that period of time in which such vehicle is actually being
loaded or unloaded;



      10.   No vehicle shall be parked in the traveled portion of
any road or right-of-way in the town so as to obstruct the flow of traffic on
the right-of-way;



      11.   No vehicle shall be parked along Morgan Avenue at 7th
Street, Chesterton Boulevard and 6th Street from the intersection of said
streets to a point 25 feet west of each intersection;



      12.   No vehicle shall be parked on 7th Street and Chesterton
Boulevard at their intersections with Morgan Avenue from the intersection of
said streets to ten feet north of Morgan Avenue;



      13.   No vehicle shall be parked for a distance of ten feet
west of the alleys between 8th and 7th Street, 7th and Chesterton Boulevard,
all along Morgan Avenue;



      14.   No vehicle shall be parked on the west side of 5th
Street, from Broadway to Indiana Avenue;



      15.   No vehicle shall be parked along the north side of
Lincoln Avenue at 8th Street from the intersection of said streets to a point
20 feet west of said intersection;



      16.   No vehicle shall be parked along Morgan Avenue at 7th
Street from the intersection of said streets to a point 20 feet east of said
intersection;



      17.   No vehicle shall be parked along the east side of
Chesterton Boulevard at Morgan Avenue from the intersection of said streets
to a point 20 feet north of said intersection;



      18.   No vehicle shall be parked for a distance of 20 feet
south of the alley between Morgan Avenue and Indiana Avenue along the east
side of Chesterton Boulevard;



      19.   No vehicle shall be parked along the east side of 6th
Street at Morgan Avenue from the intersection of said streets to a point 20
feet north of said intersection;



      20.   No vehicle shall be parked for a distance of 20 feet
south of the alley between Morgan Avenue and Indiana Avenue along the west
side of 6th Street;



      21.   No vehicle shall be parked on Morgan Avenue from its
intersection at Calumet Avenue to the Coffee Creek Bridge;



      22.   No vehicle shall be parked on Gateway Boulevard from its
intersection at Village Pointe to SR 49;



      23.   Within any area marked for the exclusive use as an
electric vehicle charging station unless such vehicle is an electric vehicle
which is actively charging;



      24.   No vehicle shall be parked for a distance of 40 feet
from the curb return tangent of Bostwick Avenue, Cole Street, Delos Marr
Avenue, Dunbar Street, Gossett Mill Avenue, Gustafson Avenue, Hickory Grove
Street, Harrington Avenue, Murray Street and Rosenquist Street;



      25.   No vehicle shall be parked along the center island curb
of Dunbar Street, in the circle drive intersecting Dunbar Street, Delos Marr
Avenue and Gossett Mill Avenue;



      26.   No vehicle shall be parked along the center median curb
on Dunbar Street between CR 1050 N and Delos Marr Avenue;



      27.   No vehicle shall be parked on the east side of Cole
Street;



      28.   No vehicle shall be parked along the center curb of the
triangular intersection of Bostwick Avenue and Delos Marr Avenue;



      29.   No vehicle shall be parked on the south side of Gossett
Mill Avenue between Dickinson Road and Dunbar Street;



      30.   No vehicle shall be parked on the north side of
Gustafson Avenue between Dickinson Road and Dunbar Street;



      31.   No vehicle shall be parked on the north side of
Gustafson Avenue between Dunbar Street and Hickory Grove Street;



      32.   No vehicle shall be parked on the west side of Dunbar
Street or on the south side of Harrington Avenue within the intersection of
Dunbar Street and Harrington Avenue; and



      33.   No vehicle shall be parked along the center island curb
on Murray Street between Delos Marr Avenue and Gossett Mill Avenue.



   B.   The town’s Street Commissioner shall be responsible for
placing and maintaining appropriate signage and street markings in this area.



(Ord. 2005-04, passed 4-25-2005; Ord. 2006-11, passed 5-22-2006; Ord.
2007-20, passed 8-13-2007; Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-14-2015; Ord. 2016-11,
passed 6-27-2016)



§ 13-55  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   A.   1.   Any person accused of a violation of Art. IV of Ch. 14
of this code of ordinances and the parking regulations set forth in §§
13-22 and 13-75 of this code of ordinances may settle and compromise such
infraction by paying to the town the sum of $25 within ten days from the date
of the citation.



      2.   Such payment shall be made at the police station.



      3.   In the event the $25 fine is not paid within ten days
from the date of the citation, the fine for the violation will automatically
increase to $40 payable at the police station. Failure to pay the $40 fine
within 30 days from the date of the citation shall result in the citation
being filed before a court of competent jurisdiction.



      4.   In the event the citation is sent to a court of competent
jurisdiction, the offender shall be subject to the general penalty provisions
found at § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



   B.   The fact that a vehicle which is parked or remaining stationary
in violation of the code as provided for in this section is registered in the
name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was
in control of the vehicle at the time such vehicle was parked or allowed to
remain stationary.



   C.   Any violation of parking restrictions in § 13-54 shall subject
the offender to the penalty provisions of this section and 13-75 of this
chapter and § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-14-2015)



DIVISION 2. SNOW EMERGENCY REGULATIONS



§ 13-66  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EVEN-NUMBERED SIDE OF A STREET. The side of the street that has
even-numbered house numbers, or a majority of even-numbered house numbers,
over its entire length.



   ODD-NUMBERED SIDE OF A STREET. The side of the street that has
odd-numbered house numbers, or a majority of odd-numbered house numbers, over
its entire length.



§ 13-67  WHEN EFFECTIVE.



   Whenever two or more inches of snow has fallen on the town’s streets
and alleys, the same is hereby declared to be a snow emergency and the
parking regulations and prohibitions set forth in this division shall be in
effect until the Town Council or the Street Commissioner shall have declared
such snow emergency to have ceased.



§ 13-68  PARKING RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   During any snow emergency, no parking shall be allowed between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on the following enumerated streets.



 



East - West Streets


   Broadway, full length


   CR 1050 N, from CR 200 E to SR 49 Gateway Boulevard


   CR 1100 N, from Dickinson Road to Pearson Road


   Indian Boundary Road, from Calumet Road to Sand Creek Drive North


   Porter Avenue, from CR 250 E to 23rd Street


   Rail Road, full length


   Voyage Boulevard


   Wabash Avenue, from Calumet Road to Waverly Road


   Woodlawn Avenue, from 15th Street to Calumet Road


North - South Streets


   11th Street, from Porter Avenue to 1050 North


   15th Street, from Washington Avenue to Woodlawn Avenue


   23rd Street, from CR 1100 N to Wood Street


   4th Street, from Wabash to Broadway


   5th Street, from Broadway to CR 1050 N


   8th Street, from Porter Avenue to Wabash Avenue


   Calumet Road, from Taylor Street south to CR 1100 N


   Council Drive


   CR 100 E, from Calumet Road to Rail Road


   Dickinson Road, from Porter Avenue to CR 1050 N


   Jackson Boulevard, from Broadway north to railroad tracks


   Kelle Drive


   Plaza Drive


   Village Point


   Waverly Road, from Wabash Avenue to Woodlawn Avenue




 



§ 13-69  PARKING REGULATIONS FOR OTHER STREETS.



   During any snow emergency, parking and the presence of automobiles on
all streets in the town other than those specifically set forth in § 13-68
above shall be as follows.



   A.   On even-numbered days of the month, no parking between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight shall be allowed on the odd-numbered side of
such street.



   B.   On odd-numbered days of the month, no parking between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and midnight shall be allowed on the even-numbered side of such
street.



§ 13-70  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   During any snow emergency, no parking shall be allowed on any alley in
the town between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight.



§ 13-71  STREET COMMISSIONER’S AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT PARKING.



   The Street Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to prohibit
parking in the streets and alleys of the town at any time, even though that
time period may conflict with other provisions of this division, for the
purpose of snow removal, emergencies, repairs, and maintenance upon the
following conditions:



   A.   1.   Whenever the Street Commissioner shall determine that
parking should be prohibited upon any street or alley in order to expedite
the orderly and efficient removal of snow, or for the purpose of repairs and
maintenance, or in any emergency, as so determined by the Street
Commissioner, the Street Commissioner shall cause signs to be posted within
the right-of-way of such street or alley, at least every 300 feet, which
shall be substantially as follows:



 

No Parking from                                   To    
                             

Street Commissioner, Town of Chesterton



 



      2.   And each such sign shall be at least eight and one-half
inches by 11 inches in size.



   B.   Such signs shall prohibit parking for no more than eight hours
and shall be posted for at least four hours before it shall be lawful to tow
or remove vehicles parked on any street or alley so posted.



§ 13-72  TOWING OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.



   The Police Department is hereby authorized to have removed and towed
away by commercial towing service any vehicle parked or remaining stationary
on any street or alley in contravention of the provisions of this division
upon the following conditions.



   A.   The Police Department shall cause any vehicle violating any
provisions of this division to be impounded, an impound form completed, and a
citation shall be issued to the owner of such vehicle for the violation of
the provisions of this division.



   B.   The Police Department shall cause such vehicle to be removed by
a commercial towing service, which service shall remove such vehicle to a
place maintained, off any public street and alley, by such towing service and
such towing service shall hold such vehicle until a proper release form
executed by the Police Department shall be presented by the owner, of the
owner’s authorized representative, to such towing service.



§ 13-73  TOWING SERVICE’S LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; CHARGES; HOURS OF
REDEMPTION.



   Any commercial towing service removing and towing a vehicle under the
provisions of this division shall use ordinary care and responsibility in the
removal, towing and storage of such vehicle and shall not be liable for any
damages or injury to such vehicle which is not occasioned by the negligence
of such towing service and shall impose and collect before release of such
vehicle to the owner or the owner’s duly authorized representative, a
towing charge in accordance with current rates and a storage charge as is
appropriate, and in no event shall such vehicle be released by the commercial
towing service until a proper release form executed by the Police Department
has been presented to such towing service. No towing service shall be
obligated to release such vehicle, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.



§ 13-74  PRIMA FACIE PROOF OF VIOLATIONS.



   The fact that a vehicle that is parked or remaining stationary in
violation of the provisions of this division is registered in the name of a
person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control
of the automobile at the time such vehicle was parked or allowed to remain
stationary.



§ 13-75  PENALTIES.



   Any person accused of a violation this division may settle and
compromise such infraction by paying to the town the sum of $25 within ten
days from the date of the citation. Such payment shall be made at the police
station. In the event the $25 fine is not paid within ten days from the date
of the citation, the fine for the violation will automatically increase to
$40 payable at the police station. Failure to pay the $40 fine within 30 days
from the date of the citation shall result in the citation being filed before
a court of competent jurisdiction, in the event the citation is sent to a
court of competent jurisdiction, the offender shall be subject to the general
penalty provisions found at § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-14-2015)



ARTICLE V. BICYCLES



§ 13-85  “BICYCLE” DEFINITION.



   BICYCLE means any foot-propelled vehicle, irrespective of the number of
wheels in contact with the ground.



§ 13-86  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS.



   Every person riding a bicycle or a skateboard upon a roadway shall be
granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to
the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state, declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the town applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article,
excepting those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their nature, can
have no application.



§ 13-87  LICENSE; APPLICATION; FEE.



   An application for a bicycle license and sticker may be made on a form
provided by the town and submitted to the Chief of Police. A license fee
shall be set and paid to the Clerk-Treasurer or designee before each license
is granted. The fee will be commensurate with the current cost of the
stickers to the town.



§ 13-88  SAME; ISSUANCE; DENIAL; RECORDS.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue a bicycle license required
under this article upon receiving a proper application. The Chief of Police
shall not issue a license for any bicycle that he or she knows, or has
reasonable grounds to believe that, the applicant is not the owner of or
entitled to the possession of such bicycle. The Chief of Police shall keep a
record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address
of the person to whom it was issued and the number on the frame of the
bicycle for which it was issued.



§ 13-89  SAME; STICKER; ATTACHMENT.



   The Chief of Police, upon issuing a bicycle license required by this
article, shall also issue a license and sticker bearing the license number
assigned to that bicycle. The Chief of Police, or his or her designated
representative, shall cause such license to be firmly attached to the frame
of the bicycle so that it is plainly visible. No person shall remove a
license sticker form a bicycle during the period of time for which it was
issued.



§ 13-90  RESERVED.



§ 13-91  NOTICE REQUIRED UPON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   Upon the sale or transfer of the ownership of a bicycle which has been
licensed under this article, the new owner may notify the Chief of Police of
the sale and give his or her name, address and other necessary information so
that the record can be amended accordingly within 30 days of the sale.



§ 13-92  PARKING.



   A.   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



   B.   The Town Council may designate bicycle parking zones on the
streets of the town as it may deem necessary. When signs are erected
indicating a bicycle parking zone, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
bicycle parking zone.



§ 13-93  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle or a skateboard upon any sidewalk
adjacent to a business in the town. No person shall ride a bicycle or a
skateboard on any other sidewalks so as to interfere with pedestrian traffic.



§ 13-94  VIOLATIONS.



   It is a violation of this article for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this article. The parent of
any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
article. These regulations applicable to bicycles or skateboards apply
whenever a bicycle or a skateboard is operated upon any street or upon any
public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or skateboards,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.



§ 13-95  PENALTIES.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article who is of
legal age to possess a state operator’s license, whether or not they
possess one, shall be prosecuted through the Ordinance Violations Bureau. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this article who is under the legal
age to possess a state operator’s license shall receive a notice of
violation that will be forwarded to the offender’s parents or guardian.



ARTICLE VI. PARKING FACILITIES FOR PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS



§ 13-110  COMPLIANCE WITH ADA.



   Notwithstanding any requirements of this article, a person shall comply
with:



   A.   Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. § 12181);



   B.   The Americans With Disabilities Act Guidelines adopted by the
United States Department of Justice; and



   C.   This article.



§ 13-111  RESERVATION OF SPACES AND PARKING FACILITY PROVIDING FOR
SELF-PARKING.



   A.   Except as provided in subsection D. below, each parking
facility that provides parking spaces for self-parking by employees or
visitors must have accessible parking spaces reserved according to the
following schedule:



 

Total Number of Parking Spaces in Facility
 
Minimum Number of Reserved Spaces




1 to 25
 
1


26 to 50
 
2


51 to 75
 
3


76 to 100
 
4


101 to 150
 
5


151 to 200
 
6


201 to 300
 
7


301 to 400
 
8


401 to 500
 
9


501 to 1,000
 
2% of total


Over 1,000
 
20, plus 1 for each


100 spaces
 
Over 1,000




 



   B.   A parking facility may provide accessible parking spaces in a
different location from other parking spaces if the location of the
accessible spaces results in equivalent or greater access by the shortest
accessible route of travel to an accessible entrance of:



      1.   A building, if the parking facility serves a specific
building; or



      2.   The parking facility, if the parking facility does not
serve a specific building.



   C.   This subsection C. applies to a building with more than one
accessible entrance that has parking adjacent to the entrances. Accessible
parking spaces for a building described in the subsection must be dispersed
and located closest to the accessible entrances.



   D.   This subsection D. applies to a facility that provides medical
care or other services for persons with mobility impairments. A facility
described in this subsection D. must provide accessible parking spaces
according to the following schedule:



      1.   An outpatient facility or unit: 10% of the total number
of parking spaces; and



      2.   A facility or unit that specializes in treatment or
services for persons with mobility impairments: 20% of the total number of
parking spaces serving the facility or unit must be accessible parking spaces.



   E.   The reserved space or spaces under this chapter must be
reserved by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from the space or
spaces a vertical sign measuring at least 48 inches from the base of the
sign, located in a manner that will not be obscured by a vehicle parked in
the space and bearing the following:



      1.   The international symbol of accessibility;



      2.   Letters and numbers that have a width to height ratio
between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke width to height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10;
and



      3.   Characters and numbers that are sized according to the
distance from which the characters and numbers are read, with the minimum
height measured by an uppercase “X”. Lowercase characters may be used.



   F.   The characters and background of a sign required under
subsection E. above must be eggshell, matte, or another non-glare finish.
Characters and symbols used on a sign must contrast with the background of
the sign.



§ 13-112  SIZE AND LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES.



   A.   Except as provided in subsection B. below, the size and
location of parking spaces required under this chapter must conform to the
following standards.



      1.   An accessible parking space must be at least 96 inches
wide.



      2.   An access aisle adjacent to an accessible parking space
must be at least 60 inches wide and may not be restricted by a built-up curb
ramp, planters, curbs, wheel stops or any other obstructions.



      3.   Two adjacent accessible parking spaces may share a common
access aisle.



      4.   An access aisle:



         a.   Must be part of an accessible route to the building
or facility; and



         b.   Must either merge with the accessible route or have
a curb ramp to the accessible route that complies with the rules governing
curb ramps.



      5.   An accessible parking space and an access aisle must have
a surface slope of not more than 1:50 (2%) in all directions.



      6.   An accessible parking space and an access aisle must be
designated with blue lines.



      7.   An accessible parking space and at least one vehicle
access route to the accessible parking space must have a minimum vertical
clearance of at least 98 inches.



   B.   A parking facility must designate at least one accessible
parking space of every eight accessible parking spaces as a van accessible
parking space. A van accessible parking space must have an access aisle at
least 96 inches wide. Notwithstanding § 13-111C. of this chapter, a parking
facility may group all van accessible parking spaces in a single location.



   C.   Notwithstanding subsection B. above, a parking facility that is
as follows is not required to conform with subsection B. above until the
first time the parking facility is resurfaced or re-striped after 6-30-1996:



      1.   Is in existence on 6-30-1996; and



      2.   Conforms to the specifications for the size and location
of parking spaces under this section as the specifications were in effect on
6-30-1996.



§ 13-113  PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING SPACES.



   A.   The Town Council may, by motion, designate parking spaces to be
reserved for the use of physically disabled persons only, and erect signs as
required by law designating said space as “physically disabled parking
only”.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle
which does not have displayed an unexpired physical disability parking permit
issued under I.C. 9-14-5 (before its repeal), an unexpired disabled
veteran’s registration plate under I.C. 9-18.5-5, or an unexpired physical
disability registration plate or decal issued under I.C. 9-18.5-8, in any
space in town designated as “physical disability parking only”. Any motor
vehicle displaying an unexpired physical disability parking permit, an
unexpired disabled veteran’s registration plate or an unexpired physical
disability registration plate or decal issued under the laws of another state
may stand or park in a space reserved for physically disabled persons, only
when the vehicle is being used to transport a physically disabled person.



   C.   It is a defense that a physically disabled person was using a
motor vehicle that was parked in the reserved space.



   D.   The Police Department is authorized to have towed away at the
offender’s expense any vehicle parked in spaces designated as “physical
disability parking only”.



   E.   The fine for violations of subsection B. above shall be $100
for each offense. If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the offense,
this matter shall be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction and the
general penalty provisions of the code shall apply. This fine may be in
addition to any costs of towing which may be required under the circumstances.



ARTICLE VII. OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS



§ 13-121  LOCAL ORDINANCE; AUTHORITY.



   The Town Council has the authority, pursuant to I.C. 9-21-1-3.3, to
adopt by ordinance additional traffic regulations concerning the use of golf
carts on streets within the jurisdictional limits of the town.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 13-122  DEFINITION.



   GOLF CART shall have the meaning set forth in I.C. 9-13-2-69.7, as may
be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 13-123  USE LOCAL ORDINANCE; AUTHORITY.



   Subject to the regulations contained within this article, the operation
of golf carts shall be permitted on streets within the jurisdictional limits
of the town.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 13-124  LICENSE.



   Golf carts may not be operated on the town’s streets by a person who
has not obtained an operator’s license under I.C. 9-24.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 13-125  GOLF CART TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   A.   Golf carts shall obey all traffic regulations applicable to
motor vehicles.



   B.   Golf carts shall display a slow-moving vehicle sign or red or
amber flashing lamps attached to the rear of the golf cart.



   C.   Golf carts shall not be permitted to operate on SR 49 or at any
grade crossing of SR 49. Golf carts shall not be permitted to operate on any
sidewalks in the town.



   D.   The operation of golf carts on public streets shall be limited
to daylight hours, unless the golf cart is equipped with headlamps, tail
lamps and stop lamps.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 13-126  EXEMPTIONS.



   The use of golf carts by public safety personnel or by town employees
during special events shall be exempt from the regulations contained in this
article. All such personnel shall be clearly identified, shall be insured and
shall maintain a valid operator’s permit pursuant to I.C. 9-24.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 13-127  VIOLATIONS.



   Violation of this article shall be subject to a penalty in the sum of
$100. Fines not paid within 30 days shall be filed with a court of competent
jurisdiction and § 1-9 of this code of ordinances shall apply. All amounts
collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the General Fund.



(Ord. 2009-16, passed 9-14-2009)



CHAPTER 14: RESERVED



CHAPTER 15:  NUISANCES



Section



   15-1   Definition



   15-2   Illustrative enumeration



   15-3   Prohibited



   15-4   Notice to abate



   15-5   Contents of notice



   15-6   Service of notice



   15-7   Abatement by town



   15-8   Recovery of town’s costs



   15-9   Chapter to be supplemental



§ 15-1  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the word NUISANCE is hereby defined
as the doing of any unlawful act, or the omitting to perform a duty, or the
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:



   A.   Injuries or endangerment to the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others;



   B.   Is offensive to the senses;



   C.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway,
sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage;



   D.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or



   E.   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



§ 15-2  ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.



   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to
be or remain on any public or private property of the following items,
conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:



   A.   Noxious weeds and other rank vegetation;



   B.   Accumulations of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other
abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things;



   C.   Any condition that provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes
and other vermin;



   D.   Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated
condition, that it is unfit for human habitation, kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in
the vicinity where it is located;



   E.   All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations,
including noises;



   F.   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as
the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of such odors and stenches;



   G.   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a
reasonable time after death;



   H.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes
or other substances;



   I.   Any building, structure or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained;



   J.   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on
any lot or piece of ground;



   K.   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   L.   The unauthorized obstruction of any public street, road or
sidewalk; and/or



   M.   Any abandoned vehicle.



§ 15-3  PROHIBITED.



   Any person who causes, permits, maintains or allows the creation or
maintenance of a nuisance shall be punished as provided in § 1-9 of this
code of ordinances.



§ 15-4  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the town or within the
town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, a duly designated officer of the town
may give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which
such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance.



§ 15-5  CONTENTS OF NOTICE.



   The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall contain:



   A.   An order to abate the nuisance or to request hearing within a
stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances;



   B.   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;



   C.   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;



   D.   A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; and



   E.   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and
no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the town may abate
such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person.



§ 15-6  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as authorized by law.



§ 15-7  ABATEMENT BY TOWN.



   Upon failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was
served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same, a duly
designated officer or employee of the town may proceed to abate such nuisance
and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.



§ 15-8  RECOVERY OF TOWN’S COSTS.



   A.   Any and all costs incurred by the town in the abatement of a
nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against
the property upon which such nuisance existed and shall be certified by the
Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor who shall cause such costs to be placed
upon the tax duplicate of the owner of such property and such costs shall
then be collected from the owner as other taxes are collected.



   B.   In addition, such costs shall be a debt that may be collected
by the town in an appropriate civil action.



§ 15-9  CHAPTER TO BE SUPPLEMENTAL.



   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be supplemental
to all other ordinances of the town.



CHAPTER 16:  OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



Section



Article I. In General



   16-1   Discharging firearms prohibited



   16-2   Hand gun license application fee



   16-3   Curfew for minors



   16-4   Curfew; defenses



   16-5   Funeral protests



Article II. Parades, Assemblages, Pickets



   16-16   Definition



   16-17   Permit; required



   16-18   Same; application



   16-19   Same; standards for issuance



   16-20   Same; notice of denial



   16-21   Same; alternative



   16-22   Same; contents



   16-23   Same; revocation



   16-24   Same; possession



   16-25   Compliance with permit, laws and the like required



   16-26   Reserved



   16-27   Reserved



   16-28   Exceptions



Article III. Alarm Systems



   16-29   Definitions



   16-30   Permitted devices



   16-31   Automatic telephone dialing systems prohibited



   16-32   Monitoring system



   16-33   Inspection



   16-34   Local alarms



   16-35   Testing of equipment



   16-36   Disconnection



   16-37   Violations and penalties



Article IV. Consumer Fireworks



   16-40   Definitions



   16-41   Use restrictions



   16-42   Violations and penalties



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 16-1  DISCHARGING FIREARMS PROHIBITED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any firearm within the corporate boundaries of the town, except:



      1.   By a law enforcement officer commissioned by the state or
the United States of American; or



      2.   When located within a qualified practice facility by a
person of proper age.



   B.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      PERSON OF PROPER AGE. A person who is at least 18 years of age
unless under the direct supervision of a person who is at least 18 years of
age.



      QUALIFIED PRACTICE FACILITY shall mean a place that:



         a.   Has secured a use variance from the Board of Zoning
Appeals, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-900 et seq., and complies in all other ways
with the code;



         b.   Is located within a fully enclosed building or
structure specifically designed for the safe containment of projectiles and
the abatement of noise;



         c.   Compiles with all Occupational, Health and Safety
Administration (OSHA) rules and regulations concerning lead exposure; and



         d.   Complies with any and all applicable federal, state
and local statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations and laws.



§ 16-2  HAND GUN LICENSE APPLICATION FEE.



   A.   The town establishes the following handgun license application
fees:



      1.   Four-year handgun license: $10, $5 of which shall be
refunded if the license is not issued;



      2.   Lifetime handgun license (no current valid state handgun
license): $50, $30 of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued;
and



      3.   Lifetime handgun license (current valid state handgun
license): $40, $30 of which shall be refunded if the license is not issued.



   B.   The application fees shall be deposited in a Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund, to be used for law enforcement training duties.



§ 16-3  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   A.   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16 or 17 years of age
to be in a public place:



      1.   Between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;



      2.   After 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday or Friday; and



      3.   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday
or Friday.



   B.   It is a curfew violation for a child less than 15 years of age
to be in a public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.



(Ord. 2009-06, passed 5-26-2009)



§ 16-4  CURFEW; DEFENSES.



   A.   It is a defense to a violation under § 16-3 of this chapter
that a child was emancipated:



      1.   Under I.C. 31-37-19-27 or I.C. 31-6-4-15.7 (before its
repeal);



      2.   By virtue of having married; or



      3.   In accordance with the laws of another state or
jurisdiction, at the time that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct.



   B.   It is a defense to a violation under § 16-3 of this chapter
that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:



      1.   Accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian or
custodian;



      2.   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child’s
parent, guardian or custodian;



      3.   Participating in, going to or returning from:



         a.   Lawful employment;



         b.   A school sanctioned activity;



         c.   A religious event;



         d.   An emergency involving the protection of a person
or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;



         e.   An activity involving the exercise of the child’s
rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
or Art. 1, § 31, of the Constitution of the state, or both, such as freedom
on speech and the right of assembly; or



         f.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training or other
care under the supervision of one or more adults.



      4.   Participating in an activity undertaken at the prior
written direction of the child’s parents, guardian or custodian; or



      5.   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a
location outside Indiana to another location outside of Indiana.



   C.   Violations of the regulations set forth in § 16-3 of this
chapter shall be included in Appendix B to this code of ordinances and
processed for first time offenders, through the Ordinance Violations Bureau
with a fine of $100 to be assessed. In the event the fine is not paid within
30 days from the offense, the matter shall be filed with a court of competent
jurisdiction and § 1-9 of this code of ordinances shall apply. Any
subsequent violations of § 16-3 of this chapter by the violator shall
subject said violator to the general penalty provision of said code found at
§ 1-9 of this code of ordinances. All amounts collected pursuant to this
section shall be deposited in the town’s General Fund.



(Ord. 2009-06, passed 5-26-2009)



§ 16-5  FUNERAL PROTESTS.



   A.   Every person may freely speak, write and publish the person’s
sentiments on all subjects, but no person shall picket or engage in other
protest activities, nor shall any association or corporation cause picketing
or other protest activities to occur within 300 feet of any residence,
cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue or other establishment during or
within one hour before or one hour after the conducting of any actual funeral
or burial service at that place.



   B.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      FUNERAL AND BURIAL SERVICE. The ceremonies and memorial services
held in conjunction with the burial or cremation of the dead, but this
section does not apply to processions while they are in transit beyond the
300 feet zone established under subsection A. above.



      OTHER PROTEST ACTIVITIES. Any action that is disruptive or
undertaken to disrupt or disturb a funeral or burial service.



   C.   Violations of this section shall be included in Appendix A to
this code of ordinances and processed for first time offenders, through the
Ordinance Violations Bureau with a fine of $250 to be assessed. In the event
the fine is not paid within 30 days from the offense, the matter shall be
tried with a court of competent jurisdiction and § 1-9 of this code of
ordinances shall apply. Any subsequent violations of this section by the
violator shall subject said violator to § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.
All amounts collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the
town’s General Fund.



(Ord. 2013-04, passed 4-8-2013)



ARTICLE II. PARADES, ASSEMBLAGES, PICKETS



§ 16-16  DEFINITION.



   As used in this article, the term PARADE shall mean any parade, march,
ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar
display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the town.



§ 16-17  PERMIT; REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of
Police.



§ 16-18  SAME; APPLICATION.



   A.   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer not
less than ten days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the
parade.



   B.   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade;



      2.   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization;



      3.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      4.   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      5.   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      6.   The approximate number of person who, and animals and
vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals; and
description of the vehicles;



      7.   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;



      8.   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;



      9.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such
parade;



      10.   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      11.   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
such parade;



      12.   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his or her behalf; and



      13.   Any additional information that the Chief of Police
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should issue.



   C.   The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall
have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less
than ten days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.



   D.   It is the policy of the Town that the Chief of Police shall
consider applications filed hereunder on less than ten days’ notice so long
as the application is complete, meets the standards for issuance of § 16-19
of this chapter and the Chief of Police has a reasonable opportunity to
review the application prior to the parade.



§ 16-19  SAME; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   A.   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for
hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, finds that:



      1.   The conduct of the parade will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of the other traffic contiguous to
its route;



      2.   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion
of so great a number of police officers of the town to properly police the
line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the town;



      3.   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion
of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the town other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;



      4.   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas;



      5.   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the
movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;



      6.   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create
a disturbance;



      7.   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin
to its point of termination expeditiously and without reasonable delays en
route; and



      8.   The parade is not being held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, cause, goods or event and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.



   B.   No such permit, however, shall be granted unless bond in such
amount as determined by the Chief has first been filed with the town as
security for the payment of any damages or injury which may occur as the
result of the parade; provided, however, that, for cause shown the Chief may
waive the requirement of such bond.



§ 16-20  SAME; NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   If the Chief of Police disapproves the application for a parade permit,
he or she shall mail to the applicant within two days after the date upon
which the application was filed, a notice of his or her action.



§ 16-21  SAME; ALTERNATIVE.



   A.   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date,
at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within four days
after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of
acceptance with the Chief of Police.



   B.   An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements
of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under, this article.



§ 16-22  SAME; CONTENTS.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   A.   Starting time;



   B.   Minimum speed;



   C.   Maximum speed;



   D.   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of
the parade;



   E.   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;



   F.   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
and



   G.   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this article.



§ 16-23  SAME; REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued hereunder upon a determination that the applicant or proposed parade
no longer meets one or more of the standards for issuance as set forth in
this article.



§ 16-24  SAME; POSSESSION.



   The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity
shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of
the parade.



§ 16-25  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT, LAWS AND THE LIKE REQUIRED.



   A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.



§ 16-26  RESERVED.



§ 16-27  RESERVED.



§ 16-28  EXCEPTIONS.



   This article shall not apply to:



   A.   Funeral processions;



   B.   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and/or



   C.   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.



ARTICLE III. ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 16-29  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM CONDITIONS. Alarms activated by lawful violation of a user’s
property or other violations that the systems were designed to protect
against, acts of God, other violent conditions or by outside agencies of
external forces not under the control of the owner, lessee or his or her
employee or agent.



   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER. Any person, firm or corporation that sells,
leases or installs automatic protection devices or signaling devices that
transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus from a detection apparatus or
manually operated system.



   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices such as a
solid-state unit, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring
urgent attention and to which Police or Fire Department is expected to
respond.



   ALARM USER.



      1.   Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the town, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles.



      2.   Also included are those systems that employ an audible
signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to alert or
signal persons outside the premises.



   CENTRAL STATION. A facility whose prime purpose is to monitor incoming
alarm signals 24 hours a day and relay the signal information to the
appropriate authorities.



   DIRECT LINE. A telephone line leading directly into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for use only to report signals on a
person-to-person basis.



   FALSE ALARMS. The activation of an alarm system caused by improper
operation, negligence of the owner or lessee or its employee or agent or
equipment malfunction; provided, however, that, the term FALSE ALARM shall
not include alarm activation caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by an alarm
user or alarm equipment supplier.



   LOCAL ALARMS. A signaling system which, when activated, causes an
audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises
within which the system is installed.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or
society, but such term does not include the town.



   POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the Police Department of the town, or his or
her authorized representative or designee.



   PUBLIC TRUNK LINE. A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency
and administrative calls on a person-to-person basis.



   SIGNALING DEVICE. An electrically operated instrument that
automatically sends visual and/or audible signals to be registered by
indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal, or central station.



   TOWN. The Town of Chesterton.



§ 16-30  PERMITTED DEVICES.



   A.   No person shall use or cause or permit to be used, an alarm
system utilizing signaling devices that automatically select a public trunk
line of the Police Department of the town and then reproduce any prerecorded
message to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency.



   B.   With the exception of local alarms, only signaling devices
shall be permitted to be installed in the town for the purpose of reporting
any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency to the Police Department of
the town.



§ 16-31  AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
install, maintain, lease, operate or assist in the operations of an automatic
telephone dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively used by
the public directly to request emergency service from the Police Department
of the town.



   B.   The Police Chief or his or her designee, upon becoming aware of
an automatic telephone dialing system installed or operated in violation of
this section, shall order, in writing, the owner, operator or lessee to
disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of receipt of
the order.



   C.   Any automatic telephone dialing system installed prior to the
effective date of this article shall be removed within 30 days of the
effective date of this article.



§ 16-32  MONITORING SYSTEM.



   The Metropolitan Board of Police Commissioners of the town is
authorized to contract for and maintain the installation of a uniform
monitoring system (Board) to receive visual and audible signals over direct
lines.



§ 16-33  INSPECTION.



   The Chief of Police shall have the right to inspect, at reasonable
times, any alarm system on the premises where it is intended to be used to
determine whether it is being used in conformity with the provisions of this
article.



§ 16-34  LOCAL ALARMS.



   Local alarms with any externally audible alert shall not make a sound
similar to that of civil defense warning systems, and such alarms in
residential districts must have an automatic cutoff after 15 minutes of
sounding.



§ 16-35  TESTING OF EQUIPMENT.



   A.   No alarm system designed to transmit alarm conditions directly
to the Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first
notifying the Police Department. Notification is not required to test or
demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting alarm conditions directly to the
Police Department, unless reports of the alarm conditions are to be relayed
to the Police Department.



   B.   Failure to notify the Police Department prior to testing an
alarm system shall constitute a false alarm and shall be subject to the
penalty provisions under this article.



§ 16-36  DISCONNECTION.



   A.   When alarm conditions are discovered by the Police Department
that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the
Police Chief is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the alarm
system, or its representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made
to comply with the requirements of this article.



   B.   Any person affected by the Police Chief’s order to disconnect
an alarm system shall have the right to request the Board of Metropolitan
Police Commissioners to review the decision or action taken by the Police
Chief by requesting review in writing within ten days after any adverse
action or decision has been made by the Police Chief. The Board may affirm,
modify or reverse any decision made by the Police Chief.



   C.   In the event the town finds it necessary to order an alarm
system disconnected, the town shall incur no liability by such action to the
extent allowed by law.



§ 16-37  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   No alarm user may have more than two false alarms in any calendar
month. Each additional false alarm shall constitute a violation of this
article and shall result in a fine of $50 and shall be prosecuted in
accordance with the Ordinance Violations Bureau. In the event the fine is not
paid within 30 days from the offense, the matter shall be filed with a court
of competent jurisdiction and § 1-9 of this code of ordinances shall apply.
All amounts collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the
town’s General Fund. Any alarm person, firm or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists
enforcement of any other provisions of this article shall be subject
enforcement in a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with § 1-9 of
this code of ordinances.



ARTICLE IV. CONSUMER FIREWORKS



§ 16-40  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms CONSUMER FIREWORK and FIREWORK shall have the meaning set
forth in I.C. 22-11-14-1 as the same may be amended from time to time. Two
copies of I.C. 22-11-14-1 are on file in the office of the town’s
Clerk-Treasurer for inspection by the public.



(Ord. 2007-13, passed 5-29-2007)



§ 16-41  USE RESTRICTIONS.



   The use, ignition or discharge of consumer fireworks within the
corporate limits of the town shall be unlawful and in violation of this
article at any time with the exception of the following:



   A.   Within the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on
June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8 and
July 9 in any year;



   B.   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on July 4;
and



   C.   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1 in any given year.



(Ord. 2007-13, passed 5-29-2007)



§ 16-42  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   A first violation of this article shall subject the offender to a $100
fine before the town’s Violations Bureau. Any subsequent violations of this
article shall subject the offender to § 1-9 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2007-13, passed 5-29-2007)



CHAPTER 17:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



Article I. In General



   17-1   Department created



   17-2   Operating fund



   17-3   Capital fund



Article II. Park and Recreation Board



   17-16   Creation; composition; qualifications of members



   17-17   Terms; vacancies



   17-18   Officers



   17-19   Powers, duties



   17-20   Annual budget; acceptance of gifts and the like



Article III. Use Regulations



   17-31   General duties of persons using parks



   17-32   Prohibited acts



   17-33   Hours parks are open



   17-34   Use permits



   17-35   Picnics



   17-36   Enforcement



   17-37   Dunes Friendship Land Park; rules and regulations



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 17-1  DEPARTMENT CREATED.



   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-10-3, there is hereby created a Town
Department of Parks and Recreation.



§ 17-2  OPERATING FUND.



   A.   There is hereby created, pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22, as
amended, a special non-reverting operating fund for the use of the Park and
Recreation Board.



   B.   The Park and Recreation Board may make expenditures from the
fund created by this section without appropriation.



§ 17-3  CAPITAL FUND.



   There is hereby created, pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-20, a special
non-reverting capital fund for the purpose of acquiring land for the park
system of the town.



ARTICLE II. PARK AND RECREATION BOARD



§ 17-16  CREATION; COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   A Park and Recreation Board shall be created, composed of four members
appointed by the executive of the municipality on the basis of their interest
in, and knowledge of, parks and recreation. No more than two members shall be
of the same political party.



§ 17-17  TERMS; VACANCIES.



   Upon establishment of the Board created by this article, the terms of
the members, after those initially appointed, shall be four years. All terms
expire on the first Monday of January, but a member shall continue in office
until a successor is appointed. If the executive of the municipality does not
make an appointment for a new term by the first Monday in April, the
incumbent shall serve another term. If a vacancy occurs, the executive of the
municipality shall appoint a new member for the remainder of the unexpired
term.



§ 17-18  OFFICERS.



   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board created by this
article shall elect a President and Vice-President. The Vice-President shall
have authority to act as the President of the Board during the absence or
disability of the President. The Board may select a Secretary either from
within or without its own membership.



§ 17-19  POWERS, DUTIES.



   The Board created by this article shall have the power to perform all
acts necessary to acquire and develop sites and facilities and to conduct
such programs as are generally understood to be park and recreation
functions. In addition, the Board shall have all the powers and duties listed
in I.C. 36-10-3.



§ 17-20  ANNUAL BUDGET; ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS AND THE LIKE.



   The Board created by this article shall prepare and submit an annual
budget in the same manner as other departments of the town as prescribed by
the State Board of Accounts. The Board may accept gifts, donations and
subsidies for parks and recreation purposes.



ARTICLE III. USE REGULATIONS



§ 17-31  GENERAL DUTIES OF PERSONS USING PARKS.



   Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all
debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the
premises in good order, and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition.



§ 17-32  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person using the parks to either perform
or permit to be performed any of the following acts:



   A.   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or caused to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing in such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in pollution of said waters;



   B.   Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic liquor in any park;



   C.   Violate any rule for use of the parks, made or approved by the
Park and Recreation Board;



   D.   Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its
facilities or interfere with such compliance with this article and the rules
applicable to such use;



   E.   Swim, bath or wade in any water or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor,
and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may
hereafter be adopted by the Town Council or the Park and Recreation Board;



   F.   Engage in special activities including model airplanes, golf
practice, ice skating, games and picnics, except at locations specifically
designated for such activities by the Park Superintendent. Areas for such
activities may be reserved by groups for use at specified times;



   G.   Drive or park any automobile or motor vehicle, except on a
street, driveway or parking lot in any park; or to park or to leave any such
vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking;



   H.   Bring any dangerous animal into any park and it shall be
unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash
not more than six feet long and in no event shall equines be allowed to be
brought into or harbored in any of the parks of the town;



   I.   For any person other than employees and officials of the Park
and Recreation Board to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or
article within the park, unless a use permit is obtained; and



   J.   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever or erect or cause to be erected any
sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park;
provided that, these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized
government official in pursuit of his or her official duties.



§ 17-33  HOURS PARKS ARE OPEN.



   A.   The Park and Recreation Board shall establish days and hours
during such days that parks, or any of them, shall be open to the public and
it shall be unlawful for any person other than town personnel conducting town
business therein, to occupy or be present in such parks, or any of them,
during any hours in which the park or parks are not open to the public.



   B.   The Park Superintendent may declare any section, or part of any
park, or any park, closed to the public at any time and for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regular stated intervals.



§ 17-34  USE PERMITS.



   A.   Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use
park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties and the
like, a representative of such group, association or organization shall first
obtain a permit from the Park Superintendent for such purposes. The Park and
Recreation Board may adopt an application form to be used by the Park
Superintendent for such situations.



   B.   The Park Superintendent shall grant the application if it
appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with
the general use of the park by the individual members of the public if such
group, association or organization meets all of the conditions contained in
the application. The application may contain a requirement for an indemnity
bond to protect the town from any liability of any kind or character and to
protect town property from damage and to ensure cleanup of such park after
use by such group, association or organization.



   C.   The Park and Recreation Board has the authority to adopt a
schedule of fees for the use of park facilities.



§ 17-35  PICNICS.



   A.   No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than
those designated for that purpose. The Park Superintendent or his or her
designee shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas
when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the
comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions
given to achieve this.



   B.   No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas
of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purposes of holding
picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area
and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.



§ 17-36  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Park Superintendent and his or her designees are herewith granted
authority to enforce the provisions of this article and the Police Department
and the members thereof are herewith specifically directed and authorized to
enforce the provisions of this article.



§ 17-37  DUNES FRIENDSHIP LAND PARK; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   A.   The Department of Parks and Recreation has approved and the
Town Council adopts the following rules and regulations for Dunes Friendship
Land Park.



   B.   These rules and regulations are as follows.



      1.   No obscene language or disorderly behavior on park
property.



      2.   No pets are allowed within the Dunes Friendship Land play
structure.



      3.   No bikes are allowed within the Dunes Friendship Land
play structure.



      4.   No skates are allowed within the Dunes Friendship Land
play structure.



      5.   No skateboards are allowed within the Dunes Friendship
Land play structure.



      6.   No roller blades are allowed within the Dunes Friendship
Land play structure.



      7.   There will be a curfew one hour after sunset in the Dunes
Friendship Land play structure.



      8.   There is a marked height restriction for the children’s
portion of the Dunes Friendship Land play structure. Parents are allowed to
be in the area with their children, but only children under the marked height
are allowed in the children’s area.



      9.   No children over eight years of age shall be allowed to
play in the fenced in area at the Dunes Friendship Land Park.



      10.   Any vandalism within the Dunes Friendship Land play
structure or any other park property that is overseen by the Department of
Parks and Recreation will not be tolerated. Any persons caught vandalizing
town parks will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law.



      11.   Any violations of the above rules will result in the
offender being asked to leave the park on the day in question. A second
offense will result in the offenders being banned from the park in question.
The third offense will result in the offender being banned from all town
parks. Violations of this article shall be prosecuted through the Ordinance
Violations Bureau.



CHAPTER 18:  PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS



Section



   18-1   Definitions



   18-2   License; required



   18-3   Same; application



   18-4   Same; fee



   18-5   Same; issuance



   18-6   Same; term



   18-7   Same; exhibition upon demand required



   18-8   Restrictions as to hours of sale



   18-9   Exemptions



   18-10   Violations; penalty



§ 18-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, ITINERANT VENDORS and SOLICITORS. Any transient
person who engages temporarily in the making or selling of any goods, wares
or merchandise of any kind whatsoever, including the sale, or soliciting for
sale of photographs and magazine subscriptions within the town, regardless of
whether such goods, ware or merchandise are peddled from house to house, sold
or hawked upon the streets or other public places, or sold from any room,
building, structure or lot rented or leased for the purpose of carrying on
such business, for present or future delivery, by telephone or otherwise.



   TRANSIENT PERSON. Any person who does not reside with the boundaries of
the Duneland School Corporation.



§ 18-2  LICENSE; REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler, solicitor or other
itinerant vendor in goods, wares or merchandise, to offer the same for sale
in the town without having first obtained a license therefor.



§ 18-3  SAME; APPLICATION.



   A.   Not less than 24 hours prior to the issuance of any license by
the Clerk-Treasurer, as provided herein, an applicant for a license, as a
condition precedent to the issuance of such license, shall furnish the
Clerk-Treasurer a written application in triplicate on a form to be furnished
by the town known as “Peddler’s Application Form No. 1”, in which each
and every question shall be answered under oath. Such form is to be examined
and approved by the Clerk-Treasurer and the Clerk-Treasurer is directed to
refuse to issue a license to a person who has not answered each and every
question thereon under oath.



   B.   The Chief of Police shall direct the investigation of the
application for a license and may deny same provided that written reasons are
submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer by the Chief of Police and given to the
applicant.



§ 18-4  SAME; FEE.



   A.   1.   The amount to be paid for a license under this chapter
shall be $5 for one day and $25 for one week, in conformity with the
application.



      2.   Any sponsored event where there is to be more than ten
peddlers, hawkers, solicitors and itinerant vendors, as defined in § 18-1 of
this chapter, shall be permitted and required to have one license covering
all vendors for the sum of $50 per day, said application to be completed by
an authorized member of the sponsoring group.



   B.   The fees required under this section shall be paid at the time
the application is submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer in order to cover the
expenses of processing the application. In the event that a license is not
issued, the town will retain the processing fee.



§ 18-5  SAME; ISSUANCE.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall make out all licenses granted to peddlers,
hawkers, itinerant vendors and solicitors under this chapter and each license
shall be properly signed by the Clerk-Treasurer, the President of the Town
Council and the Chief of Police, upon the Clerk-Treasurer having received
from the applicant the proper sum for such license and all other terms of
this chapter having been complied with.



§ 18-6  SAME; TERM.



   No license shall be issued under this chapter for less than one day, or
longer than one week.



§ 18-7  SAME; EXHIBITION UPON DEMAND REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor,
solicitor or other person to refuse to show his or her license when requested
to do so by any person to whom he or she shall offer to sell any goods, wares
or merchandise, or to any police officer of the town when so requested.



§ 18-8  RESTRICTIONS AS TO HOURS OF SALE.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor,
solicitor or other person to sell, solicit for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise within the town, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. of each week day and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturday of each week.



§ 18-9  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to the
dealers by commercial travelers, or to sheriffs, constables, administrators,
guardians, receivers or other properly elected and qualified officers, nor to
sales by producers of farm or dairy products, where such produce was raised
or produced on the premises of the seller, nor shall it apply to the sale of
newspapers by one who has a regular and established route for sale of the
same.



§ 18-10  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be prosecuted in accordance with the
Ordinance Violations Bureau.



CHAPTER 19:  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



Section



Article I. Economic Development



   19-1   Findings



   19-2   Creation of Department and Commission



   19-3   Appointment of Commission members; terms



ARTICLE I. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



§ 19-1  FINDINGS.



   It is hereby found that a need exists for the financing of economic
development and pollution control facilities as authorized by I.C. 36-7-12-1
et seq.



§ 19-2  CREATION OF DEPARTMENT AND COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created the Town Department of Development and the Town
Development Commission, which Commission shall consist of three members.



§ 19-3  APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSION MEMBERS; TERMS.



   Members of the Development Commission shall be nominated and appointed
and shall serve for the terms as provided in I.C. 36-7-12-1 et seq.



CHAPTER 20: RESERVED



CHAPTER 21:  POLICE



Section



Article I. In General



   21-1   Management and control of Department



   21-2   Mandatory retirement age



   21-3   Fee for video taped information



   21-4   Duneland Emergency Regional Dispatch Operations Center
Management Board



Article II. Metropolitan Board of Police Commissioners



   21-16   Created



   21-17   Title, composition



   21-18   Qualifications



   21-19   Terms; filling of vacancies



   21-20   Compensation



   21-21   Oath



   21-22   Bond



   21-23   To appoint Chief of Police



   21-24   Appointment of employees



   21-25   Compensation of Police Department members



   21-26   Suspension or removal of Police Department members



   21-27   Removal of Commissioners



Article III. Police Reserves



   21-31   Establishment of Police Reserves



   21-32   Benefits



   21-33   Training and probationary period



   21-34   Prohibition of powers



   21-35   Rules and regulations governing



Cross-reference:



   Health and Sanitation, see Ch. 11



   Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions, see Ch. 16



   Ordinance Violations Bureau, see App. B



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 21-1  MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF DEPARTMENT.



   The operation and management of the town’s Police Department shall be
governed by provisions of the state law applicable to the management and
control of metropolitan police departments.



§ 21-2  MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE.



   A.   All police officers hired and employed by the town after the
effective date of Ord. 2014-04 shall retire upon reaching the age of 65 years.



   B.   All police officers of the town employed as of 3-28-1977 who
shall have completed 20 years of active service as police officers in the
town, under the Metropolitan Police Pension Fund, so as to be eligible to
receive a pension, such eligibility having been attained prior to reaching
the age of 65 years, shall retire upon attaining the age of 65 years.



   C.   In the event any police officer employed by the town as of
3-28-1977 who is a member of the Metropolitan Police Pension Fund, shall not
have served 20 years of active service so as to be eligible for a pension
from such pension fund, shall be allowed to complete 20 years of active
service so as to be eligible for a pension, and shall retire upon attaining
20 years of active service.



   D.   This section shall not contradict, nor avoid, any other
requirements of the Indiana Code with regard to eligibility for service as a
police officer, including, but not limited to, ability to perform duties as a
police officer of the town.



(Ord. 2014-04, passed 4-28-2014)



§ 21-3  FEE FOR VIDEO TAPED INFORMATION.



   A.   1.   The Police Department shall hereafter charge a fee of
$50 to provide a copy of videotape that was taken by the Police Department
involving an incident or accident, traffic arrest and any other type of
traffic enforcement for which there is videotape taken by the Police
Department. The $50 fee is to be charged for each incident or each tape.



      2.   In the event that the same incident or accident involves
two separate tapes, the charge shall be $50 for each tape.



      3.   The person or party requesting a copy of such tape or
tapes shall be responsible for providing a blank tape or tapes for copying
and reproduction purposes.



   B.   All fees received by the Police Department for said
reproduction of video tapes shall be deposited in a separate account to be
known as the “Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund” and may be
expended by the discretion of the chief administrative officer of the
Department for any Department purpose reasonably related to keeping of
incident or accident reports and records or traffic enforcement pursuant to
I.C. 9-26-9-3 and any future amendments thereto.



§ 21-4  DUNELAND EMERGENCY REGIONAL DISPATCH OPERATIONS CENTER MANAGEMENT
BOARD.



   A.   The Town Council herein establishes the Duneland Emergency
Regional Dispatch Operations Center Management Board. The members shall be:



      1.   Town Chief of Police;



      2.   Town Assistant Chief of Police;



      3.   Town of Porter Chief of Police;



      4.   Town of Porter Assistant Chief of Police;



      5.   Porter County, Indiana E911 Director;



      6.   Town Council President; and



      7.   Town of Porter Town Council President.



   B.   The Board shall elect one of its members to serve as President
on an annual basis.



   C.   The Board shall have the following responsibilities:



      1.   Management of the operations of the center;



      2.   Control of the budget with regard to personnel and
equipment in the center; and



      3.   Authority to enact and enforce policies concerning
computer operations in the center.



(Ord. 2015-25, passed 12-14-2015; Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-9-2016)



ARTICLE II. METROPOLITAN BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 21-16  CREATED.



   Pursuant to the referendum of 5-2-1967, and in accordance with I.C.
36-8-9-1 et seq., the Town Council herein establishes a Metropolitan Board of
Police Commissioners.



§ 21-17  TITLE, COMPOSITION.



   The Board of Police Commissioners created by this article shall be
identified as the “Chesterton Board of Police Commissioners”, which Board
shall consist of three members to be appointed by the Town Council.



§ 21-18  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Commissioners appointed pursuant to this article shall be of good
character and shall be legal residents of the town and not more than two of
the Commissioners shall be of the same political party.



§ 21-19  TERMS; FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   Upon the expiration of the terms of the initial members, the successors
of such members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be elected, as
aforesaid, for three-year terms. Any vacancy occurring during a term of
office shall be filled by the majority vote of the Town Council by a
replacement member who shall serve out the term of the member whose office
has become vacant and such replacement member shall be affiliated with the
same political party as that of the member whose office was vacated.



§ 21-20  COMPENSATION.



   Each member of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be compensated
at the rate as set by the Town Council from time to time for his or her
services as a member of such Board, payable monthly out of the treasury of
the town.



§ 21-21  OATH.



   Each Commissioner before entering upon his or her duties shall take and
subscribe to an oath before the Clerk of the Circuit or Superior Court of the
county, as prescribed under I.C. 36-8-9-3.1.



§ 21-22  BOND.



   Each Commissioner, before entering upon his or her duties, shall give
bond in the penal sum of $5,000, payable to the state, conditional upon the
faithful and honest discharge of his or her duties, which bond shall be
approved by the Town Council.



§ 21-23  TO APPOINT CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Board of Police Commissioners shall appoint one person to serve as
Chief of the police force.



§ 21-24  APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.



   The Board of Police Commissioners shall have the power to appoint such
other employees as are necessary to carry on the work of the Police
Department.



§ 21-25  COMPENSATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.



   The Commissioners shall recommend to the Town Council who shall fix and
determine the compensation to be paid members of the Police Department, so
long as compensation is just and reasonable and in compliance with the laws
of the state.



§ 21-26  SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL OF POLICE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.



   The Board of Police Commissioners shall have the authority to suspend
or remove any person or persons from the Police Department, if in accordance
with I.C. 36-8-9-4, 36-8-3-4 and 36-8-3-4.1 and any future amendments.



§ 21-27  REMOVAL OF COMMISSIONERS.



   Each Commissioner shall be subject to removal from office by the Town
Council for any cause the Town Council deems sufficient.



ARTICLE III. POLICE RESERVES



§ 21-31  ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE RESERVES.



   The Police Reserve Unit is hereby established that is limited to a
maximum of 15 members, to be appointed by the Metropolitan Board of Police
Commissioners with the approval of the Town Council.



§ 21-32  BENEFITS.



   A.   To the extent sums of money for benefits are appropriated by
the Town Council, Police Reserves may:



      1.   Receive a uniform allowance;



      2.   Receive compensation for time lost from other employment
because of court appearances;



      3.   Be insured for life, accident and sickness coverage; and



      4.   A Police Reserve may be covered by medical treatment and
burial expense provisions of the Worker’s Compensation Law (I.C. 22-3-2
through I.C. 22-3-6) and the Worker’s Occupational Disease Law (I.C.
22-3-7). If compensability is at issue, the administrative procedures of I.C.
22-3-2 through I.C. 22-3-6 and I.C. 22-3-7 shall be used to determine the
issue.



   B.   Police Reserves are not eligible to participate in any pension
program provided for regular members of the Department.



§ 21-33  TRAINING AND PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   A Police Reserve officer may not be appointed until he or she has
completed the training and probationary period specified by rules of the
Police Department.



§ 21-34  PROHIBITION OF POWERS.



   A Police Reserve officer may not make an arrest, conduct a search or
seizure of a person or property, or carry a firearm, unless the Police
Reserve officer successfully completes a pre-basic course under I.C.
5-2-1-9(1).



§ 21-35  RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING.



   The Metropolitan Board of Police Commissioners shall promulgate and
establish rules and regulations of the Police Department concerning Police
Reserves.



CHAPTER 22: RESERVED



CHAPTER 23:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Section



Article I. In General



   23-1   Obstructions prohibited; removal at property owner’s expense



   23-2   Posting of notices and the like on utility poles or public
property restricted



   23-3   Littering prohibited



   23-4   Placement and use of poles and wires restricted



Article II. Culverts



   23-16   Definitions



   23-17   Purpose



   23-18   Installation prerequisite; to commencement of construction
on abutting property in certain instances



   23-19   Determination of need for culvert upon building permit
applications



Article III. Snow Removal



   23-61   Generally



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 23-1  OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AT PROPERTY OWNER’S EXPENSE.



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or maintain any
shrubs, bushes, trees or other form of vegetation or material in such a
manner that it obstructs or hinders the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks
or vehicular traffic on streets or alleys within the town.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, build or maintain
any building, fence, barricade, gate or structure of any kind in such a
manner that it obstructs the passage of pedestrians upon sidewalks or
crosswalks or vehicular traffic on the streets or alleys within the town.
This subsection B. shall not apply to any obstruction made in accordance with
the Building Code ordinances or street excavation ordinance and under permits
issued in accordance therewith.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or maintain any
fence, barricade or structure at any intersection of any roads, streets,
alleys, highways or vehicular right-of-way within the limits of the town,
which in the opinion of the Town Council, obstructs unreasonably the vision
of motorists or pedestrians approaching such intersection.



   D.   Any cost incurred by the town correcting or removing any
violation as herein provided shall be taxed against the offending property
owner and placed upon the tax records for collection.



   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, place or deposit
any mud, dirt, stone, woodchips or other debris upon any roadway.



§ 23-2  POSTING OF NOTICES AND THE LIKE ON UTILITY POLES OR PUBLIC PROPERTY
RESTRICTED.



   A.   No person shall post, paint, print, paste, stencil, tack, nail
or otherwise affix any notice, mar, poster, handbill, advertisement, campaign
poster or any other sign whatsoever, except traffic signs and directive
signs, upon any utility pole or tree on any street, park or public ground
located within the town.



   B.   This section shall not apply to the posting of any legal notice
required to be posted by law.



§ 23-3  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any handbill,
paper, garbage, refuse and rubbish, as the same are defined in § 10-2 of
this code of ordinances, upon the streets, alleys, walks or public places
within the town.



§ 23-4  PLACEMENT AND USE OF POLES AND WIRES RESTRICTED.



   A.   All persons and the owners and operators of public utilities
using pole lines, with wires within the corporate limits of the town in,
across or along a public street, alley or public place, shall be required to
raise the wires, guy wires and such other appurtenances to such pole lines
belonging and replace poles, when necessary to permit the construction of any
public improvement of any street, sewer or sidewalk or roadway or the moving
of any building along any street, alley or public place in the town, and to,
when necessary, remove and replace the poles or pole lines to a new position
in the street, alley or public place so as to accommodate such public
improvement or moving of buildings in the incorporated town.



   B.   All such persons and the operators of public utilities, using
pole lines with wires within the corporate limits of the town, as mentioned
in subsection A. above, shall be required to so construct and maintain their
poles and pole lines and wires in and upon the streets, alleys and public
places of the town in such a manner so as not to interfere with the ingress
or egress to private property within the town and that when any property
owner, within the town, builds or constructs a roadway or driveway, as
ingress and egress to and from his or her property from the public streets or
alleys of the town, any pole, wires, guy wires or other appurtenances to such
pole line belonging, of the public utilities mentioned in subsection A.
above, interfering with the free and reasonable use of such driveway or
roadway, shall be removed and replaced to a new position in the street, alley
or public place, so as to accommodate such property owner to the free and
unobstructed use of such roadway or driveway, leading from the public street
or alley in or upon his or her property.



   C.   In the construction of public improvements, or the moving of
buildings, the Town Council or the Engineer in charge of the work for the
town, shall have authority to determine that the wire lines or pole lines,
crossing the street, alley or public place in the line of the improvement or
which might interfere with the free and unobstructed use of roadways or
driveways on private property, described in this section, shall be required
to be removed, or the wires raised and shall issue a certificate to the
contractor of such improvements, or to the person doing the work or to the
property owner to procure from the Clerk-Treasurer a permit, as hereinafter
provided, and such contractor or person shall take such certificate issued by
the Engineer or by the Town Council, to the Clerk-Treasurer, and shall inform
the Clerk-Treasurer as to the wires to be raised or the poles to be removed
by the owners thereof, specifying the particular place and specific time of
passing through or along the streets where such poles or wires obstruct and
interfere with the construction of such improvements or interfere or obstruct
the free and reasonable use of roadways or driveways from public streets or
alleys to private property or where the same obstruct or interfere with the
passage of the machinery used in such construction or obstructs the moving of
buildings, and such Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permanent permit to such
contractor or person or property owner upon payment of $5 and upon issuing
such permit the Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare an order on the owner or owners
of the poles and wires, to be prepared to raise the wires or remove the poles
at the time and place set forth in the permit to such contractor or person
and the Clerk-Treasurer shall serve such order, as a notice, on the owner or
owners of such pole lines or the agent thereof or on it local representative
within such town, not less than 24 hours before the time fixed in such order
or notice for the raising of the wires or removal of the wires or poles in
order that the same shall not interfere with or obstruct such public
improvements or obstruct the passage of any machinery used by the person or
contractor making such improvements, or that such poles or wires will not
obstruct or interfere with the free and reasonable se of property within the
town.



   D.   Any such utility owning and operating pole lines and wires, as
set out in subsection A. above, who shall fail to comply with the request and
notice provided for in subsection C. above, shall, upon such failure be
liable to the town for the penalty as prescribed in § 1-9 of this code of
ordinances for each and every day in default, and each day shall be a
separate offense, and that sum or sums may be collected in any court of
competent jurisdiction for and on behalf of the town.



ARTICLE II. CULVERTS



§ 23-16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INSPECTOR. The Building Commissioner, Street Commissioner or designee.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, whether
continuously or intermittently.



§ 23-17  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to maintain watercourses, whether
natural or artificial, along the public roads within the town by regulating
the installation, use and maintenance of private culverts along public roads
within the town.



§ 23-18  INSTALLATION PREREQUISITE; TO COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION ON
ABUTTING PROPERTY IN CERTAIN INSTANCES.



   To accomplish the purposes hereof, the owners of all real estate, and
improvements thereon within the town, and abutting any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located or shall in the future be located
a culvert, is hereby required at his or her expense to install, use and
maintain such culvert, prior to the commencement of any construction on such
real estate according to the provisions of this article.



§ 23-19  DETERMINATION OF NEED FOR CULVERT UPON BUILDING PERMIT
APPLICATIONS.



   A.   Upon any application for a building permit, the Inspector shall
initially determine by personal inspection whether or not a culvert would be
necessary in order to maintain the watercourse in, near and upon the real
estate involved in the application for a building permit and adjacent
properties.



   B.   If the Inspector shall determine that a culvert in necessary,
the Inspector shall require that such culvert be installed and be in
accordance with the written instructions of the Inspector setting forth the
location, diameter, which shall be no less than 12 inches, length and depth
of burial of such culvert, which installations shall be done prior to the
issuance of a building permit.



ARTICLE III. SNOW REMOVAL



§ 23-61  GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to move snow, slush or ice, or
cause the same to be moved from any driveway, parking lot, alley, sidewalk or
other parcel of land and deposit same upon any street or alley in the town.
The Street Department is exempt from the provisions of this article while
performing its official job duties.



CHAPTER 24:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



Section



Article I. In General



   24-1   Definitions



   24-2   Management structure



Article II. Storm Water Management Board



   24-16   Composition; qualifications; terms of members; appointments;
filling vacancies



   24-17   Officers and rules of procedure



   24-18   Meetings



   24-19   Powers and duties



   24-20   Superintendent



   24-21   MS4 operator



Article III. Illicit and Illegal Discharge



   24-30   Applicability



   24-31   Responsibility for administration



   24-32   Discharge prohibition



   24-33   Suspension of MS4 access



   24-34   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   24-35   Monitoring of discharges



   24-36   Requirement to use best management practices (BMPs)



   24-37   Notification of spills



   24-38   Enforcement



   24-39   Costs of abatement



   24-40   Injunctive relief



Article IV. Storm Water Run-off from Construction Sites



   24-50   Applicability



   24-51   Project site owner responsibilities



   24-52   Individual lot owner or operator responsibilities



   24-53   General requirements for storm water quality control



   24-54   Erosion and sediment control permit



   24-55   Erosion and sediment control permit application and procedure



   24-56   Requirements for construction plan/storm water pollution
prevention plan



   24-57   Notice of intent



   24-58   Self-monitoring requirements



   24-59   Inspection and violations



   24-60   Project termination



   24-61   Duration of erosion and sediment control permit



   24-62   Enforcement



Article V. Post-Construction Storm Water Management



   24-101   Applicability



   24-102   General requirements for post-construction storm water
management



   24-103   Performance criteria



   24-104   Monitoring and inspection



   24-105   Enforcement of violations



Article VI. Rates and Charges



   24-200   Definitions



   24-201   Charges levied



   24-202   Classes of users



   24-203   Determination of charges



   24-204   Billing



Article VII. Violations and Enforcement



   24-300   General enforcement provisions



   24-301   Administrative hearings and fines



   24-302   Civil actions



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 24-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL CONSERVATION PRACTICES.



      1.   Practices that are constructed on agricultural land for
the purposes of controlling soil erosion and sedimentation.



      2.   These practices include grass waterways, sediment basins,
terraces and grade stabilization structures.



   AGRICULTURAL LAND DISTURBANCE. Tillage, planting, cultivation or
harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or nursery
vegetative crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and
establishment, the construction of agricultural conservation practices and
the installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tile. For purposes
of this chapter, the term does not include land disturbing activities for the
construction of agricultural-related facilities, such as:



      1.   Barns;



      2.   Buildings to house livestock;



      3.   Roads associated with infrastructure;



      4.   Agricultural waste lagoons and facilities;



      5.   Lakes and ponds;



      6.   Wetlands; and



      7.   Other infrastructure.



   AVERAGE ANNUAL POST-DEVELOPMENT TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS LOAD. The amount
of the total suspended solids load after the completion of construction
activities and the achievement of permanent stabilization based on the
average reading of the total suspended solids loadings from all storms less
than or equal to the two-year/24-hour storm.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures or other management practices,
including treatment practices and operating procedures, undertaken to prevent
or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the
municipal separate storm sewer system, approved BMPs shall be compiled by the
town from time to time.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (THE ACT). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), any subsequent amendments thereto and all rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant to said Act.



   CLEARING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land disturbing activities and land disturbing
activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and structures.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more and include, but are not limited to, such activities as clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.



   CONSTRUCTION PLAN. A representation of a project site and all
activities associated with the project. The plan includes the location of the
project site, buildings and other infrastructure, grading activities,
schedules for implementation and other pertinent information related to the
project site. A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) is a part of
the CONSTRUCTION PLAN.



   CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS. A stabilized stone surface at all points of
ingress or egress to a project site for the purpose of capturing and
detaining sediment carried by tires of vehicles or other equipment entering
or exiting the project site.



   DISCHARGE OF A POLLUTANT. Any addition of any pollutant, or combination
of pollutants, into any waters of the state.



   DRAINAGE WAY. Any channel that conveys surface run-off throughout the
site.



   DRY WEATHER VIOLATION. A violation of this chapter occurring more that
24 hours after a wet weather event and up to a subsequent wet weather event.



   EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of
practices, to control erosion and resulting sedimentation.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT. The permit issued by the town that
authorizes construction activities on one or more acres of land.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SYSTEM. The use of appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures to minimize sedimentation by first reducing or
eliminating erosion at the source and then, as necessary, trapping sediment
to prevent it from being discharged from or within a project site.



   FINAL STABILIZATION. All land disturbing activities have been completed
and a uniform, perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70% has
been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been
employed. For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes,
FINAL STABILIZATION means that the land is returned to its preconstruction
agricultural use.



   GRADING. The cutting and filling of land surface to a desired slope or
elevation.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to
the municipal separate storm sewer system (“MS4”), except as exempted by
this chapter.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:



      1.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the MS4, and any
connections to the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved
by the town; or



      2.   Any drain or conveyance from a residential, commercial or
industrial land use connected to the MS4 not documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records or previously allowed, permitted or approved by the town.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Surfaces, such as pavement and rooftops that
prevent the infiltration of storm water into the soil.



   INDIVIDUAL LOT. A single parcel of land, whether or not located within
a larger common plan of development or sale.



   INDIVIDUAL LOT OPERATOR. Any individual engaged in construction
activity on an individual lot.



   INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER. A person who has financial control of
construction activities for an individual lot.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (“NPDES”) industrial permits as defined in 327 I.A.C.
15-6 (“Rule 6”).



   LAND DISTURBANCE or LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES. Any man-made change of
the land surface, including removing vegetative cover that exposes the
underlying soil, excavating, filling, transporting and grading. This term
does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor landscaping
projects.



   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A plan, undertaken by a
single project site owner, or a group of project site owners acting in
concert, to offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or
is known, designated, purchased or advertised as a common unit or by a common
name, such land shall be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as part
of a larger common plan. The term also includes phased or other construction
activity by a single entity for its own use.



   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP). The statutory standard that
establishes the level of pollutant reductions that operators of regulated
MS4s must achieve.



   MEASURABLE STORM EVENT. A precipitation event that results in a total
measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half inch
of rainfall.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, rivers, creeks, lakes, conduits of water on
or underneath the ground, human-made channels or storm drains), which are
owned, monitored or operated by the town and that discharge into the waters
of the United States.



   MS4 JURISDICTION. The town boundaries of the town.



   MS4 OPERATOR. The person responsible for development, implementation
and enforcement of the requirements in 327 I.A.C. 15-13 (“Rule 13”) for
the town’s MS4 jurisdiction, or his or her designated representative.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM STORM WATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT). A permit issued by the state’s Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an
individual, a group or on a general area-wide basis.



   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). A written notification indicating intent to
comply with the terms of a specified general permit rule in lieu of applying
for an individual NPDES permit.



   NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT). A written notification indicating that all
land disturbing activities have ceased and that the project closure
requirements of the erosion and sediment control permit have been satisfied.



   OPERATOR. Any individual engaged in construction activity.



   PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of flow during a storm, usually in
reference to a specific design storm event.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner’s agent.



   PERMANENT STABILIZATION. The establishment, at a uniform density of 70%
across the disturbed area, of vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive
material that will ensure the resistance of the soil to erosion, sliding or
other movement.



   PERMIT HOLDER. Any person, partnership, corporation or landowner who
holds, or has been issued an NPDES or erosion and sediment control permit.



   PERMITTED FACILITY. Any facility subject to a NPDES permit.



   PHASING OF CONSTRUCTION. Sequential development of smaller portions of
a large project site.



   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution or thermal
pollution, including, but not limited to, heat, paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute
to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.



   PROJECT SITE. The entire area on which construction activity is to be
performed.



   PROJECT SITE OWNER. The entity required to submit an application for
the erosion and sediment control permit under this chapter and required to
comply with the terms of this chapter, including either a developer or a
person who has financial and operational control of construction activities
and project plans and specifications, including the ability to make
modifications to those plans and specifications.



   RUN-OFF. Waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a
tributary drainage basin that exceed the infiltration capacity of the soils
of that basin, flow over the surface of the ground or are collected in
channels or conduits.



   SEDIMENT. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface.



   SEDIMENTATION. The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated sediment
carried by storm water run-off.



   SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the surface of
the earth that serves as the natural medium for the growth of plants.



   STORM WATER. Any surface or subsurface flow, run-off, and drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A document which
describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



   STORM WATER QUALITY MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of practices,
to control or minimize pollutants associated with storm water run-off.



   STRIP DEVELOPMENT. A single or multi-lot, commercial project site where
the individual lot(s) front on an existing road.



   SUBDIVISION. The same meaning as that found in the town’s Subdivision
Control Ordinance.



   TEMPORARY STABILIZATION.



      1.   The covering of soil to ensure its resistance to erosion,
sliding or other movement.



      2.   The term includes vegetative cover, anchored mulch or
other non-erosive material applied at a uniform density of 70% across the
disturbed area.



   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS LOAD. A measure of the concentration of sediment
and other solid particles suspended in the water column of a stream, lake or
other body of water.



   TOWN. The Town of Chesterton, Indiana, acting by and through the Town
Council of Chesterton, Indiana, or any duly authorized officials and boards
acting in its behalf and designated to enforce and administer this chapter.



   TRACKING. The deposition of soil that is transported from one location
to another by tires, tracks of vehicles or other equipment.



   TRAINED INDIVIDUAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in the
principles of storm water quality, including erosion and sediment control as
may be demonstrated by state registration, professional certification,
experience or completion of course work that enable the individual to make
judgments regarding storm water control or treatment and monitoring.



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water.



   WET WEATHER EVENT. An occurrence of storm water run-off, snow melt
run-off or ice melt run-off as determined at a particular site.



   WET WEATHER VIOLATION. A violation of this chapter that occurs during a
wet weather event or within 24 hours following the culmination of a wet
weather event.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 2006-15, passed 6-30-2006; Ord.
2008-06, passed 4-28-2008)



§ 24-2  MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE.



   A.   The Town Council hereby re-establishes the Storm Water
Management Board for the town as the same has operated in the past pursuant
to I.C. 8-1.5-5 et seq.; and hereby establishes the following pattern of
organization and administrative arrangements under which said town will
exercise its authority and discharge its responsibility for storm water
management.



   B.   The Department of Storm Water Management (“Department”)
shall consist of the following:



      1.   A Storm Water Management Board (“Board”);



      2.   A Storm Water Superintendent (“Superintendent”);



      3.   A Storm Water Commissioner;



      4.   A MS4 Operator;



      5.   A Storm Water Secretary; and



      6.   A Storm Water Attorney.



   C.   There may be, as may be provided for in the Department’s
budget, such other employees as are necessary to operate and maintain the
system.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



ARTICLE II. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT BOARD



§ 24-16. COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS OF MEMBERS; APPOINTMENTS;
FILLING VACANCIES.



   A.   The Board shall consist of three members, who shall be chosen
by the Town Council and shall serve in accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-5-4. No
more than two of the Directors shall be of the same political party. Members
shall serve terms of three years and terms shall be staggered.



   B.   Any vacancy occurring during a term of office of a member of
the Board shall be filled by the appointing authority by a replacement member
who shall be of the same political party and shall serve out the remaining
term of the member whose office has become vacant.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-17  OFFICERS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Board shall, during the month of January of each year, elect a
President and Vice-President, who shall serve in such offices until December
31 of the year in which they were elected. The Board shall establish its own
rules and procedure for the conduct of its meetings.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-18  MEETINGS.



   The Board shall conduct public meetings at least once each month.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-19  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   A.   The Board has general supervisory powers over the MS4, with
responsibility for the detailed supervision of the MS4 to be vested in the
Superintendent, who is responsible to the Board for the business and
technical operation of the MS4. The Board may:



      1.   Fix the number and compensation of employees;



      2.   Adopt rules governing the appointment of employees
including making proper classifications and rules to:



         a.   Determine the eligibility of applicants;



         b.   Determine by competitive examination the relative
fitness of applicants for positions;



         c.   Establish eligible lists arranged according to the
ratings secured;



         d.   Provide for the appointment of those having the
highest ratings; and



         e.   Provide for the promotion of employees.



      3.   Appoint a Superintendent of the MS4. The Board shall make
the appointment on the basis of fitness to manage the MS4, taking into
account executive ability and knowledge;



      4.   Hire attorneys when required for the operation of the MS4;



      5.   Hire professional or expert personnel when required for
the operation of the MS4;



      6.   Submit a budget of its financial needs for the next year
in the detail required by the municipal legislative body;



      7.   After a public hearing, recommend to the legislative body
reasonable and just rates and charges for services to the users of the storm
water utility;



      8.   Appropriate, lease, rent, purchase and hold all real and
personal property of the Department;



      9.   Enter upon lands for the purpose of surveying or
examining the land to determine the location of any structures or systems
within the MS4 jurisdiction;



      10.   Award contracts for:



         a.   The purchase of capital equipment;



         b.   The construction of capital improvements; or



         c.   Other property or purposes that are necessary for
the full and efficient construction, management and operation of the
Department.



      11.   Adopt rules for the safe, economical and efficient
management and protection of the MS4;



      12.   Deposit at least weekly with the Municipal Fiscal
Officer all money collected from the storm water utility to be kept in a
separate fund subject to the order of the Board; and



      13.   Make monthly reports to the fiscal officer of the
receipts and disbursements of money belonging to the Department and an annual
report of the condition of the storm water utility.



   B.   The Board may purchase by contract electricity, water, gas,
power or any other commodity or service for the purpose of furnishing the
commodity or service to the users of the storm water utility.



   C.   If the Board wants to purchase the commodity or service from a
public utility and the parties cannot agree on a rate or charge to be paid
for it, either party may apply to the commission or other appropriate state
or federal regulatory agency to establish a fair and reasonable rate or
charge to be paid for the commodity or service.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-20  SUPERINTENDENT.



   A.   The Superintendent shall:



      1.   Appoint, supervise or dismiss all employees of the
Department;



      2.   Employ unskilled labor when needed, without competitive
examination;



      3.   Investigate all claims against the Department;



      4.   Oversee the operation of the Department and any
construction work, repairs or alterations to the system; and



      5.   Advise the Board in all matters that will bring about an
efficient and economical operation and maintenance of the Department.



   B.   The Superintendent is entitled to the compensation for his or
her services that is determined by salary ordinance of the town.



   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the
Superintendent to other Department personnel.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-21  MS4 OPERATOR.



   The MS4 Operator has responsibility for the technical operation of the
MS4, subject to the supervision of the Superintendent. In addition to such
duties as assigned by the Superintendent, the MS4 Operator shall have those
responsibilities as detailed in 327 I.A.C. 15-13 et seq.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



ARTICLE III. ILLICIT AND ILLEGAL DISCHARGE



§ 24-30  APPLICABILITY.



   This article shall apply to all landowners, permit holders, developers,
other entities in possession or other persons acting with or without the
consent of a landowner which affects any real estate located within the MS4
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-31  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The Department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this chapter within the MS4 jurisdiction. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the town may be delegated in writing by the town to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the town.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-32  DISCHARGE PROHIBITION.



   A.   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the MS4 any materials, including, but not limited
to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute
to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.



   B.   Exempted discharges. The following discharges are exempt from
discharge prohibitions established by this article:



      1.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape or agricultural irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows,
rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains, crawl space
pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of
passenger vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming
pools containing less than one parts per million (PPM) chlorine, firefighting
activities and any other water source not containing pollutants;



      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the town as being
necessary to protect public health and safety;



      3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
verbal notification to the town prior to the time of the test; and



      4.   Non-storm water discharges permitted under a NPDES
permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency; provided that, the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the MS4.



   C.   Prohibition of illicit connections. No person shall construct
use, maintain or permit any illicit connection to the MS4, including any
illicit connection made prior to the adoption of this article, regardless of
whether the connection was permissible under law or practice prevailing at
the time of the connection.



   D.   Violations involving the discharge of hazardous or
non-hazardous materials. In addition to any other remedies provided under
this chapter, violations of subsection A. above may be prosecuted through the
Ordinance Violations Bureau established by § 1-13 of this code of
ordinances. A first offense involving the discharge of non-hazardous
materials shall be punishable by a fine of $100 per occurrence. Second and
subsequent offenses shall be punishable by a fine of $250 per occurrence.
Each day that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate
violation. Violations involving discharge of hazardous materials shall be
punishable by a fine of $250 per occurrence. In addition, the town shall be
entitled to enforce offenses involving the discharge of hazardous materials
through any combination of fines, injunctive relief and the use of the
administrative hearing process set forth in this chapter.



   E.   Violations involving the illicit connection of hazardous
materials. In addition to any other remedies provided under this chapter,
violations of subsection C. above may be prosecuted through the Ordinance
Violations Bureau established by § 1-13 of this code of ordinances. All
illicit connections shall immediately be disconnected. In addition, a first
offense involving the illicit connection of non-hazardous materials shall be
punishable by a fine of $100 per occurrence. Second and subsequent offenses
shall be punishable by a fine of $250. Each day that a violation is found to
exist shall constitute a separate violation. Violations involving connection
of hazardous materials shall be punishable by a fine of $250 per occurrence.
The town shall be entitled to enforce offense involving the illicit
connection of hazardous materials through any combination of fines,
injunctive relief and the use of the administrative hearing process set forth
in this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 2008-06, passed 4-28-2008)



§ 24-33  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   A.   Illicit discharges in emergency situations.



      1.   The town may, without prior notice, suspend discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened illegal discharge or any discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, to the MS4 or any watercourse, whether or not contained
within the MS4.



      2.   If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the town may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or any watercourse, whether or not
contained within the MS4.



   B.   Detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging in
violation of this article may have their access to discharge to the MS4
terminated in order to abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The town will
notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator
may petition the town for reconsideration and a hearing.



   C.   Reinstatement of access. No person whose discharge access has
been suspended or terminated may reinstate MS4 access without the prior
approval of the town.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-34  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   A.   Any person engaged in industrial and/or construction activity
and subject to a NPDES permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.



   B.   Prior to allowing any such person to discharge into the MS4,
the town may require proof of compliance with said permit in a form
acceptable to the town.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-35  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges
associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.



   A.   The town shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this article as necessary to determine
compliance. If a facility has security measures in force, which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, necessary
arrangements shall be made to allow access to representatives of the town.



   B.   Facility operators shall allow the town ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES
permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties
as defined by state and federal law.



   C.   The town shall have the right to set up on any permitted or
non-permitted facility such devices as the town deems necessary to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of a facility’s storm water discharge.



   D.   The town may require the owner or operator of a facility to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the facility at its own expense. All devices used to
measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum in
accordance with manufacturer’s specifications to ensure their accuracy.



   E.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the permit holder at the written or oral request of the town and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or
operator of the facility.



   F.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the town access to a permitted
or non-permitted facility is a violation of this article. The operator of a
facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the town
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any
activity authorized or required by this article.



   G.   On the proper showing that access to a facility is being denied
and that probable cause exists to believe there is a violation of this
article, or the need to inspect and/or sample is necessary to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued here under, the town may
seek the issuance of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   H.   The town may require a SWPPP from commercial facilities which,
in the opinion of the MS4 operator, have the potential to pollute receiving
waters within the MS4 jurisdiction based on past activities at the site or
the nature of the commercial activity.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-36  REQUIREMENT TO USE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS).



   The town will adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity,
operation or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of the MS4. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at his, her or their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the MS4 through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for an illicit discharge may be required to
implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and
non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a SWPPP as necessary for compliance
with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-37  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other requirements of law, any person who
has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into
the MS4 shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies
of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release
of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the MS4 operator in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the MS4 operator within three business days of the
phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for no less than three years from the date of the discharge.



   B.   In addition to any other remedies provided under this chapter,
violations of this section may be prosecuted through the Ordinance Violations
Bureau established by § 1-13 of this code of ordinances. The first offense
of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $100. Second
and subsequent fines shall be punishable by a fine of $250 per occurrence.
Each day that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate
violation.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 2008-06, passed 4-28-2008)



§ 24-38  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   Notice of violation.



      1.   In addition to any other remedies provided under this
chapter, whenever the town finds that a person has violated any provision or
requirement of this article, the town may order compliance by written notice
of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require the violator
to cure or mitigate the violation by requiring the performance of any or all
of the following:



         a.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and
reporting;



         b.   The elimination of illicit connections or illegal
discharges;



         c.   That illegal discharges, practices or operations
shall cease and desist;



         d.   The abatement or remediation of storm water
pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;



         e.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



         f.   The implementation of source control or treatment
BMPs.



      2.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within
the established deadline, the work may be completed by the town with the
expense charged to the violator.



   B.   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of
violation may appeal the determination to the Board. The notice of appeal
must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation.
Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his or her designee
shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of
appeal unless the hearing is extended by agreement. The decision of the Board
shall be in writing and shall be final, subject to the right of appeal to the
Superior Court of the county, filed within 30 days from the date of the
decision of the Board.



   C.   Abatement. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to
the requirements set forth in the notice of violation within 30 days of the
decision of the Board, provided no appeal has been filed with the Superior
Court, then representatives of the town are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 2008-06, passed 4-28-2008)



§ 24-39  COSTS OF ABATEMENT.



   In the event the town abates a violation in accordance with § 24-38C.
of this chapter, the owner of the property will be notified of all costs of
abatement, including administrative costs, within 15 days from the date the
violation is abated. The costs of abatement shall be paid by the owner of the
property. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days, the costs of
abatement shall become a fee and special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment
pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5-29(b).



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-40  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the town may petition
to a court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to abate or remediate the violation. In
addition to all other remedies available, the town may recover reasonable
attorneys’ fees, court costs and all other expenses associated with
enforcing the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



ARTICLE IV. STORM WATER RUN-OFF FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES



§ 24-50  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   Unless expressly provided otherwise, the requirements of this
article shall apply to all construction sites with a land disturbance greater
than or equal to one acre, or a land disturbance of less than one acre;
provided that, it is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that
will disturb more than one acre, initiated after the adoption of this chapter.



   B.   In determining whether a construction site is subject to this
article, the following shall apply.



      1.   Off-site construction activities that provide services
including, but not limited to, road extensions, sewer, water and other
utilities, to a permitted project site, shall be considered a part of the
permitted project site when the activity is under the control of the project
site owner.



      2.   Multi-lot project sites shall be subject to this section,
unless the total combined land disturbance on all individual lots is less
than one acre and the individual lots are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale. The land disturbance shall be calculated by adding the
total area of land disturbance for improvements, such as roads, utilities or
common areas, and the expected total disturbance on each individual lot,
taking into consideration the following.



         a.   For a single-family residential project site where
the lots are one-half acre or more, one-half acre of land disturbance must be
used as the expected lot disturbance.



         b.   For a single-family residential project site where
the lots are less than one-half acre in size, the total lot must be
calculated as being disturbed.



         c.   To calculate land disturbance on all other types of
project sites, including industrial and commercial project sites, the
following apply.



            1.   Where lots are one acre or greater in size, a
minimum of one acre of land disturbance shall be considered as the expected
lot disturbance.



            2.   Where the lots are less than one acre in
size, the total land area shall be considered disturbed.



   C.   For purposes of this article, strip developments are considered
as one project site and shall comply with this article.



   D.   Provided other applicable permits contain provisions requiring
immediate implementation of erosion and sediment control measures, this
article shall not apply to the following:



      1.   Persons involved in agricultural land disturbing
activities or forest harvesting activities;



      2.   Landfills that have been issued a certification of
closure under 329 I.A.C. 10;



      3.   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34;



      4.   Municipal solid waste landfills accepting waste pursuant
to a permit issued by the IDEM under 329 I.A.C. 10 containing equivalent
storm water requirements; or



      5.   Road and regulated drain maintenance.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-51  PROJECT SITE OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.



   Each project site owner, subject to this article, shall:



   A.   Ensure that a construction plan/SWPPP is completed and
submitted in accordance with § 24-56 of this chapter;



   B.   Ensure compliance with this article during the land disturbing
activity and the implementation of the SWPPP;



   C.   Ensure that all construction activity takes place pursuant to a
valid erosion and sediment control permit issued in accordance with this
article;



   D.   Complete and submit a notice of intent (NOI) in accordance with
§ 24-57 of this chapter;



   E.   Complete and submit a notice of termination letter (NOT) in
accordance with § 24-60 of this chapter;



   F.   Ensure that all persons engaging in construction activities on
a permitted project site comply with the applicable requirements of this
article and the approved construction plan/SWPPP; and



   G.   Inform all general contractors, construction management firms,
grading or excavating contractors, utility contractors and the contractors
that have primary oversight on individual building lots of the requirements
of this article, the conditions and standards included in the construction
plan/SWPPP and the schedule for proposed implementation.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-52  INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER OR OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.



   A.   An individual lot operator, whether owning the property or
acting as the agent of the property owner, shall be responsible for erosion
and sediment control requirements associated with the activities on
individual lots.



   B.   For an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be
one acre or more and the lot does not lie within a project site permitted
under this article, the individual lot owner shall:



      1.   Complete and submit a NOI in accordance with this
article; and



      2.   Ensure that a construction plan/SWPPP is completed,
submitted and followed in accordance with this article.



   C.   For an individual lot where the land disturbance lies within a
project site permitted under this article, the individual lot operator is not
required to submit an NOI or a construction plan/SWPPP. The individual lot
operator shall comply with the provisions and requirements of the
construction plan/SWPPP developed by the project site owner and the
requirements under this article. At the time of building permit application,
the individual lot operator shall submit a lot site plan demonstrating
compliance with all required erosion and sediment control measures.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-53  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER QUALITY CONTROL.



   A.   All storm water quality measures and erosion and sediment
controls necessary to comply with this article must be implemented in
accordance with the construction plan/SWPPP.



   B.   A project site owner shall meet the following requirements, at
a minimum:



      1.   Sediment-laden water flowing from the project site shall
be treated by erosion and sediment control measures appropriate to minimize
sedimentation;



      2.   Appropriate measures shall be implemented to minimize or
eliminate wastes or unused building materials, including garbage, debris,
cleaning wastes, wastewater, concrete truck washout and other substances from
being carried from a project site by run-off or wind. Identification of areas
where concrete truck washout is permissible must be clearly posted at
appropriate areas of the site. Wastes and unused building materials shall be
managed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable statutes and
regulations;



      3.   A stable construction site access shall be provided at
all points of construction traffic ingress and egress to the project site;



      4.   Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared of
accumulated sediment that is a result of run-off or tracking. Bulk clearing
of sediment shall not include flushing the area with water. Cleared sediment
shall be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in accordance with
all applicable statutes and regulations;



      5.   Storm water run-off leaving a project site must be
discharged in a manner that is consistent with town code and all applicable
state or federal laws;



      6.   The project site owner shall post a notice near the main
entrance of the project site. For linear project sites, such as a pipeline or
highway, the notice must be placed in a publicly accessible location near the
project field office. The notice must be maintained in a legible condition
and contain the following information:



         a.   A copy of the valid erosion and sediment control
permit and any applicable NPDES permit number;



         b.   The name, company name, telephone number, e-mail
address (if available) and address of the project site owner, or a local
contact person; and



         c.   The location of the construction plan, if the
project site does not have an on-site location to store and keep a copy of
the plan.



      7.   The construction plan/SWPPP shall serve as a guideline
for storm water quality, but should not be interpreted to be the only basis
for implementation of storm water quality measures for a project site. The
project site owner is responsible for implementing, in accordance with this
rule, all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted storm water
run-off;



      8.   The project site owner shall inform all general
contractors, construction management firms, grading or excavating
contractors, utility contractors and the contractors that have primary
oversight on individual building lots of the terms and conditions of this
rule and the conditions and standards of the construction plan/SWPPP and the
schedule for proposed implementation;



      9.   Phasing of construction activities shall be used, where
possible, to minimize disturbance of large areas;



      10.   Appropriate measures shall be planned and installed as
part of an erosion and sediment control system;



      11.   All storm water quality measures must be designed and
installed under the guidance of a trained individual;



      12.   Sediment control measures for sheet flow areas;



      13.   Sediment control measures for concentrated flow areas;



      14.   Sediment control measures for storm sewer inlet
protection;



      15.   Run-off control measures (e.g., diversions, rock check
dams, slope drains and the like);



      16.   Storm water outlet protection specifications;



      17.   Grade stabilization structure locations and
specifications;



      18.   Sediment control associated with dewatering and
directional boring operations;



      19.   Erosion and sediment control provisions for
stream/channel crossings;



      20.   Collected run-off leaving a project site must be either
discharged directly into a well-defined, stable receiving channel or diffused
and released to adjacent property without causing an erosion or pollutant
problem to the adjacent property owner;



      21.   Drainage channels and swales must be designed and
adequately protected so that their final gradients and resultant velocities
will not cause erosion in the receiving channel or at the outlet;



      22.   Natural features, including wetlands and sinkholes,
shall be protected from pollutants associated with storm water run-off;



      23.   Un-vegetated areas that are scheduled or likely to be
left inactive for 15 calendar days or more must be temporarily or permanently
stabilized with measures appropriate for the season to minimize erosion
potential. Alternative measures to site stabilization are acceptable if the
project site owner or his, her or their representative can demonstrate they
have implemented erosion and sediment control measures adequate to prevent
sediment discharge. Vegetated areas with a density of less than 70% shall be
re-stabilized using appropriate methods to minimize the erosion potential;



      24.   During the period of construction activities, all storm
water quality measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article
shall be maintained in working order;



      25.   A self-monitoring program that contains all requirements
in § 24-58 of this chapter;



      26.   Proper storage and handling of materials, such as fuels
or hazardous wastes, and spill prevention and clean-up measures shall be
implemented to minimize the potential for pollutants to contaminate surface
or ground water or degrade soil quality; and



      27.   Achieve final stabilization.



   C.   Individual building lots within a permitted project shall meet
the following requirements:



      1.   Erosion and sediment control requirements associated with
activities on individual lots;



      2.   Installation and maintenance of a stable construction
site access;



      3.   Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter
erosion and sediment control measures prior to land disturbance;



      4.   Sediment discharge and tracking from each lot must be
minimized throughout the land disturbing activities on the lot until
permanent stabilization has been achieved;



      5.   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed
onto roads. Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area
with water. Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner
that is in compliance with all applicable statutes and rules;



      6.   Erosion and sediment control specifications for
individual building lots;



      7.   Adjacent lots disturbed by an individual lot operator
must be repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface
stabilization; and



      8.   Each individual residential lot shall meet the criteria
for final stabilization.



   D.   In addition to any other remedies provided under this chapter,
violations of this section may be prosecuted through the Ordinance Violations
Bureau established by § 1-13 of this code of ordinances.



      1.   Dry weather violations. Dry weather violations of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for a first offense. Second and
subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine of $250 per occurrence.
Each day that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate
violation. Violations that are not remedied after a second or subsequent
violation may result in a stop-work order.



      2.   Wet weather violations. Wet weather violations of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of $250 per occurrence. Each day that a
violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate violation. Second and
subsequent wet weather violations of this section may, in addition to any
fine issued, result in a stop-work order.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 2008-06, passed 4-28-2008)



§ 24-54  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT.



   No construction activity or land disturbing activity shall occur unless
the MS4 operator has issued an erosion and sediment control permit under this
article.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-55  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE.



   Any person who commences any construction activity or land disturbing
activity shall first obtain an erosion and sediment control permit by
submitting the construction plan/SWPPP, along with an application fee of
$250, plus an additional $10 for each lot. The application fee shall cover
the administrative expense of reviewing the application for compliance with
this article. The MS4 operator shall review the construction plan/SWPPP for
compliance with this article. In no event shall any construction or land
disturbing activities occur prior to the expiration of 60 days from the date
the construction plan/SWPPP is received by the MS4 operator.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-56  REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION PLAN/STORM WATER POLLUTION
PREVENTION PLAN.



   A.   The construction plan/SWPPP must be prepared, signed and sealed
by a registered professional engineer, and must be designed to, at the least,
meet the general requirements in § 24-53 of this chapter and must
specifically include the following:



      1.   Cover sheet (24 inches by 36 inches) that includes:



         a.   An index indicating the location, in the
construction plans, of all information required by this subsection A.; and



         b.   A vicinity map depicting the project site location
in relationship to recognizable local landmarks, towns and major roads, such
as a USGS topographic quadrangle map or county or municipal road map.



      2.   General note sheet (24 inches by 36 inches) that includes:



         a.   Description of the nature and purpose of the
project;



         b.   Soil properties, characteristics, limitations and
hazards associated with the project site and the measures that will be
integrated into the project to overcome or minimize adverse soil conditions;



         c.   General construction sequence of how the project
site will be built, including phases of construction;



         d.   Hydrologic Unit Code (14 Digit) available from the
United States Geological Survey (USGS);



         e.   Identification of any other state or federal water
quality permits that are required for construction activities associated with
the owner’s project site; and



         f.   Listing of all General Requirements for Storm Water
Quality Control in § 24-53B. of this chapter.



      3.   Primary plat sheet (24 inches by 36 inches) that includes:



         a.   Project site map showing lot numbers, lot
boundaries and road layout and names; and



         b.   Legal description of the project site, to the
nearest quarter section, township and range, and including the civil township.



      4.   Existing project site layout sheet (24 inches by 36
inches) at a 1:20 (unless otherwise approved by the MS4 operator) that
includes:



         a.   Location of all existing topographic features and
structures on the project site;



         b.   Location and name of all wetlands, lakes and
watercourses on or adjacent to the project site;



         c.   Existing topography at a one-foot contour interval
to indicate drainage patterns;



         d.   One hundred year floodplains, floodway fringes and
floodways, or a notation if none exist;



         e.   Soil map of the predominant soil types, as
determined by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NCRS) Soil Survey, or an equivalent
publication, or as determined by a soil scientist. A soil legend must be
included with the soil map;



         f.   Identification and delineation of vegetative cover,
such as grass, weeds, brush and trees, on the project site; and



         g.   Land use of all adjacent properties.



      5.   Final project site layout sheet (24 inches by 36 inches)
at a 1:20 scale (unless otherwise approved by the MS4 operator) that includes:



         a.   Location of all proposed site improvements,
including roads, utilities, lot delineation and identification, proposed
structures and common areas;



         b.   Proposed final topography at a one-foot contour
interval to indicate drainage patterns;



         c.   One hundred year floodplains, floodway fringes and
floodways, or a notation if none exist;



         d.   Proposed topographic information; and



         e.   Finished garage floor elevations labeled for all
lots.



      6.   Overall grading and drainage plan sheet (24 inches by 36
inches) at a 1:20 scale (unless otherwise approved by the MS4 operator) that
includes:



         a.   Proposed final topography at one-foot contour
interval to indicate drainage patterns;



         b.   The five-year storm frequency peak discharge for
the project site pre-construction and the 100-year storm frequency peak
discharge for the project site post-construction;



         c.   Location, size and dimensions of all storm water
drainage systems, such as culverts, storm sewers and conveyance channels;



         d.   Location, size and dimensions of features, such as
permanent retention or detention facilities, including existing or manmade
wetlands, used for the purpose of storm water management;



         e.   Delineated and labeled drainage sub-basins;



         f.   Drainage arrows and spot elevations to delineate
the surface run-off flow route;



         g.   Finished garage floor elevations for all lots;



         h.   Locations where storm water might be directly
discharged into ground water, such as abandoned wells or sinkholes, or a
notation if none exists;



         i.   Locations of specific points where storm water
discharge will leave the project site; and



         j.   Name of all receiving waters. If the discharge is
to a separate municipal storm sewer, identify the name of the municipal
operator and the ultimate receiving water.



      7.   Stockpile plan sheet (24 inches by 36 inches) that
includes:



         a.   Delineation of all proposed land disturbing
activities, including off-site activities that will provide services to the
project site;



         b.   Location of all soil stockpiles and borrow areas;



         c.   Information regarding any off-site borrow,
stockpile or disposal areas that are associated with a project site and under
the control of the project site owner;



         d.   Proposed topographic information;



         e.   Identification of areas where concrete truck
washout is permissible and required erosion control measures for this
activity; and



         f.   Identification of stable construction site access
for all construction traffic ingress and egress to the project site.



      8.   Erosion control general note sheet (24 inches by 36
inches) that includes:



         a.   Temporary stabilization sequence of implementation;



         b.   Permanent stabilization sequence of implementation;



         c.   Construction sequence describing the relationship
between implementation of storm water quality measures and stages of
construction activities;



         d.   Self-monitoring program including plan and
procedures;



         e.   A description of potential pollutant sources
associated with the construction activities, that may reasonably be expected
to add a significant amount of pollutants to storm water discharges; and



         f.   Material handling and storage associated with
construction activity shall meet the spill prevention and spill response
requirements in 327 I.A.C. 2-6.1.



      9.   Post-construction storm water pollution prevention plan
sheets (24 inches by 36 inches) at a 1:20 scale (unless otherwise approved by
the MS4 operator) that includes:



         a.   A description of potential pollutant sources from
the proposed land use, that may reasonably be expected to add a significant
amount of pollutants to storm water discharges;



         b.   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and
construction details of all post-construction storm water quality measures;



         c.   A description of measures that will be installed to
control pollutants in storm water discharges that will occur after
construction activities have been completed. Such practices include
infiltration of run-off, flow reduction by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions, buffer strip and riparian zone preservation, filter
strip creation, minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness,
maximization of open space and storm water retention and detention ponds;



         d.   A sequence describing when each post-construction
storm water quality measure will be installed;



         e.   Storm water quality measures that will remove or
minimize pollutants from storm water run-off;



         f.   Storm water quality measures that will be
implemented to prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream and riparian
habitat; and



         g.   A narrative description of the maintenance
guidelines for all post-construction storm water quality measures to
facilitate their proper long-term function. This narrative description shall
be made available to future parties who will assume responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of the post-construction storm water quality
measures.



   B.   The MS4 operator may, upon finding reasonable cause, require
modification to the construction plan/SWPPP if it is determined that changes
are necessary due to site conditions or project design changes. Revised
plans, if requested must be submitted to the appropriate entity within 14
calendar days of a request for a modification. In no event shall construction
activity takes place prior to the expiration of 45 days after the date the
revised plans are submitted to the MS4 operator.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-57  NOTICE OF INTENT.



   A.   Information requirements. The following information must be
submitted with a complete NOI letter under this article:



      1.   Name, mailing address and location of the project site
for which the notification is submitted;



      2.   The project site owner’s name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address (if available), ownership status as federal, state,
public, private or other entity;



      3.   Contact person (if different than project site owner),
person’s name, company name, address, e-mail address (if available) and
telephone number;



      4.   A brief description of the construction project,
including a statement of the total acreage of the project site. Total acreage
claimed in the NOI letter shall be consistent with the acreage covered in the
construction plan;



      5.   Estimated dates for initiation and completion of
construction activities. Within 48 hours of the initiation of construction
activity, the project site owner must notify the MS4 operator and the IDEM of
the actual project start date;



      6.   The latitude and longitude of the approximate center of
the project site to the nearest 15 seconds, and the nearest quarter section,
township, range and civil township in which the project site is located;



      7.   Total impervious surface area, in square feet, of the
final project site including structures, roads, parking lots and other
similar improvements;



      8.   The number of acres to be involved in the construction
activities;



      9.   Proof of publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town that notified the public that a construction activity
is to commence, that states, “(Company name, address) is submitting an NOI
letter to notify the town and the IDEM of our intent to comply with the
requirements under 327 I.A.C. 15-5 to discharge storm water from construction
activities for the following project: (name of the construction project,
address of the location of the construction project). Run-off from the
project site will discharge to (stream(s) receiving the discharge(s))”;



      10.   A written certification by the MS4 operator that:



         a.   The storm water quality measures included in the
construction plan/SWPPP comply with the requirements of this article and that
an erosion and sediment control permit has been issued;



         b.   The measures required by this article will be
implemented in accordance with the construction plan/SWPPP;



         c.   If the projected land disturbance is one acre or
more, the town has been sent a copy of the construction plan/SWPPP for review;



         d.   Storm water quality measures beyond those specified
in the construction plan/SWPPP will be implemented during the life of the
permit if necessary to comply with this article; and



         e.   Implementation of storm water quality measures will
be inspected by trained individuals.



      11.   The name of receiving water or, if the discharge is to
the MS4, the name of the MS4 operator and the ultimate receiving water; and



      12.   The NOI letter must be signed by a person meeting the
signatory requirements in 327 I.A.C. 15-4-3(g).



   B.   NOI letters. All NOI letters shall be sent at least 48 hours
prior to the initiation of land disturbing activities at the site to the
following:



      Attention: Rule 5 Storm Water Coordinator



      Indiana Department of Environmental Management



      Office of Water Quality, Urban Wet Weather Section



      100 North Senate Avenue P.O. Box 6015



      Indianapolis, IN 46206-6015



   and to:



      MS4 Operator



      Town of Chesterton



      726 Broadway Chesterton, IN 46304-2229



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-58  SELF-MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   A self-monitoring program that includes the following must be
implemented at all permitted project sites.



      1.   A trained individual shall perform a written evaluation
of the project site a minimum of one time per week and by the end of the next
business day following each measurable storm event.



      2.   The evaluation must address the maintenance of existing
storm water quality measures to ensure they are functioning properly and
identify additional measures necessary to remain in compliance with all
applicable statutes and rules.



      3.   Written evaluation reports must include:



         a.   The name of the individual performing the
evaluation;



         b.   The date of the evaluation;



         c.   Problems identified at the project site; and



         d.   Details of corrective actions recommended and
completed.



      4.   All evaluation reports for the project site must be made
available to the MS4 operator or other designated entity within 48 hours of a
request.



      5.   Evaluation reports must be maintained for a period of two
years from date of NOT.



      6.   All evaluation reports will be scanned and submitted in
electronic format (CD-ROM) to the town no later than 90 days from the date of
NOT.



   B.   The failure to file self-monitoring reports required by this
section may be prosecuted through the Ordinance Violations Bureau established
by § 1-13 of this code of ordinances. Dry weather violations of this section
shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for a first offense. Second and
subsequent dry weather violations shall be punishable by a fine of $250. Each
day that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
We weather violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $250.
Each day that the violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate
violation. Violations that are not remedied after a second or subsequent
violation may result in a stop-work order.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 2008-06, passed 4-28-2008)



§ 24-59  INSPECTION AND VIOLATIONS.



   A.   The town shall make inspections as hereinafter required and
either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the construction plan/SWPPP
as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and filling work
bearing the stamp of approval of the town shall be maintained at the site
during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall
notify the town at least two working days before the following:



      1.   Start of construction;



      2.   Installation of erosion and sediment control measures;



      3.   Completion of site clearing;



      4.   Completion of rough grading;



      5.   Completion of final grading;



      6.   Close of the construction season; and



      7.   Completion of final landscaping.



   B.   The town or its designated agent shall enter the property of
the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the
validity of the reports filed under § 24-58 of this chapter.



   C.   All persons engaging in construction activities on a project
site shall be responsible for complying with the construction plan/SWPPP and
the provisions of this article.



   D.   The MS4 operator shall investigate potential violations of this
article to determine which person may be responsible for the violation. The
MS4 operator shall, if appropriate, consider public records of ownership,
building permits issued by local units of government and other relevant
information, which may include site inspections, construction plans/SWPPPs,
permit applications and other information related to the specific facts and
circumstances of the potential violation.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-60  PROJECT TERMINATION.



   A.   The project site owner shall plan an orderly and timely
termination of land disturbing activities, including the implementation of
storm water quality measures that are to remain on the project site.



   B.   Except as provided in subsection C. below, the project site
owner shall submit a NOT letter to the MS4 operator or other designated
entity certifying that each of the following conditions have been met:



      1.   All land disturbing activities, including construction on
all building lots, have been completed and the entire site has been
stabilized;



      2.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures have
been removed; and



      3.   All post-construction certified BMPs and associated
control devices have been installed and documented with the MS4 jurisdiction.



   C.   The project site owner may submit an NOT letter to obtain early
release from compliance with this article if the following conditions are met:



      1.   The remaining, undeveloped acreage does not exceed three
acres, with contiguous areas not to exceed one acre;



      2.   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all
remaining undeveloped lots, is attached to the NOT letter. The map must be
accompanied by a list of names and addresses of individual lot owners or
individual lot operators of all undeveloped lots;



      3.   All public and common improvements, including
infrastructure, have been completed and permanently stabilized and have been
transferred to the appropriate local entity;



      4.   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat
to the integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties or water quality;
and



      5.   All permanent storm water quality measures have been
implemented and are operational.



   D.   The MS4 operator shall verify the information in the NOT
letter; provided, the information in the NOT letter is verified, the MS4
operator shall issue a written approval of the NOT letter to the project site
owner. Upon receipt of written approval of the NOT letter from the MS4
operator, the erosion and sediment control permit shall no longer be valid
and the project site owner shall no longer be responsible for compliance with
this article, except to the extent that any BMPs constitute infrastructure
for which the project site owner remains responsible pursuant to any
applicable guarantee issued in favor of the town.



   E.   Following receipt of a written approval from the MS4 operator,
the project site owner shall notify in writing all current individual lot
owners and all subsequent individual lot owners of the remaining undeveloped
acreage and acreage with construction activity that they are responsible for
complying with this article. The remaining individual lot owners do not need
to submit an NOT letter. The notice must contain a verified statement that
each of the conditions in subsection B. above has been met. The notice must
also inform the individual lot owners of the requirements to:



      1.   Install and maintain all appropriate erosion and sediment
control measures as part of the approved construction plan/SWPPP; and



      2.   Follow all requirements of § 24-52 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-61  DURATION OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT.



   A.   A permit issued under this article is granted for a period of
five years.



   B.   Once the five-year permit term duration is reached, the permit
issued under this article will be considered expired, and, as necessary for
construction activity continuation, a new permit application would need to be
submitted in accordance with subsection C. below.



   C.   To obtain a renewal permit, the information required under §
24-56A. of this chapter must be submitted to the MS4 operator 90 calendar
days prior to the expiration of the permit. Coverage under a renewal permit
will begin on the date of expiration from the previous five-year permit term.
The construction plan/SWPPP shall be updated and submitted according to this
article, unless the MS4 operator certifies that an updated construction
plan/SWPPP is not required.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-62  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any
person holding or acting pursuant to an erosion and sediment control permit
pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit or performs
construction activity that fails to implement measures in the construction
plan/SWPPP to reduce and eliminate erosion, the MS4 operator may issue an
immediate stop-work order.



   B.   Failure to maintain storm water quality measures. If remaining
storm water quality measures are not properly maintained by the owner or
occupier of the property, the town may pursue enforcement against that person
for correction of deficiencies under 327 I.A.C. 15-1-4.



   C.   Inspection of records. Construction plans/SWPPPs,
self-inspection logs and other supporting documentation associated with the
project site must be made available to the MS4 operator within 48 hours of
any such request.



   D.   Violation and penalties.



      1.   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or
maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any terms of this article. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to § 1-9 of
this code of ordinances, with each day during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted,
constituting a separate offense.



      2.   In addition to any other penalty authorized by this
section, any person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of
the provisions of this article shall be required to bear the expense of such
restoration.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



ARTICLE V. POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



§ 24-101  APPLICABILITY.



   A.   The requirements of this article shall apply to the owners of
all parcels of real estate subject to and constructed in accordance with Art.
IV of this chapter.



   B.   In determining whether a parcel of real estate is subject to or
exempted from the requirements of this article, the applicability
requirements of § 24-50A. to D. of this chapter shall govern.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 6-30-2006)



§ 24-102  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   A.   The owner of any parcel of real estate subject to the
requirements of this article shall comply with all storm water quality
measures and practices required by § 24-56A.9. of this chapter and
identified in the construction plan/SWPPP.



   B.   The owner of any parcel of real estate subject to the
requirements of this article shall install and maintain at the owner’s cost
east post-construction storm water quality measure approved as part of the
construction plan/SWPPP or approved and implemented according to § 24-103 of
this chapter.



   C.   The owner of any parcel of real estate subject to the
requirements of this article shall permit monitoring and inspection of all
storm water quality measures and practices approve as part of the
construction plan/SWPPP or approved and implemented according to § 24-103 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 6-30-2006)



§ 24-103  PERFORMANCE CRITERIA.



   All persons subject to this article shall employ storm water quality
measures approved as part of the construction plan/SWPPP, provided that such
storm water quality measures are achieving elimination of 80% or more of the
average annual post-development total suspended solids load. In the event
that the storm water quality measures approved as part of the construction
plan/SWPPP are not meeting this criteria, the owner shall be responsible for
implementing, at the owner’s expense, a recognized storm water quality
measure in order to achieve this performance criteria.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 6-30-2006)



§ 24-104  MONITORING AND INSPECTION.



   A.   In general. The town may monitor and inspect any approved storm
water quality measure approved by the town as part of a construction
plan/SWPPP and maintained according to this article or implemented pursuant
to § 24-103 of this chapter in order to determine compliance with the
performance criteria established by § 24-103 of this chapter. In addition,
the town may enter onto any parcel pursuant to § 24-35 of this chapter for
the purpose of monitoring or inspecting any storm water quality measure
employed within the MS4 jurisdiction in order to determine compliance with
this article.



   B.   Access to records. All persons subject to this article shall
make available for inspection by the town all records of the installation and
maintenance of any storm water quality measure employed within the MS4
jurisdiction. Records related to the installation and maintenance of any such
storm water quality measure shall be retained for a minimum of five years
after the date of the installation and/or maintenance and shall be made
available to the town during any monitoring and/or inspections by the town.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 6-30-2006)



§ 24-105  ENFORCEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   The town shall have all the remedies of enforcement found in §§ 24-38
to 24-40 of this chapter to enforce compliance with this article, including
the remedy of abatement.



(Ord. 2006-15, passed 6-30-2006)



ARTICLE VI. RATES AND CHARGES



§ 24-200  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). A unit value which is equal to the
average amount of impervious surface area for a single family home within the
MS4 jurisdiction of the town. One ERU has been determined to equal 3,585
square feet of impervious surface area.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA. The amount, measured in square footage, of the
surfaces on a parcel of land, such as pavement and rooftops, that prevent the
infiltration of storm water into the soil.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL USER. Any user of a parcel of land or building located
within the MS4 jurisdiction of the town, which is not a residential user.



   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any user of a parcel of land or building located
within the MS4 jurisdiction of the town, which is use primarily as a
residence and contains two or less single-family dwelling units.



   USER. The owner of a parcel of land or building located within the MS4
jurisdiction of the town.



(Ord. 2006-22, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 24-201  CHARGES LEVIED.



   There shall be a storm water utility user fee assessed on each and
every lot and parcel of real property within the MS4 jurisdiction of the town
in order that the storm water utility shall recover revenue, which is
proportional to the cost of the operation and maintenance of the storm water
system.



(Ord. 2006-22, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 24-202  CLASSES OF USERS.



   The classes of users of the storm water system shall be as follows:



   A.   Residential; and



   B.   Non-residential.



(Ord. 2006-22, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 24-203  DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.



   A.   The town shall collect rates and charges from users of the
storm water system, which rates and charges shall be payable as hereinafter
provided and shall be in an amount, per calendar month, determined as follows:



 

User Class
 
Base Rate
 
Variable Rate
 
Total


Non-residential
 
$4.65
 
$2.18 per ERU
 


Residential
 
$4.65
 
$2.18
 
$6.83



 



   B.   Non-residential users with less than 3,585 square feet of
impervious surface area will be billed at a rate of one ERU. For
non-residential users, calculations of the ERU will be rounded to the nearest
whole number.



(Ord. 2006-22, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 2016-17, passed 7-25-2016)



§ 24-204  BILLING.



   The rates and charges established by this article shall be prepared,
billed and collected by the town in a manner provided by law and ordinance.
The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed bi-monthly,
along with the billing provided for the purpose of collecting the rates and
charges for sewage service and shall be due on the payment date set out on
said bills. The rates and charges shall be billed to the user. All charges
not paid within 20 days from and after the billing date are declared
delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the rates and charges shall
attach thereto; provided that, no penalties shall attach where, immediately
preceding the delinquent bill, an owner has made 12 consecutive bi-monthly
payments on time. In the event of an action brought by the town in its name
to collect delinquent rates, in addition to any delinquent rates, charges and
penalty, the town may recover the costs of litigation and its reasonable
attorney’s fees. Additionally, payments and/or penalties that have been due
and unpaid for at least 90 days may be filed as a lien against the real
property.



(Ord. 2006-22, passed 10-9-2006)



ARTICLE VII. VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 24-300  GENERAL ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of
the town to pursue a violation of this chapter as specifically provided in
§§ 24-33, 24-38, 24-39, 24-40 and 24-62 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-301  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND FINES.



   A.   When the MS4 operator has cause to believe that a user has
violated any provision of this chapter, the MS4 operator may initiate an
administrative hearing before the Board, as provided in I.C. 36-1-6-9. The
MS4 operator shall provide notice of the hearing to the user no later than
ten days prior to the hearing and shall include in the notice:



      1.   Specific details of the alleged violation;



      2.   The date and time of the hearing and a statement that the
user has the right to cross-examine witnesses and evidence and the right to
present evidence regarding the alleged violation; and



      3.   A statement that the Board may consider the evidence and,
upon a showing of a violation by the preponderance of the evidence, impose an
administrative fine of up to $2,500 for a first violation of this article,
and up to $7,500 for a second or subsequent violation of this article, or
order other appropriate relief.



   B.   The Board shall issue a determination whether the charged
violation has been proved by a preponderance of the evidence and the amount
of the fine, if any, in writing no later than 30 days after the date of the
hearing and a copy of the determination shall be provided to the user. The
Board’s determination shall be final unless a user files an appeal with the
county’s Superior Court no later than 30 days after the date of the
determination.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



§ 24-302  CIVIL ACTIONS.



   In lieu of an administrative hearing set forth in § 24-301 of this
chapter, the town may initiate an action in a court of competent jurisdiction
to enforce any provision of this chapter. The town may petition for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction in addition to any civil
penalties that may be available. In addition to any injunctive relief and
civil penalties that may be ordered by the court, the town shall be entitled
to recover all attorneys fees, costs and litigation expenses, including the
costs of any monitoring or testing conducted by the town prior to or during
litigation, as well as expert witness fees.



(Ord. 2006-04, passed 2-13-2006)



CHAPTER 25:  UTILITIES



Section



Article I. In General



   25-1   Management structure



Article II. Utility Service Board



   25-16   Composition; qualifications, terms of members; appointments;
filling vacancies



   25-17   Compensation



   25-18   Officers; rules of procedure



   25-19   Meetings



   25-20   Powers and duties



   25-21   Superintendent of the Utility



Article III. Sewers and Sewage Disposal



Division 1. Generally



   25-30   General provisions



   25-31   Definitions



   25-32   Prohibited discharge



   25-33   Private treatment or disposal of wastewater



   25-34   Sewer connection permits



   25-35   Specific discharge limitations



   25-36   Pretreatment



   25-37   State/federal requirements



   25-38   Pumping station specifications



   25-39   Dilution



   25-40   Accidental discharges



   25-41   Right of access



   25-42   Enforcement



   25-43   Abatement



   25-44   Severability



   25-45   Confidential information



   25-46   Wastewater discharge permit application



Division 1-A. Special Utility Area



   25-47   Establishment of special utility area



   25-48   Compliance with Sewer Use Ordinance



   25-49   Installation and maintenance of equipment



   25-50   Rates and liens



Division 2. Rates and Charges



   25-81   Definitions



   25-82   Charges levied; classes of users



   25-83   Determination of charges



   25-84   Determination of water use



   25-85   Adjustment of charges for stronger than normal discharges



   25-86   Billing



   25-87   Cost studies



   25-88   Sewer connection fees



   25-89   Regulating authority



   25-90   Harmful deposits



   25-91   Appeal to Utility Service Board



   25-92   Special rate contracts authorized



   25-93   Effective date



   25-94   Disconnection/recheck fees



   25-95   General utilities service deposit



   25-96   Fund



   25-97   Refunds



   25-98   Forfeitures and collections



   25-99   Application of deposit to judgment



   25-100   Unclaimed deposits



Article IV. Water



Division 1. Meters, Cross-Connections and the Like



   25-151   Meters; piping prerequisite to installation



   25-152   Depth of service pipes



   25-153   Utility not responsible for damage due to defects in
customers’ pipes and fixtures



   25-154   Cross-connections; defined



   25-155   Same; prohibited



   25-156   Same; inspection



   25-157   Toxic substance requiring back-flow preventer



   25-158   Installation of wells for potable supply prohibited for
premises within 100 feet of town sanitary sewer or public water mains



   25-159   Installation of wells for non-potable supply lawful within
100 feet of public water or sanitary sewer mains



   25-160   Connection to public water utility piping prohibited



   25-161   Water supplied by wells discharged to town sewage system to
be metered



ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL



§ 25-1  MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE.



   A.   The Town Council hereby re-establishes the Utility Service
Board for the town as the same has operated in the past pursuant to I.C.
8-1.5-3 et seq.; and hereby establishes the following pattern of organization
and administrative arrangements under which said town will exercise its
authority and discharge its responsibility for utility service. For the
management and administration of the town’s publicly owned treatment work
(POTW), there shall be:



      1.   A Utility Service Board (Board);



      2.   A Superintendent or Manager;



      3.   A Utility Secretary; and



      4.   A Utility Attorney.



   B.   There may be, as may be provided for in the sewage treatment
utility budget, such other employees as are necessary to operate and maintain
the POTW.



ARTICLE II. UTILITY SERVICE BOARD



§ 25-16  COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS, TERMS OF MEMBERS; APPOINTMENTS;
FILLING VACANCIES.



   A.   The Board shall consist of five members, who shall be
freeholders and residents of the town, three of which members shall be
appointed by the Town Council President and two shall be appointed by the
Town Council pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-3. The appointments by the Town Council
President shall be one member for a term of one year, one member for a term
of two years and one member for a term of three years; after the initial
appointment, all subsequent terms shall be for three years. The terms of the
members appointed by the Town Council shall be an initial appointment for one
member for a term of one year, and one member for a term of two years; all
subsequent terms shall be for two years pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-3. Not more
than two-thirds of the members may be of the same political party.



   B.   Any vacancy occurring during a term of office of a member of
the Board shall be filled by the appointing authority by a replacement member
who shall serve out the term of the member whose office has become vacant.



§ 25-17  COMPENSATION.



   Each member of the Board shall be compensated for his or her services
as a member of such Board at a sum to be determined and fixed by the Town
Council.



§ 25-18  OFFICERS; RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Board shall, during the month of January of each year, elect a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary who shall serve in such offices
until December 31 of the year in which they were elected. The Board shall
establish its own rules and procedure for the conduct of its meetings.



§ 25-19  MEETINGS.



   The Board shall conduct public meetings at least once each month.



§ 25-20  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   A.   The Board has general supervisory powers over the POTW with
responsibility for the detailed supervision of the POTW to be vested in its
Superintendent or Manager who is responsible to the Board for the business
and technical operation of the POTW. The Board may:



      1.   Fix the number and compensation of employees;



      2.   Adopt rules governing the appointment of employees
including making proper classifications and rules to:



         a.   Determine the eligibility of applicants;



         b.   Determine by competitive examination the relative
fitness of applicants for positions;



         c.   Establish eligible lists arranged according to the
ratings secured;



         d.   Provide for the appointment of those having the
highest ratings; and



         e.   Provide for the promotion of employees.



      3.   Subject to I.C. 36-4-9-2, appoint a Superintendent or
Manager of the utility under its control who is responsible to the Board for
the business and technical operation of the POTW. The Board shall make the
appointment on the basis of fitness to manage the POTW, taking into account
his or her executive ability and his or her knowledge of the utility industry;



      4.   Subject to I.C. 36-4-9-12, hire attorneys when required
for the operation of the POTW;



      5.   Hire professional or expert personnel when required for
the operation of the POTW;



      6.   Submit a budget of its financial needs for the next year
in the detail required by the municipal legislative body;



      7.   Recommend to the legislative body reasonable and just
rates and charges for services to the patrons of the POTW;



      8.   Appropriate, lease, rent, purchase and hold all real and
personal property of the utility;



      9.   Enter upon lands for the purpose of surveying or
examining the land to determine the location of any plant or appurtenances;



      10.   Award contracts for:



         a.   The purchase of capital equipment;



         b.   The construction of capital improvements; or



         c.   Other property or purposes that are necessary for
the full and efficient construction, management and operation of the POTW.



      11.   Adopt rules for the safe, economical and efficient
management and protection of the POTW;



      12.   Deposit at least weekly with the municipal fiscal
officer all money collected from the utility to be kept in a separate fund
subject to the order of the Board; and



      13.   Make monthly reports to the fiscal officer of the
receipts and disbursements of money belonging to the utility and an annual
report of the condition of the utility.



   B.   The Board may purchase by contract electricity, water, gas,
power or any other commodity or service for the purpose of furnishing the
commodity or service to the patrons of the municipally-owned POTW or to the
municipality itself.



   C.   If the Board wants to purchase the commodity or service from a
public utility and the parties cannot agree on a rate or charge to be paid
for it, either party may apply to the commission or other appropriate state
or federal regulatory agency to establish a fair and reasonable rate or
charge to be paid for the commodity or service.



   D.   The Board may discontinue water service by a waterworks to a
water consumer or any property, upon failure by the water consumer or the
property owner to pay charges legally due for sewer or sewage disposal plant
service. However, the water service may not be discontinued for non-payment
of sewer or sewage disposal plant service charges until the charges have been
due and unpaid for at least 30 days.



   E.   Before water service is discontinued under subsection D. above,
the Board must give written notice to the water consumer or property owner of
its intention to discontinue water service if the unpaid sewer or sewage
disposal plant service charges are not paid before a date specified in the
notice. The notice must be mailed not less than ten days before water service
is to be discontinued and addressed to the water consumer or the property
owner at his or her last known address.



§ 25-21  SUPERINTENDENT OF THE UTILITY.



   A.   The Superintendent of the utility shall:



      1.   Appoint, supervise or dismiss all employees of the POTW;



      2.   Employ unskilled labor when needed, without competitive
examination;



      3.   Investigate all claims against the utility;



      4.   Oversee the operation of the POTW and any construction
work, repairs or alterations to the system; and



      5.   Advise the Board in all matters that will bring about an
efficient and economical operation and maintenance of the POTW.



   B.   The Superintendent is entitled to the compensation for his or
her services that is determined by the Board, subject to final approval of
the Town Council.



   C.   The Superintendent shall give bond in a sum of not less than
double to estimated amount of money that may be in his or her hands at any
time. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his or her
duties and the payment to the proper person of all money in his or her hands.
The bond is subject to the approval of the executive of the municipality.



   D.   The Superintendent may be removed by the Board for cause at any
time after notice and a hearing.



   E.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the
Superintendent to other POTW personnel.



ARTICLE III. SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL



DIVISION 1. GENERALLY



§ 25-30  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   A.   Purpose and policy.



      1.   This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of
the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and enables it to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part
403). The objectives of these regulations are:



         a.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
POTW that will interfere with its operation;



         b.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;



         c.   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected
by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;



         d.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial
wastewater and sludge from the POTW;



         e.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution
of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and



         f.   To enable the POTW to comply with its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use
and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the
POTW is subject.



      2.   This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. The
ordinance provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   B.   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
article, shall have the designated meanings.



      BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.



      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



      COD. Chemical oxygen demand.



      EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington DC.



      FOG. Fats, oils and grease.



      gpd. Gallons per day.



      I.A.C. Indiana Administrative Code.



      I.C. Indiana Code.



      I/I. Inflow and infiltration.



      IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



      MGD. Million gallons per day.



      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.



      NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.



      RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



      SIC. Standard industrial classification.



      SIU. Significant industrial/commercial user.



      TSS. Total suspended solids.



§ 25-31  DEFINITIONS.



   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      AMMONIA (NH3N). The same as Ammonia Nitrogen, measured as
Nitrogen. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods, as defined in this section.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Regional Administrator of the EPA, Region
5, Chicago, IL.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF SIU.



         a.   A principal executive officer (i.e., president,
secretary, treasurer, vice-president) if the user is a corporation;



         b.   A general partner or proprietor if the user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or



         c.   A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g., mg/l). The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.



      BOARD. The Utility Service Board of Chesterton, Indiana, or any
duly authorized officials or Boards acting on its behalf.



      BUILDING (OR HOUSE) DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system that receives the discharge from waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to a point
approximately five feet outside the foundation wall of the building.



         a.   SANITARY. A building drain that conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.



         b.   STORM. A building drain that conveys storm water or
other clean water drainage, but not sanitary or industrial sewage.



      BUILDING (OR HOUSE) LATERAL SEWER. An extension, privately owned,
from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.



         a.   SANITARY. A building sewer that conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.



         b.   STORM. A building sewer that conveys storm water or
other clear water drainage, but not sanitary or industrial sewage.



      CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which apply
to a specific category of industrial users and that appear in 40 C.F.R. Ch.
I, Subch. N, parts 405 through 471.



      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.



      DISCHARGE. To emit a substance into the sanitary sewer.



      DISCHARGER or CONTRIBUTOR. Any person discharging into the public
sewer system.



      DOMESTIC DISCHARGER. Any discharger of sanitary sewage.



      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management
Division Director, or other duly authorized officials of said agency.



      ESCHEHCIA COLIFORM (E. COLI). A member of the coliform bacteria
common to the intestinal tract of humans, animals and birds, whose presence
in sanitary sewage is an indicator of fecal contamination. E. COLI is the
recommended indicator for fresh waters.



      EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which standards will be applicable to
such source if promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.



      FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG). Fats, oils and grease of animal or
vegetable origin.



      GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or
dispensing of food and from handling, storage or safe of produce.



      GENERAL INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user that does not meet the SIU
criteria, but has been determined by the Superintendent to possibly have an
impact on the POTW.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a discharge without
regard to the flow in the discharge and over a period of time not to exceed
15 minutes.



      INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. The individual designated by
the Superintendent who shall be responsible for the day to day implementation
and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment program.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an industrial,
manufacturing, commercial or business process, or from the development,
recovery or processing of any natural resource carried on by a person and
shall further mean any waste from an industrial sewer.



      INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not
limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
(INFILTRATION does not include and is distinguished from inflow.)



      INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.



      INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof
leader, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling
water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers,
cross- connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins,
storm waters, surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage. (INFLOW does
not include, and is distinguishable from infiltration.)



      INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the town
and/or POTW through its Town Council and/or Board to inspect and approve the
installation of building sewers and their connection to the public sewer
system.



      INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, does one of the following:



         a.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge use or
disposal methods;



         b.   Causes a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation; and



         c.   Prevents the use of the POTW’s sewage sludge or
its sludge disposal method selected in compliance with the following
statutory provisions, regulations or permits issued thereunder or more
stringent state or local regulations:



            1.   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1345);



            2.   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42
U.S.C. § 6901), including:



               a.   Title II, more commonly referred to as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and



               b.   The rules contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. §
6941).



            3.   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401); and



            4.   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C.
§ 2601).



      MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR. A contributor that:



         a.   Has a flow equal to or greater than 25,000 gallons
per 24-hour period;



         b.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts
as defined in § 307 of the Federal Act;



         c.   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow earned by
the town sewage collection system receiving the waste;



         d.   Has in its wastes toxic pollutants, as defined
pursuant to § 307 of the Act, of state regulations; or



         e.   Is found by the Board, IDEM or the EPA to have
significant impact, either singly or in connection with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the
system’s effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.



      NEW SOURCE.



         a.   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with the section; provided
that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         b.   Any construction on a site at which an existing
source is located which results in a modification rather than a new source if
the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of subsections a.2. or a.3. above, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         c.   Construction of a new source as defined under this
paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as a part of a
continuous on-site construction program any placement, assembly or
installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing building, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this subsection c.2.



      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.



      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



      NPDES PERMIT. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States
pursuant to § 402 of Pub. Law No. 95-217.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction
with the discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the town’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



      pH. The measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.



      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individuals, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, partnership,
copartnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency, the state, the United States of
America, or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.



      PHOSPHORUS or P. The chemical element phosphorus, total. The
laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods, as defined in this section.



      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).



      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(d); and shall include all applicable rule and regulations
contained in the Code of Federal Regulations as published in the Federal
Register, under § 307 of Pub. Law No. 95-217, under regulation 40 C.F.R.
part 403 pursuant to the act, and amendments.



      PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer that is not owned by public authority.



      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. The
absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as these
prohibitions appear in §§ 25-32 and/or 25-35 of this chapter.



      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.



      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the POTW
and will consist of the following increments.



         a.   COLLECTOR SEWER shall mean a sewer whose primary
purpose is to collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges.



         b.   INTERCEPTOR SEWER shall mean a sewer whose primary
purpose is to transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment
facility.



         c.   PUMPING STATION shall mean a station positioned in
the public sewer system at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). The “treatment works,”
as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the
town for the public purpose of treating effluent for users within the
corporate boundaries of the town, as said boundaries may change from time to
time, and for other outside contract customers, as may be determined by the
Board in its sole discretion. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances that
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.



      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries sanitary and industrial
wastes, and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally
admitted.



      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as campers,
trailers and septic tanks.



      SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water-carried human
excrement and gray-water wastes from residences (i.e., household showers,
dishwashing operations and the like), commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions (including polluted cooling water). The three most common
types of SEWAGE are as follows.



         a.   SANITARY SEWAGE shall mean the combination of
liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary
pumping facilities.



         b.   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE shall mean a combination of
liquid and water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial
establishment, and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that
establishment (this shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and
polluted cooling water).



         c.   COMBINED SEWAGE shall mean wastes including
sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow
carried to the wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.



      SEWAGE WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes to collect,
transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent and accumulated residual solids.



      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL USER (SIU).



         a.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or



         b.   A user that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);



            2.   Contributes a process wastestream that makes
up to 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of
the POTW;



            3.   Is designated as such by the Superintendent
on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement;
or



            4.   Is subject to a determination by the
Superintendent that the user has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement.



      SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE. Violations of wastewater discharge
limits, compliance schedules, reporting requirements, as follows:



         a.   Violations of wastewater discharge limits,
including:



            1.   Chronic violations: 66% or more of the
measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in
a six-month period;



            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC): 33% or more
of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average
limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period. There are two groups of
TRCs:



               a.   Group 1 for conventional pollutants
such as BOD, COD, TSS, fats, oil and grease (FOG): TRC - 1.4 (40%); and



               b.   Group 2 for all other pollutants: TRC -
1.2 (20%).



            3.   Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit
(average or daily maximum) that the Superintendent believes has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference (i.e., slug loads) or
pass through; or endangered the health of the treatment plant personnel or
the public; or



            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and
resulted in the POTW’s exercise of this emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge.



         b.   Violation of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date;



         c.   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedules, self-monitoring data or categorical standards (baseline monitoring
reports, 90-day compliance reports and periodic reports) within 30 days from
due date;



         d.   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or



         e.   Any other violation or group of violations that the
Superintendent considers to be significant.



      SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards or
limitations in §§ 25-32 and/or 25-35 of this chapter.



      STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest approved edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and
the Water Environment Federation or the latest Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater edition cited by the NPDES permit.



      STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, ground water or
unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial
wastes are not intentionally admitted.



      STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



      SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the Board to supervise
the operation of the POTW, and charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering. Their concentration shall be expressed
in milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in Standards Methods.



      TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.



      TOWN. The Town of Chesterton, Indiana, or any duly authorized
officials acting on its behalf, including the Town Council, Utility Service
Board and Superintendent.



      TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants, which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological
manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to the Clean Water
Act (Pub. Law No. 94-217).



      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



      USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. Any source that discharges, causes or
permits the discharge of wastewater into the sewage works.



      UTILITY. The Utility Service Board of the Town of Chesterton,
Indiana.



      VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids
transformed to gases or vapors when treated according to the procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.



      WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the
POTW that is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.



      WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water either continuously or intermittently.



   B.   Any terms not defined herein, but defined in § 25-81 of this
chapter, shall have the same meaning herein.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 25-32  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.



   A.   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through
or interference. The following general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW.



      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any human
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



      2.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
any sanitary sewer, either directly or indirectly, storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water,
unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial water.



      3.   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, non-contact cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted
industrial process water may be admitted to storm sewers, which have adequate
capacity for their accommodation. Waters from industrial sources must be
permitted by state and/or local authorities. No person shall use such sewers,
however, without the specific permission of the Board and Storm Water
Management Board.



      4.   Unpolluted water from air conditioners or condensing
systems shall be discharged to a storm sewer, where it is available, or to a
combined sewer approved by the Board. Where a storm sewer is not available,
discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the Board and by the
regulating agencies of the state. Where a storm sewer, combined sewer or
drainage ditch is not available, such unpolluted water may be discharged to a
sanitary sewer pending written approval by the Board.



      5.   No new connection to sanitary sewers shall be made unless
there is a capacity available to all downstream sewers, pumping stations,
force mains and sewage treatment plant, including capacity for pollutant
loading.



      6.   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
jurisdiction of the Board, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of
this article and the NPDES permit.



      7.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
any natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
article and the NPDES permit.



      8.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



      9.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
now located a public sanitary or combined sewer toilet facilities therein,
and shall connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date
of the official notice to do so; provided that, said public sewer is within
200 feet of the property line, unless otherwise excused by the Board upon
recommendation by the Superintendent.



   B.   Specific prohibitions. Under no circumstances shall any user
introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any of the following
pollutants, substances or wastewater:



      1.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21, any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      2.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0,
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW;



      3.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts that will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, rocks, gravel, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper, dishes, cups,
milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;



      4.   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference or pass through with the POTW;



      5.   Any wastewater, liquid or vapor having a temperature
greater than 150°F (65°C), or that inhibits biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference or which causes the temperature at
the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);



      6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin, that will cause interference or pass through and/or in
amounts exceeding 100 mg/l;



      7.   Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;



      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent in accordance with § 25-36O. of this
chapter;



      9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater that, whether singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      10.   Waste water that imparts color, which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions that consequently impart color to the treatment
plant’s effluent, thereby violating the town’s NPDES permit;



      11.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      12.   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      13.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;



      14.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      15.   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances
that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      16.   Wastewater causing two successive readings of more than
5% or one single reading of more than 10% of the lower explosive limit of an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW or at any
point in the POTW; and



      17.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the treatment plant.



   C.   Processing and storing. Pollutants, substances or wastewater
prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner
that they could be discharged to the POTW.



§ 25-33  PRIVATE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL OF WASTEWATER.



   A.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available
under the provisions of § 25-32A.9. of this chapter, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage system complying with the provisions
of this article.



   B.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first notify the Board through the
Superintendent.



   C.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state’s Board
of Health and applicable county regulations.



   D.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in subsection C.
above, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



   E.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
town.



   F.   All new storm sewer connections to existing combined sewers
shall be made separate and apart from the sanitary sewer connection in order
to facilitate future disconnection. In the event a separate storm sewer
subsequently becomes available in such instances where a separate storm sewer
subsequently becomes available, the Board may require an owner to cause the
storm sewer connection to be disconnected from the combined sewer and
reconnected to a separate sewer within 90 days after notice is provided by
the Board to the owner of the availability of a separate storm sewer.



   G.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the
state’s Board of Health or the county’s Health Officer.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 11-24-2014)



§ 25-34  SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS.



   A.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit as provided in this section.



   B.   There shall be two classes of building permits: one for
residential service; and another for commercial and industrial service. In
either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent or designee. A sewer permit
and inspection fee of $25 for each unit located in a residential building and
$50 for each unit located in a single commercial or industrial building shall
be paid to the utility at the time the application is filed. The sewer permit
and inspection fee required herein shall apply not only to new construction,
but also for repair or replacement of any sewer referred to in Art. III of
Ch. 25 of this code of ordinances.



   C.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation,
connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   D.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



   E.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent to meet all requirements of this article.



   F.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointly testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code and all other applicable rules
and regulations of the town, including applicable town standards, the size
and slope of all building sewers shall be subject to the approval of the
Superintendent or his or her designated representative, but in no event shall
be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less
than one-eighth inch per foot.



   G.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by means
approved by the Superintendent and discharged to the building sewer.



   H.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement
drains, sump pumps, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other
sources of surface runoff ground water to a building sewer or building drain
that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   I.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code and all
other applicable rules and regulations of the town, including applicable town
standards. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the Superintendent before installation.



   J.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
utility billing office when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent. Particular care shall be taken to prevent
soil, rocks or gravel from entering the sanitary sewer system.



   K.   All excavations for building sewer installation must be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
town.



   L.   Sewage service shall not be provided to any customer outside
the corporate limits of the town unless under special contract, subject to
approval by the Board after consideration of all factors addressed by this
article.



   M.   The construction of new combined sewers or the extension of
existing combined sewers is prohibited.



(Ord. 2014-17, passed 11-24-2014; Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 25-35  SPECIFIC DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.



   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      1.   a.   Any wastewater containing any cations, anions,
compounds or substances exceeding the concentrations listed below as measured
at the point of discharge into the POTW or at the sampling manhole(s)
approved by the Superintendent. Industrial processes shall have a sampling
manhole directly after the pretreatment process, before other waste streams
enter the sewer. Concentration based effluent limits may be changed to a mass
based limit if the total mass discharged per day is deemed by the
Superintendent to be low enough to not have a negative impact on the POTW,
the wastewater treatment plant or biosolids. Bio-accumulative chemicals will
be monitored in the sludge produced by the wastewater treatment plant.



         b.   The following pollutant limits are established to
protect pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following at any time:



 

List of Limitations


Constituent
 
Limit (mg/l)




Arsenic
 
0.3


Cadmium
 
0.1


Chromium
 
3.0


Copper
 
1.0


Cyanide
 
0.2


Lead
 
0.5


Mercury
 
0.001


Molybdenum
 
0.5


Nickel
 
1.0


Selenium
 
0.10


Silver
 
0.5


Zinc
 
0.5


Total toxic organics
 
1.0




 



 

List of Limitations Resulting in Surcharges*


Constituent
 
Limit (mg/l)


Ammonia-Nitrogen
 
30.0


BOD
 
200.0


Phosphorus
 
10.0


Suspended Solids
 
200.0


NOTES TO TABLE:

* Subject to excess surcharge rates as expressed in § 25-85 of this chapter.



 



            1.   These are general limits and are not specific
to SIC classification. These limits may be lowered based on mass and current
environmental laws and conditions.



            2.   The above limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise.



            3.   The town reserves the right to establish more
stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.



      2.   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants, which exceed
the limitations set forth in the applicable federal categorical pretreatment
standards or other pretreatment standards or regulations issued by EPA or the
IDEM. A toxic pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended.



      3.   Where more than one standard (local, state or federal)
applies to discharge limitations for a particular pollutant, the most
stringent of the appropriate limitations shall apply.



         a.   State standards. Users shall comply with the
state’s pretreatment standards set forth in 327 I.A.C. 5-16.



         b.   Local standards.



            1.   The Superintendent is authorized to establish
local limits pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c).



            2.   The following pollutant limits are
established to protect against pass through and interference. No significant
industrial user shall discharge wastewater in excess of the following daily
maximum discharge limitations: 0.0003 mg/l total mercury.



      4.   The Superintendent may, subject to the approval of the
Board, implement local limits through allocation of the maximum allowable
industrial load (MAIL) to significant industrial users. The MAIL is the total
daily loading of a pollutant available to be allocated to all significant
industrial users within the jurisdiction of the POTW.



   B.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials or wastes if it appears likely, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, health, public property or
constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of any
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to all factors addressed
under this article including, but not limited to, the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity
of the treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the treatment
plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:



      1.   Any wastewater, liquid or vapor having a temperature
higher than 150°F or 65°C;



      2.   Any water or waste containing fats, oils and grease
(FOG), waxes, fatty acids or soaps, whether emulsified or not, or as further
defined by the method of their determination in accordance with Standard
Methods, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances that may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F or 0°C and 65°C,
which may result in instances of obstruction, diminished flow capacity of the
sanitary sewer lines or pumping stations, interference or pass through at the
treatment plant;



      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to
review and approval of the Superintendent;



      4.   Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established
by the Board as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



      5.   Materials that exert or cause:



         a.   Concentrations of inert suspended solids exceeding
250 mg/l (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime
residues) or concentrations of dissolved solids exceeding 600 mg/l (such as,
but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);



         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         c.   Excessive BOD, COD or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the treatment plant; and



         d.   Excessive volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs”, as defined herein.



      6.   Any water or waste that causes corrosive structural
damage to the POTW or appurtenances owned or operated by the town;



      7.   Waters or wastes containing substances that are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;



      8.   Any substances that will cause the wastewater treatment
plant or the town to be in violation of the town’s NPDES permit; and



      9.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit,
permit or cause to be deposited, or discharge in any manner whatsoever, any
substance into a sewer at a point different than the permitted sewer
connection to the sanitary sewer system.



   C.   The Superintendent may impose mass-based discharge limitations
in terms of pounds of specific pollutants discharged per day for new
commercial contributors or commercial contributors with an increase in
discharges. These mass limitations may result in lower concentration-based
specific discharge limits than those established in § 25-35 of this article.



   D.   A non-domestic discharger of any listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes under the RCRA must immediately notify the Superintendent of
the amount and frequency of the hazardous waste discharge.



   E.   Existing industrial or major contributors shall be required to
meet the discharge limitations established in subsections A. and B. above
within 90 days from the date of the adoption of this article.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-22-2015; Ord. 2016-05, passed 4-25-2016)



§ 25-36  PRETREATMENT.



   A.   1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed
to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 25-35A. and B. of this article,
and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, based upon all factors
addressed in this article, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or otherwise create a hazard
to life, health or constitutes a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:



         a.   Require all new source general or significant
industrial waste dischargers and/or major contributors and existing source
general or significant industrial waste discharges and/or major contributors
with any increase in discharges to submit information on wastewater
characteristics and obtain prior approval for discharge;



         b.   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any
reason deemed appropriate by the Superintendent;



         c.   Require pretreatment of such wastes to comply with
the limits as defined by this article;



         d.   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive
flows or loading discharged to the treatment plant to cover the additional
costs of having capacity for and treating such wastes;



         e.   Require users with the potential to discharge
flammable substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter at their expense;



         f.   Require users that operate vehicular wash
facilities to provide, operate and maintain pretreatment facilities approved
by the Superintendent to control solids and preclude the discharge of toxics
to the POTW at their expense; and



         g.   Require users that operate food preparation
facilities to provide, operate and maintain pretreatment facilities approved
by the Superintendent to control the discharge of FOG and solids to the POTW
at their expense.



      2.   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



   B.   In addition to meeting the discharge limits enumerated in §
25-35A. and B. of this chapter, pretreatment of industrial wastes from
contributing industries prior to discharge to the POTW is subject to the EPA
rules and regulations as contained in 40 C.F.R. part 403 and New Sources of
Pollution, dated 1-28-1981, as amended, and the review and approval of the
Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.



   C.   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information
relating to pretreatment control facilities shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for approval. No construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until approval in writing is granted from the Superintendent and an
IDEM construction permit is obtained. Where such facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating
order by the owner at his or her expense and shall be subject to periodic
inspection by the Superintendent to determine that such facilities are being
operated in conformance with the applicable federal, state and local laws and
permits. The owner shall maintain operating records of the influent and
effluent to show the performance of the treatment facilities and for
comparison against POTW monitoring records.



   D.   The Superintendent may require users to supply pertinent
information on wastewater characteristics. This information may be requested
on a monthly or quarterly basis. Such measurements, tests and analyses shall
be made at the users’ expense.



   E.   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying non-residential wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole(s), together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of wastes. Such manhole(s), when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Superintendent. The manhole(s) shall be installed by the
owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be
safe and accessible at all times. Agents of the Superintendent, the IDEM and
the EPA shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing.



   F.   The strength of wastewaters shall be determined, for periodic
establishment of charges provided for in §§ 25-81 et seq., from samplings
taken at the aforementioned structure at any period of time and of such
duration and in such manner as the Superintendent may elect, or, at any place
mutually agreed upon between the user and the Superintendent. Appropriate
charges for sampling and analysis may be assessed to the user at the option
of the Superintendent. The results of routine sampling and analysis by the
user may also be used for determination of charges after verification by the
Superintendent.



   G.   Periodically, at least once each calendar quarter, the
Superintendent may monitor the discharge from any non-domestic source and
bill the discharger the cost of monitoring and analyzing for any or all
controlled pollutants. The Superintendent shall reserve the right to conduct
additional inspection, testing and monitoring as is deemed appropriate to
ensure that dischargers are in compliance with provisions of this article.



   H.   1.   The Superintendent may assess charges and fees from any
non-domestic discharger, which may include:



         a.   Fees for any monitoring, inspections, surveillance
and analyzing;



         b.   Fees for reviewing plans, specifications and any
other pertinent information relating to pretreatment control facilities and
accidental discharge procedures;



         c.   Other fees as the utility may deem necessary to
determine compliance with ordinance requirements; and



         d.   Other fees as the utility may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines,
and penalties chargeable by the utility and/or town.



      2.   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the utility. A
schedule of applicable charges and fees shall be made available from the
utility.



   I.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association or the Standard Methods number specified in the current NPDES
permit, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole, except for application for
NPDES permits and report thereof which shall be conducted in accordance with
rules and regulations adopted by the USEPA, 40 C.F.R. part 136 and any
subsequent revisions subject to approval by the Superintendent. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, health
and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a
24-hour composite of all outfalls of premises is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD5 and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.)



   J.   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



   K.   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble
oils or grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of
pollutants and the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance
with § 25-32.



   L.   All discharges subject to local, state or federal regulations
must retain and preserve for at least three years, any records, books,
documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries
relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf
of a discharge in connection with its discharge. All records that pertain to
matters that are the subject of any enforcement or litigation activities
brought by the town must be retained and preserved by the discharger until
all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation
concerning any appeals have expired.



   M.   1.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or
sand; except that, such interceptors shall not be required for residential
users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at his or her expense.



         a.   Specifications for grease, oil, and sand
interceptors or traps shall be in accordance with the 1999 Indiana Plumbing
Code section on grease interceptors and traps, 675 I.A.C. 16-1.4 or current
edition of same. Copies of the aforementioned code and rules, regulations and
codes are on file as required by law in the office of the Building
Commissioner.



         b.   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand
interceptors or traps shall be maintained in continuously efficient operation
at all times. The owner of the grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps
shall keep a log of cleaning and maintenance of traps. The log shall contain,
at a minimum:



            1.   Time and date for cleaning of interceptor or
trap;



            2.   Approximate amount of waste removed;



            3.   Person or company cleaning interceptor or
trap;



            4.   Method of waste disposal; and



            5.   A copy of the manifest for waste disposal.



      2.   The maintenance log and copies of manifests shall be kept
on the premises and readily available for inspection by the Superintendent,
his or her representative or authorized representative of other environmental
government agencies.



      3.   When an underground interceptor or trap is required, it
shall be located outside the building structure in a readily accessible
location for cleaning and inspection. The interceptor or trap shall have a
minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons. The interceptor or trap shall:



         a.   Have no restroom facilities flowing into it;



         b.   Be properly baffled to trap grease and oil inside
it; and



         c.   Have a sampling point for determination of its
effectiveness.



      4.   When an inside interceptor or trap is required, it shall:



         a.   Be located in a readily accessible location for
cleaning and inspection;



         b.   Not be connected to a food waste disposal unit or
dishwasher, unless specifically required; and



         c.   Have a sample tap located at the interceptor or
trap discharge for determination of its effectiveness.



   N.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



   O.   1.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only
at locations designated by the Superintendent, and at such times as are
established by the Superintendent. Such waste shall not violate § 25-32B.8.
of this chapter or any other requirements established by the town. The
Superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.



      2.   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at
locations designated by the Superintendent.



      3.   No load may be discharged without prior consent of the
Superintendent.



      4.   The Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled
load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Superintendent may
require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.



§ 25-37  STATE/FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All provisions of this article and limits set herein shall comply with
any applicable state and/or federal requirements now, or projected to be in
effect.



§ 25-38  PUMPING STATION SPECIFICATIONS.



   A.   Any pumping station that is proposed to be utilized as part of
a public sewer shall not be built or installed unless the pumping station is
approved by the Superintendent.



   B.   In granting approval for all pumping stations, the
Superintendent shall be guided and directed by the technical specifications
in town standards.



   C.   These specifications may be amended from time to time in the
discretion of the Board by a motion made and approved by a majority of the
appointed Board.



§ 25-39  DILUTION.



   No discharger shall be allowed to increase the use of potable or
process water in any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of
diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with applicable standards.



§ 25-40  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   A.   1.   Each discharger shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances.
Where necessary, procedures and facilities to prevent the accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
discharger’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for review, and be approved by the Superintendent before
construction of the facility.



      2.   Review and approval of plans and operating procedures by
the Superintendent shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility
to modify its facility as necessary to meet applicable requirements.



   B.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Superintendent of the incident to enable the Superintendent to take
countermeasures to minimize damage to the POTW and receiving waters.
Dischargers shall notify the Superintendent at (219) 926-1032, during normal
business hours, Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. and at
(219) 926-1136 during all other times. The notification shall include the
location of the discharge, date and time of occurrence, type of waste,
concentration and volume, and corrective actions that were taken.



   C.   This notification shall be followed, within ten days of the
date of the occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the
accidental discharge, the causes, duration including times and dates of
non-compliance, and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences.



   D.   Such notification will not relieve the users of a liability for
any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant or treatment
process, or for any fines imposed by the town by any regulations.



   E.   1.   In order that employees of users be informed of the
requirements of this article, users shall make available to their employees
copies of this article and together with such other wastewater information
and notices, which may be furnished by the Superintendent from time to time,
directed toward more effective water pollution control.



      2.   A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on a
user’s bulletin board or other conspicuous place advising whom to call in
case of accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.



§ 25-41  RIGHT OF ACCESS.



   A.   1.   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the
premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.



      2.   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



      3.   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



      4.   The Superintendent may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at his or her own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least annually, as a
minimum to ensure their accuracy. Proof of such calibration must be submitted
to the Superintendent by February 1 annually, unless otherwise notified in
writing by the Superintendent.



      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the user.



      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access
to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this article.



   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in subsection A. above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the utility shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company.



   C.   1.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees
of the utility bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement.



      2.   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.



§ 25-42  ENFORCEMENT.



   A.   General. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or
negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, that is a part of the POTW. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.



   B.   Emergency suspension order.



      1.   The Superintendent may immediately and without prior
notice suspend a user’s discharge by way of an emergency suspension order
whenever a it appears that an actual or threatened discharge reasonably
appears to presents an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons, to the environment, to the operation of the POTW or
threatens to contaminate the resultant sludge and jeopardizes its disposal,
or violates any discharge limits.



      2.   Any user notified of an emergency suspension order of its
discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event
of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency
suspension order, the Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or danger to any individuals. The
Superintendent may allow the user to resume discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of
endangerment has passed.



      3.   Any user notified of the emergency suspension order of
wastewater treatment service must immediately cease all discharges. If the
user fails to comply voluntarily with a emergency suspension order, the Board
may immediately commence judicial proceeding to compel the discharger’s
compliance with the order. The Board can reinstate the wastewater treatment
service and terminate judicial proceeding provided the discharger can prove
the elimination of the non-complying discharge or conditions as outlined
above.



      4.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring
a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



   C.   Notice of violation.



      1.   Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has
engaged in conduct other than that set forth in subsection B. above, which
justifies revocation of a permit or suspension of service, the Superintendent
will serve the user with a written notice of violation, either personally or
by certificate or registered mail, stating the nature of the alleged
violation. Within ten days of the date of the receipt of a notice of
violation, the user must respond personally or in writing to the
Superintendent, advising of its position with respect to the allegations.
Thereafter, the parties must meet to determine the seriousness of the
allegations and where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory
correction of the violation including specific actions to be taken to
alleviate the violation. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation.



      2.   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



   D.   Compliance order.



      1.   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or order issued
hereunder, the Superintendent may issue a compliance order to the user
responsible for the discharge, directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the
time provided, sewer service may be discontinued.



      2.   Where a violation of the town’s ordinance or if
applicable pretreatment regulations occurs and is not corrected by timely
compliance, the Board may order any user to show cause before them and state
why the proposed action should not be taken. A written notice must be served
on the user by personal service, certified or registered mail, specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the Board. The hearing will
consider the violation, the proposed enforcement action, reasons why the
enforcement action is to be taken, and shall direct the user to show cause
before the Board as to why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing must be served no less than ten days before
the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized
representative of a user. The proceedings at the hearing will be considered
by the Board and appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper
activities of the user will be issued.



      3.   Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   E.   Cease and desist order.



      1.   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, or order issued
hereunder, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue a cease and desist order to the user directing it to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:



         a.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



         b.   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



      2.   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   F.   Administrative hearings and fines.



      1.   When the Superintendent has cause to believe that a user
has violated any provision of this article, the Superintendent may initiate
an administrative hearing before the Board, as provided in I.C. 36-1-6-9 and
§ 1-14 of this code of ordinances. The Superintendent shall provide notice
of the hearing to the user no later than ten days prior to the hearing and
shall include in the notice:



         a.   Specific details of the alleged violation;



         b.   The date and time of the hearing and a statement
that the user has the right to cross-examine witnesses and evidence and the
right to present evidence regarding the alleged violation; and



         c.   A statement that the Board may consider the
evidence and, upon a showing of a violation by the preponderance of the
evidence, impose an administrative fine of no less than $1,000 and up to
$2,500 for a first violation of this article, and no less than $1,000 and up
to $7,500 for a second or subsequent violation of this article, or order
other appropriate relief. Each day such violation occurs or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate violation of this article.



      2.   The Board shall issue a determination whether the charged
violation has been proved by a preponderance of the evidence and the amount
of the fine, if any, in writing no later than 30 days after the date of the
hearing and a copy of the determination shall be provided to the user. The
Board’s determination shall be final unless a user files an appeal with the
county’s Superior Court no later than 30 days after the date of the
determination.



   G.   Injunctive relief.



      1.   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction through the Town Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement
imposed by this article on activities of the user. The Superintendent may
also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable
relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation.



      2.   A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   H.   Civil actions. In lieu of an administrative hearing set forth
in subsection F. above, the town may initiate an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce this article. The town may petition for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction in addition to any civil
penalties that may be available. In addition to any injunctive relief and
civil penalties that may be ordered by the court, the town shall be entitled
to recover all attorneys fees, costs and litigation expenses, including the
costs of any monitoring or testing conducted by the town prior to or during
litigation, as well as expert witness fees.



   I.   Remedies non-exclusive. The remedies provided for in this
article are not exclusive. The town may take any, all or any combination of
these actions against a non-compliant user.



   J.   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this article, or order issued
hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only
recommence, at the user’s expense, after the Superintendent has
satisfactorily determined the user’s ability to comply with this article.



   K.   Request for reconsideration. Any user affected by any decision,
action or determination made by the Superintendent or Board, interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this article or in any permit issued herein,
may file with the Board a written request for reconsideration within ten days
of such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts
supporting the user’s request for reconsideration.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 25-43  ABATEMENT.



   A.   When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage or any
other impairment to the POTW, the Board may assess a charge against the user
for the work required to clean or repair the facility in an amount at least
equal to the work done and add such charge to the user’s charges and fees.



   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this article or any
permit condition or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution, or who
violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation,
national standard of performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be
fined no less than $1,000 and up to $2,500 for a first violation and no less
than $1,000 and up to $7,500 for a second or subsequent violation. Each day
such violation occurs or continues to exist shall constitute a separate
violation of this article.



   C.   Any person who discharges sewage, industrial waste, wastewater
or other waste into the POTW shall be governed by the provisions of this
article and all applicable, local, state and federal laws and regulations and
shall indemnify the town and be liable for any fine, penalty or judgment
assessed against the town and/or its duly authorized agents as a result of
said person violation of said local, state or federal law or regulation.



   D.   The Board may revoke any permit or terminate or cause to be
terminated wastewater service to any premises, if a violation of any
provision of this article is found to exist, or if a discharge or wastewater
causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or
nuisance to the POTW, as defined in this article. This provision is in
addition to other statutes, rules or regulations, authorizing termination of
service for delinquency in payment.



   E.   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement,
representation or certification in any application, report or other document
required by this article of other applicable regulations, or who tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device, will, upon conviction,
be punished by the imposition of a civil penalty as required by the local
and/or state statutes.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 25-44  SEVERABILITY.



   A.   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of
this article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article
that can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.



   B.   This article shall be in full force and effect from and after
its adoption and publication as required by law.



§ 25-45  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys and from
the Superintendent’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available
to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time the information or data is
submitted by the user. Any information or data that has been demonstrated by
the user to disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data”, as defined by 40 C.F.R. §
2.302 does not constitute confidential information and will be made available
to the public without restriction.



§ 25-46  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A.   Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Superintendent, a
user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within five days of the request. The Superintendent is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to
update this information.



   B.   Wastewater discharge permit requirement. No significant
industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first
obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the state’s Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM). The Superintendent may require other users
to obtain discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article.



   C.   Violation. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 25-42 of this chapter.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a user from any
obligation to comply with any federal or state pretreatment standards or
requirements, or with the requirements of any other federal or state law.



   D.   Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the
effective date of this section, and who wishes to continue such discharges in
the future, shall, within 30 days after the effective date of this section
apply to IDEM for a wastewater discharge permit.



   E.   New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the
POTW must apply for such permit from IDEM prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. The user must also obtain prior approval from
the Superintendent before discharging to the POTW.



DIVISION 1-A. SPECIAL UTILITY AREA



§ 25-47  ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL UTILITY AREA.



   A.   The town hereby establishes a special utility area in
accordance with the authority given to the town by I.C. 36-9-2-16 and I.C.
36-9-23-25. The geographic area of the special utility area shall be located
north of U.S. Highway 6 along Meridian Road to CR 900 N and then east along
CR 900 N to a point of connection underneath the CSX Railroad to a point
within the corporate limits of the town. A map showing the geographic area of
the special utility area shall be on file with the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



   B.   The owners of property requesting to be served as part of the
special utility area shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with the
Board concerning the installation, ownership and maintenance of improvements
and the responsibility of said owners to contribute to any existing debt
service for funding the transport system, distribution system and any other
equipment and appurtenances used for the special utility area.



(Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-8-2015)



§ 25-48  COMPLIANCE WITH SEWER USE ORDINANCE.



   Owners of property located within the special utility area shall comply
with all regulations contained within this chapter as a condition of service.



(Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-8-2015)



§ 25-49  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT.



   For the purpose of this section, EQUIPMENT shall refer to grinder pumps
installed by the town within the Fox Chase Farms subdivision. Each grinder
pump shall be a standard centrifugal/positive displacement pump containing an
impeller that grinds/macerates the solids into slurry and discharges same.
All equipment installed by the town on the property of any user within the
special utility area shall remain the property of the town. All necessary
repairs, maintenance and replacement of such equipment shall be performed by
the town, or the user. Any repairs, maintenance and replacement of such
equipment, if performed by the user, must be approved by the town prior to
such repairs being performed. In the event any such user fails to repair,
maintain or replace such equipment, the town shall have the option, but not
the obligation, of performing such repair or replacement, with all costs
associated with such repair or replacement by the town constituting a lien
against the property.



(Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-8-2015)



§ 25-50  RATES AND LIENS.



   All users of property within the special utility area shall pay rates
and charges as set forth in § 25-85C. of this chapter. The provisions of
Div. 2 of this chapter shall apply to all users within the special utility
area, except as specifically modified by this division. Any unpaid fees owed
to the town shall constitute a lien against the connected property pursuant
to I.C. 36-9-23-32.



(Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-8-2015)



DIVISION 2. RATES AND CHARGES



§ 25-81  DEFINITIONS.



   A.   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      DEBT SERVICE COSTS. The average annual principal and interest
payments on all outstanding revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.



      EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE. An additional charge, which is
billed to users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess
of “normal domestic sewage”.



      NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.



         a.   For the purpose of determining surcharges,
wastewater or sewage having an average daily concentration as follows:



            1.   BOD not more than 200 mg/l;



            2.   TSS not more than 200 mg/l;



            3.   Ammonia as nitrogen not more than 30 mg/l; and



            4.   Phosphorus not more than 10 mg/l.



         b.   As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated
domestic and/or sanitary conveniences are distinct from wastes from
industrial processes.



      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect,
necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and treatment
on a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform
with all related federal, state and local requirements. (These costs include
replacement.)



      OTHER SERVICE CHARGES. Tap charges, connection charges, area
charges and other identifiable charges other than user charges, debt service
charges and excessive strength surcharges.



      REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the sewage works equipment to maintain the capacity and performance
for which such works were designed and constructed.



      SEWER USE ORDINANCE. A separate and companion enactment to this
chapter, which regulates the connection to and use of public and private
sewers (codified as Div. 1 of this article).



      TOWN. The Town of Chesterton, Indiana, acting by and through the
Town Council of Chesterton, Indiana, or any duly authorized officials or
boards acting in its behalf.



      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment
works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to
I.C. 36-9-23-25, as the same may be amended from time to time.



      USER CLASS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by
source, function, waste characteristics and process or discharge similarities
(i.e., residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental).



         a.   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works
whose premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more
persons, including all dwelling units and the like.



         b.   COMMERCIAL USER. Any establishment involved in a
commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by
the town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



         c.   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment involved in a
social, charitable, religious and/or educational function which, based on a
determination by the town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.



         d.   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state or local
governmental user of the wastewater treatment works.



         e.   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any manufacturing or processing
facility that discharges industrial waste to a publicly owned treatment works.



   B.   Any term not defined herein, but defined in the Sewer Use
Ordinance (Div. 1 of this article) shall have the same meaning herein.



§ 25-82  CHARGES LEVIED; CLASSES OF USERS.



   Every person whose premises are served by said sewage works shall be
charged for the service provided. These charges are established for each user
class, as defined, in order that the sewage works shall recover, from each
user and user class, revenue which is proportional to its use of the
treatment works in terms of volume and load. User charges are levied to
defray the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the
treatment works. User charges shall be uniform in magnitude with a user class.



   A.   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency published in the Federal Register
2-17-1984 (40 C.F.R. § 35.2140). Replacement costs, which are recovered
through the system of user charges, shall be based upon the expected useful
life of the sewage works equipment.



   B.   The various classes of users of the treatment works for the
purposes of this division shall be as follows: Class I - Residential
Commercial Governmental Institutional Industrial.



§ 25-83  DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.



   For the use of the service rendered by sewage works, rates and charges
shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real
estate or building that is connected with the town sanitary system or
otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewage system of
the town. Such rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs,
excessive strength surcharges and other service charges, which rates and
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determined as follows.



   A.   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of
water used on or in the properly or premises subject to such rates and
charges as the same is measured by the water meter there in use, plus a base
charge based on the size of water meter installed, except as herein otherwise
provided. For the purpose of billing and collecting the charges for sewage
service, the water meters shall be read bimonthly and the users shall be
billed bi-monthly (or period equaling two months). The water usage schedule
is as follows: all Class I users:



      1.   a.   Treatment rate per 100 cubic feet of usage per
reading period:



 

I/I Charge
 
User Charge
 
Debt Service
 
Total


$0.28
 
$2.08
 
$1.08
 
$3.44



 



         b.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per
reading period:



 

I/I Charge
 
User Charge
 
Debt Service
 
Total


$0.37
 
$2.77
 
$1.43
 
$4.57



 



      2.   Base rate bi-monthly:



 

Metered Users


Water Meter Size (Inches)
 
User Charge
 
Debt Service
 
Total




5/8”-3/4”
 
$27.75
 
$12.39
 
$40.14


1”
 
$59.09
 
$14.89
 
$73.98


1-1/4” - 1-1/2”
 
$128.02
 
$18.19
 
$146.21


2”
 
$215.76
 
$22.39
 
$238.15


3”
 
$487.33
 
$35.39
 
$522.72


4”
 
$863.35
 
$53.39
 
$916.74


6”
 
$1,928.74
 
$104.39
 
$2,033.13


8”
 
$3,432.82
 
$176.39
 
$3,609,21


10”
 
$5,354.70
 
$268.39
 
$5,623.09


12”
 
$7,715.27
 
$381.39
 
$8,096.66




 



   B.   For all users of the sewage works that are unmetered water
users or accurate meter readings are not available, the bi-monthly charge
shall be determined by equivalent single-family dwelling units, except as
herein provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered bi-monthly (or period
equaling two months). The schedule on which said rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows.



      1.   Unmetered users.



 

Bi-Monthly Rate


 
User Charge
 
Debt Service
 
Total


Residential: single-family dwelling unit
 
$59.15
 
$26.69
 
$85.84



 



      2.   Outside users.



 

 
Monthly Rate


Flow rate per 1,000 gallons
 
$4.06


Flow rate per 100 cu. ft.
 
$3.05


Porter
 
$2,666.03


Indian Boundary
 
$258



 



   C.   For the service rendered to the town, the town shall be subject
to the same rates and charges established in harmony therewith.



   D.   In order to recover the cost of monitoring industrial wastes,
the town shall charge the user not less than $25 per sampling event plus the
actual costs for collection and analyzing the sample(s) as determined by the
town or by an independent laboratory. This charge will be reviewed on the
same bases as all other rates and charges in this division.



   E.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate of building
discharges sanitary sewer, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the
town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses
water in excess of 20,000 gallons per reading period and can be shown to the
satisfaction of the town that a portion as measured by the water meter or
meters does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner
or other interested party shall, at his or her expense, install and maintain
meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved
method of measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage
discharge.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2016-23, passed 12-12-2016)



§ 25-84  DETERMINATION OF WATER USE.



   The quantity of water discharged into the sanitary sewage system and
obtained from sources other than the utility that serves the town shall be
determined by the town in such manner as the town shall reasonably elect, and
the sewage service shall be billed at the above appropriate rates; except as
hereinafter provided in this section, the town may make proper allowances in
determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records to
be consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the town that
such quantities do no enter the sanitary sewage system.



   A.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into
the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is not a
user of water supplied by the water utility serving the town, and the water
used thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter, or is measured by a
water meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of water used shall
be otherwise measured or determined by the town. In order to ascertain the
rate or charge provided in this division, the owner or other interested party
shall, at his or her expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the town for determination of sewage discharge.



   B.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into
the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user
of water supplied by the water utility serving the town and, in addition, is
a user of water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or
is measured by a meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of water
used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the town. In order to
ascertain the rates or charges, the owner or other interested parties shall,
at his or her expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage discharge.



   C.   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into
the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users
of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then
in each such case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be
averaged for each user and the base charge and the flow rates and charges
shall apply to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate
or buildings served through the single water meter.



   D.   In the event that two or more dwelling units such as mobile
homes, apartments or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water or
other liquids into the town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or
indirectly, are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a
single meter, then in such case, billing shall be for a single service in the
manner set out elsewhere herein; except that, the minimum bill shall not be
less than the number of dwelling units times $6.50 per month. In the case of
mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be computed and
interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available for rent plus
any other dwelling units served through the meter. A dwelling unit shall be
interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or spaces in which cooking
facilities are provided.



   E.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the
town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses
water in excess of 20,000 gallons per reading period and can be shown to the
satisfaction of the town that a portion as measured by the water meter or
meters does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner
or other interested party shall, at his or her expense, install and maintain
meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved
method of measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage
discharge.



   F.   1.   In order that the domestic and residential users of
sewage service shall not be penalized for sprinkling lawns during the summer
months, the billing for sewage services for such users shall be based upon
the water of the previous winter months. For purpose of calculation, SUMMER
MONTHS is defined as the reading period of mid-June through mid-August, based
on the actual readings as submitted by the current public water utility
provider to the town utility. WINTER MONTHS is defined as the reading period
of mid-February through mid-April, based on actual readings.



         a.   In the event the water usage for the summer months
is greater than the water used for the winter months, then the billing for
sewage service shall be computed on the water use for the winter months.



         b.   In the event water usage is less in the summer
months than the winter months use, then the billing shall be based upon the
actual water used in said summer reading period.



      2.   Domestic and/or residential sewage services as applicable
to the sprinkling rate shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate or
building which is occupied and used as a residence. Said sprinkling rate
shall not apply to any premises which are partially or wholly used for
commercial or industrial purposes. In the event a portion of such premises
shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes the owner shall have the
privilege of separating the water service so that the residential portion of
the premises is served through a separate water meter and, in such a case,
the water usage as registered by the water meter serving such portion of the
premises used for residential purposes would qualify under the sprinkling
rate.



§ 25-85  ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES FOR STRONGER THAN NORMAL DISCHARGES.



   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably
adjusted to the service rendered to users, the town shall base its charges
not only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the
stronger-than-normal domestic sewage and wastes which it is required to treat
and dispose of. The town shall require the user to determine the strength and
content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or indirectly
into the sanitary sewage system, in such manner, by such method, and at such
times as the town may deem practicable in light of the conditions and
attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge.
The user shall furnish a central sampling point available to the town at all
times.



   A.   Additional charges, for treating stronger-than-normal domestic
waste shall be made on the following basis.



      1.   Rate surcharges based on suspended solids. There shall be
an additional charge of $0.24 per pound of suspended solids for suspended
solids received in excess of 200 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      2.   Rate surcharges based on BOD. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.24 per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for BOD
received in excess of 200 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      3.   Rate surcharges based upon ammonia. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.96 per pound of ammonia for ammonia received in
excess of 30 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      4.   Rate surcharges based upon phosphorus. There shall be an
additional charge of $0.96 per pound of phosphorus for phosphorus received in
excess of ten milligrams per liter of fluid.



   B.   The determination of suspended solids, five-day biochemical
oxygen demand and ammonia contained in the waste shall be in accordance with
the latest copy of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, as written by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation, and in
conformance with Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants, 40 C.F.R. part 136.



   C.   1.   For users of the sewage works who are located within
the special utility area, sewage service bills shall be rendered monthly, in
arrears.



      2.   The rate will be recalculated at the time of each
biennial rate study. The debt service and reserve charge will never be
greater than the initial debt service and reserve charge established at the
time unmetered users within the special utility area first receive service.
All collections of the debt service and reserve charge will be applied to the
debt serving as the basis of this charge. The debt service and reserve charge
will be removed when the debt serving as the basis of this charge is fully
discharged. The basis upon which said rates and charges shall be determined
is as follows.



         a.   Initial unmetered users.



            1.   Unmetered residential users within the
special utility area shall be billed based upon the cost for unmetered users
within the town. In addition to the monthly user charge, all unmetered
residential users within the special utility area shall be billed a debt
service and reserve charge. The initial monthly rate is as follows:



 

Monthly Rate User Charge
 
Debt Service and Reserve Charge
 
Total


$42.92
 
$55.61
 
$98.53



 



            2.   This rate will remain in effect until the
next biennial rate study approved by the Board.



         b.   Subsequent unmetered users. The user charge and
debt service and reserve charge shall be assessed to subsequent users within
the special utility area on the basis of equivalent residential units as
calculated in the most current biennial rate study approved by the Board.



         c.   Metered users.



            1.   Users within the special utility area whose
water is metered shall be billed monthly based upon the quantity of water
used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and charges as
the same is measured by the water meter there in use pursuant to the
treatment rate for Class I users set forth in § 25-83A.1. of this chapter,
this a base charge based on the size of water meter installed charged in
accordance with § 25-83A.2. of this chapter.



            2.   In addition to the treatment rate and base
charge, metered users within the special utility area shall be charged for
monthly debt service and reserve payments is accordance with the following
schedule: debt service and reserve charge per 1,000 gallons: $3.67.



            3.   The debt service and reserve charge will be
recalculated at the time of each biennial rate study. The debt service and
reserve charge will never be greater than the initial debt service and
reserve charge established at the time metered users within the special
utility area first receive service. All collections of the debt service and
reserve charge will be applied to the debt serving as the basis of this
charge. The debt service and reserve charge will be removed when the debt
serving as the basis of this charge is fully discharged. The basis of the
total charge shall be calculated as follows:



 

Whispering Sands - Based on a 4” meter and flow charge rate of an outside
user


Monthly Rate User Charge
 
Debt Service and Reserve Charge
 
Meter Charge


$4.06/1,000 gallons
 
$4,517.80
 
$458.37



 



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 2016-23,
passed 12-12-2016)



§ 25-86  BILLING.



   Such rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected by the
town in the manner provided by law and ordinance.



   A.   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and
billed bi-monthly.



   B.   The rates and charges will be billed to the owner of the real
estate serviced. If after seven days from written notification to the
property owner that a billing remains unpaid, the water service will be
requested to be discontinued to the subject property.



   C.   As provided for by I.C. 36-9-23-31, all rates and charges not
paid within 20 days from and after the billing date are declared delinquent
and a penalty of 10% of the amount of the rates or charges shall attach
thereto; provided that, no penalty shall attach where, immediately preceding
the delinquent bill, an owner has made 12 consecutive bi-monthly payments on
time. The amount of the rates and charges, the penalty and a reasonable
attorney’s fee may be recovered by the town in a civil action in its name.
Additionally, payments and/or penalties that have been due and unpaid for at
least 90 days may be filed as a lien against the real property in accordance
with I.C. 36-9-23-33.



   D.   Users of the sewage works who wish to pay their sewage service
bill by credit card shall be charged a convenience fee of $2 per transaction,
which convenience fee is payable to the town and shall be in addition to any
other fees that may be charged by the credit card issuing institution.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 7-26-2010; Ord. 2014-16, passed 12-8-2014; Ord.
2010-18, passed 12-20-2010)



§ 25-87  COST STUDIES.



   A.   In order that the rates and charges for sewage services may
remain fair and equitable and be in proportion to the cost of providing
services to the various users or user classes, the town shall cause a study
to be made within a reasonable period of time following the first two years
of operation, following the date on which this division goes into effect.
Such study shall include, but not be limited to, an analysis of the cost
associated with the treatment of excessive strength effluents from industrial
users, volume and delivery flow rate characteristics attributed to the
various users or user classes, the financial position of the sewage works and
the adequacy of its revenue to provide reasonable funds for the operation and
maintenance, replacements, debt service requirements and capital improvements
to the wastewater treatment systems.



   B.   Thereafter, on a biennial basis, within a reasonable period of
time following the normal accounting period, the town shall cause a similar
study to be made for the purpose of reviewing the fairness, equity and
proportionality of the rates and charges for sewage services on a continuing
basis. Said studies shall be conducted by officers or employees of the town
or by a firm of certified accountants, or a firm of consulting engineers
which firms shall have experience in such studies, or by such combination of
officers, employees, certified public accountants or engineers as the town
shall determine to be best under the circumstances. The town shall, upon
completion of said study revise and adjust the rates and charges, as
necessary, in accordance therewith in order to maintain the proportionality
and sufficiency of the rates.



§ 25-88  SEWER CONNECTION FEES.



   A.   The town shall collect a sewer connection fee for all new
connections at the time a building permit is applied for.



   B.   The fee for a single-family connection to the town’s sanitary
sewer system shall be determined as follows:



 

Calendar Year
 
Single-Family Connection


2015
 
$2,910


2016
 
$2,986


2017
 
$3,062


2018
 
$3,138


2019
 
$3,290



 



   C.   1.   The fee for a non-single family connections to the town
sanitary sewer system shall be the fee for a single-family connection
established by subsection B. above, multiplied by the appropriate capacity
factor as established below:



 

Classification
 
Capacity Factor




Bowling alley
 
0.403226 per # sq. ft.


Car wash
 
0.001152 per # sq. ft.


Church, auditorium, stadium
 
0.001152 per # sq. ft.


Cleaners
 
0.001000 per # sq. ft.


Dental clinic
 
0.001075 per # sq. ft.


Freight terminal/warehouse
 
0.000129 per # sq. ft.


Funeral home
 
0.000282 per # sq. ft.


Gasoline sales/service station
 
1.290323 per # restrooms


Hair salon
 
0.000645 per # sq. ft.


Health club
 
0.003226 per # sq. ft.


Hospital
 
0.645161 per # patient rooms


Hotel, motel
 
0.322581 per # rooms


Kennel/vet/grooming runs
 
0.048387 per # runs


   Surgery/examining rooms
 
0.322581 per # rooms


Laboratory
 
0.000968 per # sq. ft.


Laundromat
 
0.008871 per # sq. ft.


Manufacturing (with showers)
 
1.290323 per # toilets


Manufacturing
 
0.645161 per # toilets


Medical office
 
0.000968 per # sq. ft.


Multi-family dwellings (apartments, townhouses, condominiums and the like)


   1 bedroom
 
0.500000 per # units


   2 bedroom
 
0.750000 per # units


   3 bedroom
 
1.000000 per # units


Nursery or day care center
 
0.000806 per # sq. ft.


Nursing home or shelter care
 
0.322581 per bedrooms


Office or banks
 
0.000215 per # sq. ft.


Public transportation terminal
 
1.290323 per toilets


Retail business (except gasoline)
 
0.000484 per # sq. ft.


Restaurant
 
0.001129 per # sq. ft.


School, elementary
 
0.048387 per pupils


School, high, dance, music, trade
 
0.080645 per pupils


Surgical center
 
0.001008 per # sq. ft.


Theaters
 
0.000538 per # sq. ft.


Two-family dwellings (duplexes)
 
1.000000 per units




 



      2.   If a classification for the proposed connection has not
been established by the table above, the capacity factor shall be calculated
by the town.



 

Example: 10,000 sq. ft. dental clinic connecting on 8-1-2000


Single-family connection fee
 
 
$1,075.88


Capacity factor
 
0.001075
 


Square feet
 
10,000
 


Multiplier
 
 
10.75


Connection fee
 
 
$11,565.71



 



   D.   In the event an entire commercial or industrial building is not
finished and/or will contain multiple units and uses, the initial sewer
connection fee will be for any uses that are to be occupied upon completion
of the construction for which the building permit applies. As each remaining
unit or portion within a building has a building permit applied for, an
additional sewer connection fee based upon the rates set forth in § 25-88 of
this chapter shall be collected and no building can be occupied without
payment of the connection fee, nor can any space in a building be occupied
without payment of the required connection fee.



(Ord. 2014-16, passed 12-8-2014; Ord. 2016-23, passed 12-12-2016)



§ 25-89  REGULATING AUTHORITY.



   The town shall make and enforce such by-laws and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
town’s sewage system, pumping stations and sewage treatment works, for the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage treatment
works, the sewage collection system and for the regulation, collection,
rebating and refunding of such rates and charges.



§ 25-90  HARMFUL DEPOSITS.



   The town is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the
town’s sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the
operation of the sewage treatment works of the town, or to require methods
affecting pretreatment of said wastes to comply with the pretreatment
standards included in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit issued to the sewage works or as may be contained in the
EPA’s general pretreatment regulations, 40 C.F.R. part 403, and any
amendments thereto of the town’s pretreatment program plan.



§ 25-91  APPEAL TO UTILITY SERVICE BOARD.



   Any differences that may arise between users and officials of the
sewage works that cannot be resolved at that level may be appealed to the
town’s Utility Service Board.



§ 25-92  SPECIAL RATE CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED.



   The Board is hereby further authorized to enter into special rate
contracts with customers of the sewage works where clearly definable
reduction in cost to the sewage works can be determined, and such reduction
shall be limited to such reduced costs.



§ 25-93  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The rates and charges as herein set forth shall become effective on the
first full billing period occurring after the adoption of the ordinance from
which this division is derived.



§ 25-94  DISCONNECTION/RECHECK FEES.



   In the event the town’s sewage utility causes a customer’s water to
be disconnected for failure to pay its sewage bills on a timely basis as set
forth in this chapter, there shall be disconnection and recheck fees. This
disconnection fee shall be $33, plus a $10 administrative charge, and the
recheck fee shall be $19, plus a $10 administrative charge. All charges shall
be added to the customer’s bill. This includes charges for processing all
shut-offs and turn-ons, the requisite customer service and cashier time. If,
after a recheck of the water shutoff, the water is found to have been turned
on without authorization, water services may be dug up and detached from the
main. Before the water service can be replaced, the customer will have to pay
all delinquent sewer user fees and the actual expenses of removing and
replacing the water service, plus a $10 administrative charge.



§ 25-95  GENERAL UTILITIES SERVICE DEPOSIT.



   A.   Any owner of record of the real estate to which sewer utility
services are rendered who becomes delinquent three or more times in any
consecutive two-year period shall be required to make a cash deposit of the
estimated average payment due from the property served by the sewage works
for a three- month period.



   B.   Said deposit is a pre-requisite to continue or re-establish
sewer utility service.



§ 25-96  FUND.



   All utility service deposits shall be retained in a separate
non-interest bearing fund.



§ 25-97  REFUNDS.



   A.   The deposit, less any outstanding penalties and service fees,
shall be refunded to the depositor after receipt of a notarized statement
from the depositor that as of a certain date the property being served:



      1.   Has been conveyed or transferred to another person; or



      2.   No longer uses or is connected with any part of the
municipal sewage system.



   B.   A statement under subsection A. above must include the name and
address of the person to whom the property is conveyed or transferred.



   C.   Notwithstanding the above, deposits taken under § 25-95 of
this chapter shall, upon application, be refunded at the completion of 12
consecutive payments or two years in which no delinquencies were recorded on
the depositor’s account.



§ 25-98  FORFEITURES AND COLLECTIONS.



   A.   If a depositor fails to satisfy costs and fees within 60 days
after the termination of his or her use or ownership of the property served,
he or she forfeits his or her deposit.



   B.   Any excess that remains due after application of the forfeiture
may be collected in the manner prescribed in I.C. 36-9-23-31 or 36-9-23-32.



§ 25-99  APPLICATION OF DEPOSIT TO JUDGMENT.



   A deposit may be used to satisfy all or part of any judgment awarded to
the town under I.C. 36-9-23-31.



§ 25-100  UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS.



   A.   Any deposits under this article that have remained unclaimed by
the depositor for more than seven years after the termination of services for
which the deposit was made becomes the property of the town’s Utility
Department.



   B.   I.C. 32-34-1 does not apply to a deposit described in this
section.



ARTICLE IV. WATER



DIVISION 1. METERS, CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND THE LIKE



§ 25-151  METERS; PIPING PREREQUISITE TO INSTALLATION.



   Before a water meter is installed, the property owner shall, at his or
her own expense, have pipes so arranged that all water will pass through the
meter and provide proper space for the meter. Where pipe lines are not so
arranged, the public water utility will make the necessary changes at the
expense of the owner.



§ 25-152  DEPTH OF SERVICE PIPES.



   All service pipes up to the inlet side of the meter shall be laid at a
depth of not less than four feet and six inches underground, and shall be of
extra-strong galvanized pipe or copper tubing, or its approved equivalent.



§ 25-153  UTILITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR DAMAGE DUE TO DEFECTS IN CUSTOMERS’
PIPES AND FIXTURES.



   The town or utility shall not be held responsible for any damage done
by reason of breaking of, or defect in any of the customers’ pipes or
fixtures.



§ 25-154  CROSS-CONNECTIONS; DEFINED.



   A CROSS-CONNECTION shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the public water system, and the other, water from a
private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or
chemicals.



§ 25-155  SAME; PROHIBITED.



   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or maintain or
permit to be maintained a cross- connection.



   B.   No interconnection shall be established whereby potable water
from a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular
water supply of the public water system in the town.



§ 25-156  SAME; INSPECTION.



   The current public water utility provider or town utility has the right
to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a
connection to the public water system of the town for the purpose of
determining whether a cross-connection exists. Upon request, the owner or
occupant of any property so requested shall furnish to the public water
utility provider or town utility any pertinent information regarding the
piping system or systems on such property.



§ 25-157  TOXIC SUBSTANCE REQUIRING BACK-FLOW PREVENTER.



   A.   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, film processors, laboratories,
beauty shops, car and truck washes and all other hazardous users shall
install and maintain a reduced pressure principle back-flow preventer in the
main water line serving each building on the premises.



   B.   All residential structures, either single or multiple family,
constructed as new construction after the date of enactment of Ord. 87-08
shall have a back-flow preventer installed in the main water line serving
each structure on the premises.



   C.   The back-flow preventer must be installed in an easily
accessible location not subject to flooding or freezing.



§ 25-158  INSTALLATION OF WELLS FOR POTABLE SUPPLY PROHIBITED FOR PREMISES
WITHIN 100 FEET OF TOWN SANITARY SEWER OR PUBLIC WATER MAINS.



   It shall be unlawful to install a well, whether driven, drilled or
jetted, for the purpose of supplying potable water to any residence,
commercial or industrial building, which building or structure is located
within 100 feet of any town-owned and maintained sanitary sewer or public
water main.



§ 25-159  INSTALLATION OF WELLS FOR NON-POTABLE SUPPLY LAWFUL WITHIN 100
FEET OF PUBLIC WATER OR SANITARY SEWER MAINS.



   It shall be lawful to install a well to serve a building or structure
located less than 100 feet from a municipally-owned sanitary sewer or public
water main for the purpose of obtaining water for non-potable use.



§ 25-160  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER UTILITY PIPING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the piping of any well to be connected to any
fixture or other piping, which is connected into or supplied by water
emanating from the public water utility.



§ 25-161  WATER SUPPLIED BY WELLS DISCHARGED TO TOWN SEWAGE SYSTEM TO BE
METERED.



   All water delivered by any well which discharges into a
municipally-owned sanitary sewer shall have its flow metered, the costs of
such meter and the installations thereof shall be the responsibility of the
water user or the owner of the building serviced.



CHAPTER 26:  MUNICIPAL STREET TREE REGULATIONS



Section



   26-1   Definitions



   26-2   Establishment of a Tree Committee



   26-3   Tree Committee duties and responsibilities



   26-4   Public tree care by the town



   26-5   Street Commissioner authority



   26-6   Tree care; permit required



   26-7   Tree care; permit issuance



   26-8   Tree care; contractor permit required



   26-9   Tree care; pruning, trimming and removals



   26-10   Tree care; removal of stumps



   26-11   Tree care; emergency declared



   26-12   Tree care; proximity to construction and excavation



   26-13   Tree care; injury to trees



   26-14   Tree planting; general



   26-15   Tree and shrub planting; species and sizes to be planted



   26-16   Alteration of tree lawn



   26-17   Violations



§ 26-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the singular number include the plural number and
words in the plural number include the singular number. The word “shall”
is always mandatory and not merely directory. The term “person” shall
mean an individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or
any other association or its agents. Terms not defined in this section shall
have the meanings customarily assigned to them.



   ACCEPTED STREET TREE LIST. A list of proven trees deemed adaptable to
the street conditions of the town. The list is located in the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual, which is deemed incorporated by reference into this
chapter. Two copies of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual for the town
are on file for inspection in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



   BOUNDARY TREE.



      1.   A tree that meets one or more of the following criteria:



         a.   The stem of the tree straddles the actual property
line between town public property and adjoining property;



         b.   The town and the adjoining property owner have
previously agreed that the tree will identify the property boundary; and/or



         c.   The town and the adjoining property owner have
previously agreed to share the cost of maintaining the tree.



      2.   A BOUNDARY TREE is the common property of both landowners.



   CALIPER. The diameter measurement of the trunk taken six inches above
ground level for, up to and including four-inch caliper size.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. A circular region measured outward from the tree
trunk representing the essential area of the roots that must be maintained or
protected for the tree’s survival. CRITICAL ROOT ZONE is one foot in radial
distance for every inch of tree DBH, with a minimum distance of eight feet.
For specimen trees, the formula changes to one and one-half feet for every
inch of tree DBH.



   CROWN. The aboveground parts of a tree consisting of the branches,
stems, buds, fruits and leaves. It may also be referred to as CANOPY.



   DBH. The diameter breast height, or the diameter measurement in inches
of the trunk four and one-half feet above ground level. If a tree splits into
multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk is measured at its
most narrow point beneath the split.



   DRIP LINE. A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the
tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.



   OWNER-OCCUPANT. The property owner or the residing occupant with the
permission of the property owner.



   PARK TREES. Trees on town park areas.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PROPERTY OWNER. The person owning such property as shown by the County
Auditor’s Plat of Porter County, Indiana.



   ROOT BARRIER. An anchored physical device used to stop or divert the
growth of tree roots.



   SHRUB. A woody plant that is characteristically below 20 feet in height
and is multi-stemmed supporting the main leafy growth.



   SPECIMEN TREE OR STAND. Any tree or grouping of trees that has been
determined by the Tree Committee to be of high value because of its species,
size, age, form, historical significance or professional criteria.



   STREET. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for
purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



   STREET TREES. Trees lying on the real estate owned or controlled by the
town, excluding the real estate owned or controlled by the town’s Park
Department, except for an area 15 feet in depth from the pavement edge on
either side of any paved through streets within any park.



   TOPPING. The cutting back of the leading shoot or shoots of major limbs
that form the natural canopy of the tree as to disfigure the tree crown.



   TREE. A perennial woody plant, ordinarily with one main stem or trunk,
which develops many branches, and which ordinarily grows to a height of 20
feet or more.



   TREE CARE. The treating, removal, spraying, pruning and any other tree
maintenance or horticultural work intended for the enhancement or
preservation of trees and the removal and prevention of any and all damages
to any trees caused by tree pests, blights and diseases.



   TREE LAWN. The part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying within the town’s right-of-way.



   TREES, LARGE. Those capable of attaining a height of 45 feet or more at
maturity.



   TREES, MEDIUM. Those capable of attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet at
maturity.



   TREES, SMALL. Those capable of attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet at
maturity.



   WHEEL STOP. A solidly anchored concrete or wooden barrier at least six
inches in height that is designed to stop the forward motion of a motor
vehicle.



§ 26-2  ESTABLISHMENT OF A TREE COMMITTEE.



   There shall be created a committee that serves solely in an advisory
capacity to the Town Council that shall be known as the “Tree Committee”.
The Tree Committee shall be composed of three members who are residents of
the town who shall be appointed by the Town Council. The term of office for
the members shall initially be two years. After the initial term is over,
each successive term shall be one, two and three years, respectively. All
member of the Tree Committee serve at the pleasure of the Town Council and
the Town Council has the ability to remove any member at any time for any
reason deemed sufficient to the Town Council.



§ 26-3  TREE COMMITTEE DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   A.   The Tree Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the
Town Council on all matters pertaining to this chapter.



   B.   Matters upon which the Tree Committee may advise the Town
Council include, but are not limited to, the following:



      1.   Assist in policy development concerning the care,
preservation, selection, planting, transplanting, spraying, maintenance and
removal of trees and shrubs in the street right-of way, public parks and
other public places assuring good arboricultural practices are followed;



      2.   Make recommendations regarding tree care of street trees
and park trees and the sodding, seeding and maintenance of lawns along
existing town streets;



      3.   Assist, when requested by the Town Council, in the
preparation of grant applications that would fund municipal tree-related
projects;



      4.   Assist the Street Commissioner, when requested,
concerning matters contained within this chapter;



      5.   When requested by the Town Council, present inventory of
public trees in the town;



      6.   Cooperate with the state’s Department of Transportation
concerning planting efforts along state road rights-of-way with town
boundaries;



      7.   Conduct educational programs as necessary while working
with private and public agencies and organizations to establish programs for
planting and the care of street trees;



      8.   Advise, as needed, concerning amendments to this chapter,
including the Arboricultural Specifications Manual;



      9.   Meet as needed;



      10.   Elect a President and Vice-President annually and keep a
written record of its proceedings, all in accordance with state law; and



      11.   Shall serve without compensation.



§ 26-4  PUBLIC TREE CARE BY THE TOWN.



   The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, shrubs and plants within the lines of all streets, alleys, squares and
public grounds as may be necessary to ensure the public safety or to preserve
the aesthetics of such public grounds.



§ 26-5  STREET COMMISSIONER AUTHORITY.



   A.   The Street Commissioner or his or her designee can cause or
order to be removed any street tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest, or
which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines or other public improvements.



   B.   The Street Commissioner or his or her designee can cause or
order to be pruned limbs or branches of any trees or shrubbery which overhang
any town public property and which constitute a menace to the safety of the
public, obstructs the light from any street lamp, obstructs the motorists’
view of any street intersection or any traffic control signal or sign or
obstructs or endangers passing vehicles and pedestrians.



   C.   The Street Commissioner or his or her designee will govern the
issuance of tree work permits as required by this chapter.



§ 26-6  TREE CARE; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, company or public utility shall plant, remove, excavate
within a ten-foot radius of, trench within the critical root zone of, or cut
above the ground any public tree or disturb or plant any shrubbery within any
tree lawn, park or other public place unless the town shall have first
granted a tree care permit. No permit shall be required for the trimming of
any branches with a diameter of three inches or less. No permit shall be
necessary for tree removal or trimming in the emergency situations detailed
in § 26-11 of this chapter.



§ 26-7  TREE CARE; PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   A.   Tree care permits shall be administered and issued by the
Street Commissioner or his or her designee.



   B.   The person receiving the permit shall abide by the standards
set forth in this chapter, including the Arboricultural Specifications Manual
of the town and any additional requirements placed upon the permit by the
Street Commissioner.



   C.   An annual permit shall be issued to any public utility for
trimming and cutting trees in the public right-of-way. The permit application
shall include utility trimming schedules and locations.



   D.   There shall be no charge for the tree care permit issuance.



§ 26-8  TREE CARE; CONTRACTOR PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to work for hire performing tree
care activities in the town for private or municipal street trees without
first registering with the Clerk-Treasurer for a contract or permit and
paying the appropriate permit fee pursuant to §§ 5-81 through 5-84 of this
code of ordinances.



§ 26-9  TREE CARE; PRUNING, TRIMMING AND REMOVALS.



   A.   No person or property owner shall remove a tree or a boundary
tree from the public tree lawn for the purpose of construction, or for any
other reason, without first securing a tree care permit from the town. The
person or property owner shall bear the cost of complete removal, including
the chipping of all limbs and removal of stump.



   B.   All trimming, pruning and any other tree care activities shall
comply with good arboricultural practices as delineated in the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual of the town. The person or property owner shall bear
the cost of these activities.



   C.   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to top
any street tree. TOPPING is defined as severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
large than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical,
may be exempted from this requirement by a written determination made by the
Street Commissioner or his or her designee.



§ 26-10  TREE CARE; REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   In the process of tree removal, all stumps of street trees shall be
removed at least six inches below the surface of the ground.



§ 26-11  TREE CARE; EMERGENCY DECLARED.



   A.   In emergencies, when a tree or trees have been severely damaged
by storms or other causes, the Street Commissioner may waive the requirement
for a tree care permit. All removals of public trees under those conditions
shall be reported to the town.



   B.   The Street Department or public utilities may act to trim or
remove trees in emergency situations.



   C.   Topping and severe cutting back of limbs may be allowed by the
Street Commissioner under emergency situations.



§ 26-12  TREE CARE; PROXIMITY TO CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION.



   A.   All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near
any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work
shall be guarded whenever possible with a fence, frame or box not less than
four feet high and eight feet square and all building material, dirt or other
debris shall be kept outside the barrier. Where heavy equipment will pass
repeatedly over the tree’s critical root zone, particularly in wet
conditions, a temporary layer of four inches of shredded bark or wood chips
shall be placed and maintained on the ground. At the time of tree care permit
issuance, it may be specified that the barrier size be enlarged to further
protect the critical root zone of the tree during construction activities.



   B.   No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay
any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first
obtaining street cut and tree care permits from the Street Commissioner.



   C.   Any and all installations of underground utilities upon the
public right-of-way that impact the public trees due to necessary removals or
underground conflicts (roots) require a tree care permit and are specifically
subject to protection measures designated by the Street Commissioner.



§ 26-13  TREE CARE; INJURY TO TREES.



   Unless specifically authorized by the Street Commissioner or Park
Superintendent for park trees, no person shall intentionally damage, cut,
carve, transplant or remove any public tree; attach any wire, or nails,
advertising posters or other contrivances to any public tree; allow any
gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in
contact with them; or set fire to or allow to burn when such fire or heat
will injure any portion of any public tree.



§ 26-14  TREE PLANTING; GENERAL.



   A.   The owner-occupant of property abutting public ways may plant
street trees in the tree lawn at his or her own expense in strict accordance
with the Arboricultural Specifications Manual of the town and this chapter.



   B.   A tree care permit must first be obtained for such a planting.



§ 26-15  TREE AND SHRUB PLANTING; SPECIES AND SIZES TO BE PLANTED.



   It should be specifically noted that the Arboricultural Specifications
Manual contains a list of acceptable trees including species and sizes to be
planted, spacing, distance from curb, sidewalk and parking, and distance from
street corners, fireplugs, utility poles, utilities and other regulations. In
accordance with § 23-1 of this code of ordinances, no person shall plant or
maintain any shrubs, bushes, trees or other forms of vegetation or material
in such a manner that it obstructs or hinders the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks or vehicular traffic on streets or alleys with the town.



§ 26-16  ALTERATION OF TREE LAWN.



   No person shall pave, gravel, remove or otherwise convert existing
grassed tree lawn into hard space with the addition of the aforementioned
without the advice of the Tree Committee and the consent of the Town Council.



§ 26-17  VIOLATIONS.



   Violations of this chapter shall subject the offender to § 1-9 of this
code of ordinances, which provides for, among other things, a fine not to
exceed $2,500 per violation and that every day any violation of this chapter
shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, pursuant
to I.C. 36-1-6-2, the town may enter onto real property an take appropriate
action to bring the property into compliance with this chapter, including,
but not limited to, replanting of trees damaged or improperly removed by the
offender; provided, however, before action to bring compliance may be taken,
all persons holding a substantial interest in the property must be given a
reasonable opportunity to bring the property into compliance. If action to
bring compliance is taken by the town, the expense involved may be made a
lien against the property.



APPENDIX A:  UNIFIED COMPREHENSIVE ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



Article I. Zoning Ordinance Basic Provisions



Article II. Definitions



Article III. Town Boards, Administrative Bodies and Officials



   301.   Town Council



   302.   Plan Commission



   303.   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals



   304.   Plan Commission and BZA



   305.   Building Commissioner



   306.   Town Attorney



Article IV. Signs



   401.   Signs



   402.   Statement of findings, purpose, effect and severability



   403.   R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts; permitted signs and provisions



   404.   R-3 and RB Zoning District; permitted signs and provisions



   405.   B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts



   406.   Prohibited signs



   407.   Reserved



   408.   Reserved



   409.   Restrictions



   410.   Exemptions



   411.   Existing signs



   412.   Sign permit; requirements and procedures



   413.   Enforcement



Article V. District Regulations



   501.   Zoning map



   502.   Zoning districts



   503.   District boundaries



   504.   Districts



   505.   Permitted uses; Table A



   506.   Lot, yard and habitable living area requirements; Table B



   507.   Height regulations



   508.   Number of structures or buildings



   509.   Size regulations for retail sales structures



   510.   Traffic impact analysis



Article VI. Uses, Miscellaneous Uses, Performance Standards



   601.   Non-conforming uses



   602.   Accessory buildings and uses



   603.   Off-street parking; space requirements



   604.   Temporary structures



   605.   Home occupations



   606.   Off-street loading



   607.   Performance standards



   608.   Trailers and similar equipment



   609.   Manufactured homes



   610.   Sexually-oriented businesses



Article VII. Planned Unit Development Districts



   701.   Planned unit development



   702.   Objectives



   703.   Delegation



   704.   Procedure for Planned Unit Development District Ordinance
consideration



   705.   General requirements



   706.   Site and structure regulations



   707.   Usable open space



   708.   General standards



   709.   Permitted uses



   710.   Concept plan



   711.   PUD District Ordinance



   712.   Written commitments and infrastructure guarantees



   713.   Primary and secondary plat approval



   714.   Amending a PUD District Ordinance



   715.   Fees



   716.   General



Article VIII. Landscape and Fence Regulations



   801.   Intent and purposes



   802.   Applicability



   803.   Landscaping requirements



   804.   Selection, installation and maintenance of plant materials



   805.   Plan submission



   806.   Fences and hedges



Article IX. Business Communication Facilities



   901.   Purpose



   902.   Scope of application



   903.   General requirements



   904.   Communications facility permit required



   905.   Permit application procedures



Article X. Subdivision Regulations



Chapter 1. General



   1000-1.   Short title



   1000-2.   Purposes



   1000-3.   Applicability; compliance



   1000-4.   Effect of conflict with other laws



   1000-5.   Jurisdictional area



Chapter 2. Plat Submission Procedure



   1000-22.   Advisory meeting



   1000-23.   Primary plat



   1000-24.   Secondary plat



Chapter 3. Plat Specifications



   1000-36.   Sketch plan



   1000-37.   Primary plat



   1000-38.   Secondary plat



Chapter 4. Designs Standards



   1000-51.   Generally



   1000-52.   Natural features



   1000-53.   Streets



   1000-54.   Blocks



   1000-55.   Lots



   1000-56.   Easements



   1000-57.   Water and sewer systems



Chapter 5. Improvements



   1000-71.   Generally



   1000-72.   Monuments and markers



   1000-73.   Streets



   1000-74.   Storm drainage



   1000-75.   Water supply



   1000-76.   Sewers



   1000-77.   Utilities



   1000-78.   Landscape tree requirements



   1000-79.   Street signs



   1000-80.   Sidewalks



   1000-81.   Street lights and fire hydrants



   1000-82.   Sump drainage



Chapter 6. Dedication of Park and Recreational Lands



   1000-101.   Park lands required in subdivisions and PUDs



   1000-102.   General standard



   1000-103.   Formula for park and recreational land



Chapter 7. Plat Committee



   1000-111.   Established



   1000-112.   Appointments and terms



   1000-113.   Jurisdiction



   1000-114.   Adoption of rules



Article XI. Building Occupancy and Temporary Occupancy Permits



   1100-1.   Permits



   1000-2.   Fees



Article XII. Violations and Penalties



Appendix I. Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses



   BZA



   Plan Commission



   Planned Unit Development District Ordinances



Appendix II. Rules and Regulations of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission



   Art. I.   Meetings



   Art. II.   Officers and Employees



   Art. III.   Petition and Public Hearings



   Art. IV.   Agenda



   Art. V.   Conduct of Hearing



   Art. VI.   Disposition of Cases through Public Hearings



   Art. VII.   Final Disposition of Cases



   Art. VIII.   Amendments to or Suspension of Rules of Practice and
Procedure



   Check List A   For All Public Hearings



   Check List B   Subdivisions



   Check List C-A   PUD – Concept Plan Requirements



   Check List C-B   PUD District Ordinance – Written Text Portion



   Check List C-C   PUD District Ordinance – Drawing (Plat) Portion



   Check List D   For Issuance of Final Occupancy Permit



   Exhibit A   Petition to Plan Commission for a Change of Zoning Map



   Exhibit B   Petition to Plan Commission for Plattage of Property



   Exhibit C   Form of Notice to Property Owners within 300 Feet



   Exhibit D   Form of Acknowledged Delivered Notice on Owners of
Property Within 300 Feet



   Exhibit E   Notice of Public Hearing Before Plan Commission



   Exhibit F   Recommendation on a Petition for a Change in the
Chesterton Zoning Map Before Plan Commission



   Exhibit G   Finding and Action Taken on Petitioner’s Request for
Primary Plat Approval for a Subdivision before Plan Commission



   Exhibit H   Street Light and Fire Hydrant Agreement



   Exhibit I   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Infrastructure Guarantee



   Exhibit J   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Sidewalk Guarantee



   Exhibit K   Surety Bond Infrastructure Guarantee



   Exhibit L   Surety Bond Sidewalk Guarantee



   Exhibit M   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Infrastructure Maintenance
Guarantee



   Exhibit N   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Sidewalk Maintenance
Guarantee



   Exhibit O   Surety Bond Infrastructure Maintenance Guarantee



   Exhibit P   Surety Bond Sidewalk Maintenance Guarantee



   Exhibit Q   Petition for a Planned Unit Development District
Ordinance



   Exhibit R   Proposed Ordinance Establishing a PUD District



Appendix III. Rules of Practice and Procedure Chesterton Advisory Board of
Zoning Appeals



   Art. I.   Meetings



   Art. II.   Officers and Employees



   Art. III.   Hearings



   Art. IV.   Agenda



   Art. V.   Conduct of Hearing



   Art. VI.   Final Disposition of Cases



   Art. VII.   Written Commitments



   Art. VIII.   Termination or Revocation of Variance or Special
Exception



Editor’s note:



   This appendix was passed by Ord. 2001-03, passed 3-26-2001.



ARTICLE I. ZONING ORDINANCE BASIC PROVISIONS



TITLE.



   The official title of this appendix to the town code is the “Unified
Comprehensive Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance of Chesterton,
Indiana”.



SHORT TITLE.



   This appendix also may be referred to as the “Chesterton Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinance”.



EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This appendix shall take effect after its passage and publication
according to law.



AUTHORITY.



   This appendix is adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq. and I.C.
36-7-4-700 et seq.



COMPLIANCE.



   No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, converted or enlarged; nor shall any structure or land be used or be
designed to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of
this appendix and after the lawful issuance of any and all permits required
pursuant to this appendix.



SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of this appendix or the application of any provision
to particular circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance
or the application of such provision to other circumstances shall not be
affected.



JURISDICTIONAL AREA.



   This appendix shall apply to all incorporated land within the Town of
Chesterton, Indiana.



APPLICATION.



   It is not intended by this appendix to interfere with, abrogate or
amend any existing easements, covenants or other agreements between parties.
Where this appendix imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or real estate than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law
or by such rules, regulations, agreements, covenants or permits, the
provisions of this appendix shall control. All ordinances and parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed in their entirety,
including the Appendix A, Zoning, and Ch. 24, Subdivision Regulations of the
Town Code, as the same existed prior to the adoption of this appendix.



ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS



   For the purpose of this appendix, the definitions contained in this
article are to be observed and applied in the interpretation of all articles
in this appendix, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. The
following shall also apply:



      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;



      2.   Words used in the singular number include the plural
number;



      3.   Words in the plural number include the singular;



      4.   Words used in the masculine gender shall include the
feminine;



      5.   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory;



      6.   The word “person” shall mean an individual,
partnership, corporation or other association or their agents; and



      7.   Terms not defined in this section shall have the meanings
customarily assigned to them.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE. A building or use which:



      1.   Is clearly incidental to, subordinate to, customarily
found in connection with and serves a principal building or principal use;



      2.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
occupants of the principal building;



      3.   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the
principal building or principal use served;



      4.   Is located on the same lot as the principal building or
principal use served with the exception of accessory off-street parking
facilities as are permitted elsewhere on the same lot with the use or
structure; and



      5.   Is under the same ownership as the principal building or
principal use served.



      (For illustration, see BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.)



   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT BUILDING. A structure used to house equipment for
the operation, maintenance or repair of a wireless communications tower, in
which may also include electronic receiving, transmitting, relay equipment
and backup power-generating equipment.



   ACREAGE. Any tract or parcel of land which has not heretofore been
subdivided or platted.



   ADA. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.



   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for purposes of farming, pasturage,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry activities, and
the necessary accessory uses for parking, treating or storing the produce;
provided, however, that, the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to the normal agricultural activities. The term AGRICULTURE does
not include chemical storage or manufacturing associated with agriculture.



   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or
designed for navigation of or flight in the air.



   AIRPORT. Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use
for the landing and taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which
are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport
facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft
storage and tie-down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open
space.



   ALLEY. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.







   ALTERATION or REMODELING. Any change in the structural members,
stairways, basic construction, type, kind or class of occupancy, light or
ventilation, means of egress and ingress or any other change of an existing
building or structure affecting or regulated by the building code of the
town, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid
provisions.



   ANTENNA. A device used in communication which transmits or receives
radio, television, telephone or spectrum based signals. ANTENNAS may be
omni-directional (whip), directional (panel), dish (microwave type) and other
ancillary freestanding devices.



   APARTMENT. A part of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms
intended, designed or used as a complete housekeeping unit.



   APARTMENT HOUSE. A residential structure containing three or more
apartments.



   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES. Architectural features of a building shall
include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay winds,
chimneys and decorative ornaments.



   AUDITORIUM. A room or building assigned to the gathering of people as
an audience to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.



   AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body,
frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.



   AUTO REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor
service to automobiles, but excluding any operation specified under
“Automobile Repair, Major”.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A building or structure designed or used
for the retail sale or supply of fuels (stored only in underground tanks),
lubricants, air, water and other products for motor vehicles, aircraft or
boats, which building or structure may include the facilities for the
installation of such products on or in such vehicles, and also may include
space for storage, minor repair and servicing, but not bumping, painting,
refinishing, steam cleaning, rust-proofing, muffler installation where such
is the primary use of the premises, or facilities designed for washing of
more than two vehicles at a time.



   AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES. An open or enclosed area other than a
street used for the display and sale of new or used automobiles or trailers.
Outside storage of the vehicles for sale shall be allowed so long as the
vehicles are operable and in running condition. However, no public street or
right-of-way shall be used for the display and sale of new or used
automobiles or trailers.



   AUTOMOBILE WASH ESTABLISHMENT. A building or portion thereof, the
primary purpose of which is the washing of motor vehicles.



   AWNING. A structure made of cloth, metal or other material attached to
a building.







   BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or wholly below
grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to
the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the
ceiling. A BASEMENT shall not be counted as a story.



   BED AND BREAKFAST INNS. A one- or two-family dwelling, where rooms are
leased for the night with breakfast provided and where the owner is a
full-time resident of the dwelling. No kitchen facilities are to be made
available to the guests in BED AND BREAKFAST INNS. Any structure in the town
that is used totally or partially for leasing rooms by the night and contains
six or more guest rooms shall be considered a hotel or motel.



   BLOCK. Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the
two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets and railroad rights-of-way,
un-subdivided areas or other definite barrier.







   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel or motel, where meals, or
lodging and meals, are provided for compensation to three or more persons
other than members of the keeper’s immediate family by prearrangement for
definite periods of not less than one week, and where individual cooking
facilities are prohibited.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a lot after the setbacks,
easements and minimum open space requirements of this appendix have been
complied with. Additionally, wetlands must be subtracted from the overall
land before determining the BUILDABLE AREA.







   BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
and used or built for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or
property of any kind. In the event an additional structure is to be attached
to a principal structure which is of different use, it must be attached in a
substantial manner with the attachment being at least 50% of the common wall
for each structure. Said new structure must be of similar construction and no
higher than the original principal structure. Further, the new structure
cannot be more than 75% of the original structure building area when the use
is not the same as the original structure. An example of this is a garage
that is attached to an existing single- family residential structure. The
garage is a use that is not the same as that of the residential structure so
it could not be more than 75% of the original residential structure building
area. In the event it is not connected in a substantial manner as defined
herein, the new structure shall be considered as a separate principal
structure.



   BUILDING AREA. The footprint of the building or structure including
eaves, overhangs, steps, porches and decks more than one foot above grade.







   BUILDING COVERAGE. The area on a lot occupied by buildings and
structures, including accessory buildings. (For illustration, see LOT
COVERAGE.)



   BUILDING HEIGHT.



      1.   The vertical distance from the grade to:



         a.   The highest point of a flat roof;



         b.   The deck line of a mansard roof; or



         c.   The average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.



      2.   Chimneys, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar
projections, other than signs, shall not be included in calculating height.







   BUILDING LINE. A line established, in general, parallel to the front
lot line or right-of-way line, beyond which no part of a building shall
project, except as otherwise provided by this appendix. (For illustration,
see LOT.)



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is situated.







   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line extending across a lot establishing the
minimum open space to be provided between the front line of buildings and the
front lot line.



   BULK. A term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another and
including, but not limited to, the following:



      1.   Size and height of buildings;



      2.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to
lot lines;



      3.   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot lines,
lot size, streets and other buildings;



      4.   All open spaces allocated to the building site;



      5.   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit; and



      6.   Required parking areas.



   BUSINESS COMPLEX. For the purpose of determining allowable signs, a
single building, or series of buildings within a development, within which
two or more businesses, or non-residential tenants, are located.



   BUSINESS RECREATION. Any recreational function, activity or area that
is developed and operated for a profit, and will include any recreational
activity or area that is not owned, operated or sanctioned by the town’s
Department of Parks and Recreation or the Duneland YMCA or other similar
non-profit organizations.



   BUSINESS SCHOOLS. Beauty schools, barber schools, business schools,
trade schools or other similar schools that specialize in one or several
related subjects where a recognized college degree is not granted.



   BUSINESS WIRELESS SERVICE. Licensed business wireless telecommunication
services which include cellular, personal communication service (PCS),
specialized or enhanced mobile radio (SMR or ESMR), paging and similar
service licensed by the FCC and marketed to the general public.



   BZA. Chesterton Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.



   CANOPY. An open structure consisting of a roof or hood of permanent
construction supported separately from the primary building on a lot, for the
purpose of providing shelter and protection from the weather.







   CAPACITY IN PERSONS. Of an establishment or use is the maximum number
of persons that can avail themselves of the service (or goods) of such
establishment, at any time, with reasonable safety and comfort as determined
in the Building Code.



   CARPORT. A partially enclosed structure principally devoted to the
storage of motor vehicles.







   CHILD CARE CENTER. Any place, other than a family home, in which
persons receive child care services during any part of a day not exceeding 13
hours in any one 24-hour period and licensed pursuant to Indiana Code.



   CHILD CARE HOME. A home which is used to receive, for regular
compensation, less than six children (except those for whom the provider is a
parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian or other relative) for care during
any part of the day for more than four hours, but less than 24 hours, in each
of ten consecutive days per year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays.



   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street line.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. A building or portion thereof, the principal
use of which is for offices of physicians or dentists or both, for the
examination and treatment of persons on an out-patient basis.



   CLUB. An establishment operated for social, recreational or educational
purposes but open only to members and not the general public, but not
operated for profit.



   CO-LOCATION. A single site where equipment from multiple providers is
located.



   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A land use infrastructure including towers,
accessory buildings, power source and structures, supporting antennas or
other structures intended for the use in connection with business
transmission or receipt of radio or television signals, or any spectrum-based
transmissions/ receptions, along with backup power-generating equipment.



   COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. Any structure designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, cellular telephone and
wireless communication towers, alternative tower structures and the like.
Tower types include, but are not limited to, guyed steel towers, wooden
poles, “lattice” towers and “monopoles”.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Comprehensive Plan for the town adopted on
3-28-1994, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-500 et seq., as the same may be amended
from time to time.



   CONCEPT PLAN. A plan for the development of an entire parcel of land,
drawn to scale, that generally indicates densities, uses, open space and
infrastructure locations including all of the requirements for a concept plan
that are set forth in this appendix.



   CONDOMINIUM. A condominium is an ownership arrangement, not a land use;
therefore, it is allowed under the same restrictions in any given district as
the use that comprises it. In order to be a CONDOMINIUM, the real estate must
be owned and maintained in accordance with the Horizontal Property Law of the
state as found at I.C. 32-1-6 et seq.



   CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which complies with all use, bulk and
development standard requirements of this appendix.



   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME.



      1.   A home for the care of the aged or physically or mentally
disabled, wherein three or more persons are cared for, but not including
hospitals or clinics; and



      2.   Said home shall conform and qualify for license under
state laws even though state laws may not apply to such home because the
number of persons cared for as specified in this definition is less than the
number set forth in the state statutes.



   COUNTRY CLUB. Land area and buildings containing golf courses,
recreational facilities, a club house and customary uses only open to members
and their guests with the primary purpose being that of a social golf club.



   CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way which crosses a block to furnish
access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A street with one opening for ingress and egress, and
terminated by a vehicle turnaround.



   CURB LEVELS. The level of the established curbs in front of a building
or structure measured at the center of such front. Where no CURB LEVEL has
been established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the
centerline of the street surface in front of a building or structure,
measured at the centerline of such front.







   DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound level meters, which are employed to measure the intensity of sound, are
calibrated in DECIBELS.



   DESIGNED FAIL AREA. The area surrounding a tower in which the tower
could fall should it fail as structurally designed. The DESIGNED FAIL AREA is
quantified in terms of linear distance from the tower to the perimeter of the
DESIGNED FAIL AREA. This DESIGNED FAIL AREA shall be certified by a
structural engineer.



   DETENTION POND. A natural or artificial stormwater storage area outlet
to a regulated drain that is designed and maintained to temporarily contain
water only when excess stormwater run-off occurs.







   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A specific plan for the development of real property
that requires approval by the Plan Commission under the 1400 Series of I.C.
36-7-4, which includes a site plan, satisfies the development requirements
specified herein regarding development, and contains the plan documentation
and support information required by this appendix.



   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The trunk diameter of a tree in inches
measured four and one-half feet from the ground.



   DISPENSING DEVICE. Any mechanically or manually operated device for the
dispensing of merchandise such as, but not limited to, soft drinks, milk,
ice, candy, cigarettes, money or other items.



   DISTRICT. A portion or portions of the town within which uses of land
and buildings are permitted and wherein regulations and requirements apply
under the provisions of this appendix on a uniform basis.



   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment so developed that all
or any part of its retail or service character is dependent on providing a
driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles to serve patrons while
in the motor vehicle (e.g., restaurants, cleaners, banks, theaters).



   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof having cooking
facilities which is used or designed as a habitable unit. However, in no case
shall a manufactured home other than Type I, automobile chassis or tent be
considered a DWELLING UNIT. In case of mixed occupancy, where a building is
occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the parts so occupied shall be deemed a
DWELLING UNIT for the purpose of this appendix and shall comply with the
provisions thereof relative to dwellings.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building used or designed for three or more
dwelling units as a residence for three or more families living independently
of each other, or occupied by five or more unrelated persons living together
as a single housekeeping unit.



   DWELLING, ROW HOUSE OR TOWNHOUSE. A row of three or more attached
dwelling units, not more than two and one-half stories in height, each
dwelling having its own front and rear yards and entrances.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A single dwelling unit designed for and
occupied exclusively by one family.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for use by two
families living independently of each other.



   EASEMENT. An authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose. EASEMENTS are generally granted for the purpose
of providing public utilities, gas lines, electrical lines, in addition to
creek and/or ditch maintenance and the egress or ingress to a property.







   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room,
other than the bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly
off the principal room; provided, such dwelling unit shall contain not less
than 600 square feet of floor area.



   ENGINEER. The designated Town Engineer or engineering consultant of the
town.



   ERECTED. Includes the words built, constructed, reconstructed or any
physical operations on the premises required for the building. Building
excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of
ERECTION.



   EROSION. A wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water or gravity. All developmental activity that may result in EROSION shall
comply with the Federal Clean Water Act and 327 I.A.C. 15-5 (“Rule 5”).



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection or maintenance of public utilities,
municipal departments or commissions, or underground, surface or overhead
gas, communications, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, supply or disposal systems, including
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar
accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or
municipal departments for the general public health, safety, convenience or
welfare.



   EXCAVATING. The removal of sand, stone, gravel, clay or fill dirt below
the average elevation or the surrounding land or established grade.



   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit; provided
that, unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such FAMILY
shall contain over five persons; but, further provided that, domestic
servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being
counted as a FAMILY or FAMILIES.



   FENCE. A structure, other than a building, designed and constructed of
wood, metal, plastic or masonry, which is a barrier and used to enclose
property, or used as a boundary or means of protection.



   FILLING. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into the
ground, except such as is related to common household gardening.



   FLOOD or FLOOD WATER. The water of any lake or watercourse which is
above the banks and/or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse.
(See REGULATORY FLOOD.)



   FLOOD CONTROL. The prevention of floods, the control, regulation,
diversion or confinement of flood water or flood flow, and the protection
therefrom, according to sound and accepted engineering practice, to minimize
the extent of floods, and the death, damage and destruction caused thereby.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any floodplain or portion thereof, which has not
been adequately protected from flood water by means of dikes, levees,
reservoirs or other works approved by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources Commission.







   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest point around the
perimeter of a building at which flood water may enter the interior of the
building.



   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel
of a river or stream which has been or may be covered by flood water. The
FLOODPLAIN includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe.



   FLOOD-PROOFED BUILDING. A commercial or industrial building designed to
exclude flood waters from the interior of that building. All such
floodproofing shall be adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the
regulatory flood.



   FLOODWAY.



      1.   The channel of the stream or body of water and that
portion of the floodplain that is inundated by a flood and used to carry the
flood flow; and



      2.   The floodway district is that area designated as a
“regulatory floodway” by the state’s Department of Natural Resources
and under the jurisdiction of the state’s Natural Resources Commission.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the flood hazard area lying outside
the floodway.



   FLOOR AREA.



      1.   For the purposes of computing the minimum allowable FLOOR
AREA, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.



      2.   The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of
basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed and
unenclosed porches.







   FLOOR AREA, USABLE. For the purposes of computing required parking
spaces, is that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of
merchandise or services or for serving patrons, clients or customers. Such
floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage
or processing of merchandise or for utilities shall be excluded from this
computation of usable floor area.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building, used for the storage of self propelled vehicles for the use of the
occupants of the lot on which the garage is located and with a capacity of
not more than three motor vehicles. This definition includes storage on any
one lot, for the occupants thereof, of not more than one commercial vehicle
not exceeding a rated capacity of two tons.



   GRADE OR AVERAGE GROUND LEVEL. The established grade shall be the
average elevation of the finished ground surface adjacent to the walls or
foundation of the principal building on a lot.



   GREENBELT or BUFFER STRIP. A strip of vegetated land of definite width
and location planted with shrubs and/or trees serving as an obscuring screen
or buffer; or protecting sensitive natural areas such as streams and wetlands.



   HALF STREET. One side of a street divided longitudinally by a property
line.



   HEALTH BOARD. The State Board of Health.



   HEDGE. A row of closely planted shrubs forming a boundary or barrier.



   HOME OCCUPATION.



      1.   An occupation carried on in a dwelling by a resident
thereof, not involving:



         a.   The conduct of a retail business or manufacturing
business;



         b.   Structural additions, enlargements or exterior
alterations changing the residential appearance to a business appearance;



         c.   Exterior storage of equipment or materials used in
connection with the home occupation;



         d.   Provision for more than one extra off-street
parking space other than the requirements and the permitted facilities of the
zone district. No part of a minimum required setback distance shall be used
for off-street parking or loading facilities, and not additional driveway to
serve such home occupations shall be permitted;



         e.   Substantial increases in vehicular traffic to and
from the home occupation location;



         f.   The creation of vibrations or other like nuisances;
and



         g.   Permanent signage which exceeds two square feet per
sign, subject to the provisions of Article IV of this appendix.



      2.   Permitted home occupations shall be of a personal service
nature limited to domestic crafts and professional service, including, but
not limited to:



         a.   Such domestic crafts as dressmaking and hair
grooming;



         b.   Such professions as consulting, music, painting and
tutoring; or



         c.   Child care facilities which meet the state
regulations and the number of children cared for in a one-day period of time
does not exceed five children not immediately related to the home owner and
living on the premises.



      3.   For purposes of this appendix, clinics, doctor’s
offices, dress shops, funeral homes, tourist homes, animal clinics, kennels,
trailer rentals and the like shall not be deemed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.



      4.   Each home occupation shall be required to obtain a
business registration permit at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office in accordance
with § 12-4 of this code of ordinances.



   HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services, primarily for
patients who remain overnight, and medical and surgical care of the sick or
injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related
facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities,
central service facilities and staff offices.



   HOTEL. A building occupied or used for the lodging of individuals or
groups of individuals with or without meals, and in which there are more than
six sleeping rooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any
guest room.



   ILLEGAL NON-CONFORMING SIGN. Any sign, other than a legal
non-conforming sign, which does not conform to the requirements of Article IV
of this appendix.



   ILLEGAL NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any building or structure, other than
a legal non- conforming structure, which does not now conform to the
development standard requirements, including those of bulk, of this appendix.



   ILLEGAL NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of land or a structure, other than
a legal non- conforming use, which does not now conform to the use regulation
of the zoning district in which it is located.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface, including among other elements
streets, sidewalks and structures, which does not allow for the percolation
of water through it.



   JUNK YARD.



      1.   Any open lot, open structure, open premises or parts
thereof used for the storage, keeping or abandonment of any worn out,
cast-off or discarded or abandoned article, material, vehicle, automobile and
machinery, or parts thereof, which is ready for destruction or sale or has
been collected for storage as salvage or conversion to some use including but
not limited to scrap metal, paper, wood, cordage or other waste, or discarded
materials, articles, vehicles, automobiles and machinery or parts thereof, or
vehicles or automobiles that are inoperable or incapable of movement by their
own locomotion or power, and have been inoperable for 30 days, or vehicles or
automobiles without a valid current state registration and license plate
issued to said vehicle or automobile to the occupant, owner, purchaser,
lessor, lessee or tenant of any lot, building or structure therein or thereon
situated.



      2.   All junk yards shall be required to provide for all
storage to be screened from view by an eight-foot fence.



   LABORATORY. A place devoted to experimental or routine study, such as
testing and analytical operations; also included in this definition would be
dental or medical laboratories where products might be manufactured for
dentists or doctors, but in which general manufacturing of product or
products are not permitted.



   LEGAL NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign which, although legal at the time
erected, does not conform to the requirements of Article IV of this appendix.



   LEGAL NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or structure, although legal
when built or constructed, does not now conform to the development standard
requirements, including those of bulk, of this appendix.



   LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of land or a structure which,
although legal at the time the use was commenced, does not now conform to the
use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.



   LOADING SPACE. All off-street space on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, for temporary parking for a business vehicle while
loading and unloading merchandise or materials.



   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one principal
structure and its accessory buildings with such open spaces and off-street
parking spaces as are required by the provisions of this appendix and having
frontage on a public street.







   LOT AREA.



      1.   The area of any lot exclusive of street, highway, alley,
road or other right-of-way;



      2.   Easements are considered to be part of the lot area; and



      3.   For illustration, see LOT DEPTH.



   LOT CORNER.



      1.   A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets
or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street, two chords of which form
an angle of 135 degrees or less.



      2.   The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the
“corner”.



      3.   In the case of a corner lot with curved street lines, the
corner is that point of intersection of the chords described above.



   LOT COVERAGE. The percent of lot area that may be occupied by buildings
and accessory structures including, but not limited to, pools, decks, tennis
courts, carports, sheds and the like.







   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the
rear lot line.







   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontages on two more or
less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a
row of double frontage lots, one street may be designated as the front street
for all lots in the plat. (See LOT, THROUGH. For illustration, see BLOCK.)



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot. Any portion of a corner
lot more than 120 feet from the “corner” measured along a front street
lot line, shall be considered an interior lot; provided, such portion is of
sufficient width, length and area to meet the minimum requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located. (For illustration, see BLOCK.)



   LOT LINES. The property lines bounding the lot. (For illustration, see
LOT.)



   LOT LINE, FRONT. Any lot line which is a street line; except that, in
the case of a corner lot, the FRONT LINE is the shorter of the two
intersecting lines. In the case of a double frontage lot, all lot lines which
are street lines shall be considered FRONT LOT LINES unless otherwise
designated in the plat.



   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line of the lot and, in the case of an irregular or triangular
shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the
maximum distance from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a side street lot
line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
INTERIOR SIDE LOT LINE.



   LOT LINE, STREET OR ALLEY. A lot line separating the lot from the
right-of-way of a street or an alley.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a division of a lot or a parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which have been so recorded
in the office of the County Recorder.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one street. (See LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. For illustration, see BLOCK.)



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two points where the building line, or setback, intersects the side
lot lines. (For illustration, see LOT DEPTH.)



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for assembly at the building site, bearing a seal
certifying that it is built in compliance with either the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code of Indiana, Pub.
Law No. 360, Acts of 1971, as promulgated by the Indiana Administrative
Building Council (HUD seal); or CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
(Modular Unit seal), Pub. Law No. 360. Only manufactured structures bearing
these seals shall be allowed for residential use without a variance from the
town’s Board of Zoning Appeals.



   MANUFACTURING, GENERAL. The manufacturing, processing, assembling,
fabrication or repair of any materials or products where no continuous
process involved will produce noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, air
pollution, water pollution, heat, glare, waste matter, odor or fire hazard
which will disturb or endanger any neighboring property and where some
operations and storage may be in open spaces, which are fenced in from
adjoining properties.



   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. The manufacturing, processing, assembly,
fabrication or repairing of certain materials or products where no process
involved will produce noise, vibration, electrical disturbances, air
pollution, water pollution, heat, glare, waste matter, odor or fire hazard
which will disturb or endanger any neighboring property and where all
operations and storage are entirely within enclosed buildings or areas.



   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A structure or group of structures containing
individual storage units of 300 square feet or less with access to each unit
only for the storage and warehousing of personal property. MINI-WAREHOUSES do
not include the following activities: wholesaling, retailing, servicing,
assembling or repair of household or business goods in conjunction with
storage. Storage of chemicals, flammable solvents and the like are not
permitted in any mini storage facility. Perishable food/produce or
odorous/noxious material are not permitted.



   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure larger than 320 square feet,
designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to
the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act
of 1974, which became effective for all mobile home construction 6-15-1976.



   MOTEL. A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space and in which kitchen or cooking
facilities may be provided. Units shall contain not less than 250 square feet
of floor space; provided, however, that, for those units with kitchens or
kitchenettes a total of 300 square feet of floor space in each rental unit
shall be provided.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or premise in which freight is
received and dispatched by motor vehicle.



   MUSEUM. A building or place where art, artifacts, cultural items or
other objects of permanent public value are kept and displayed. Additionally,
the building or place must be conducted by a not-for- profit organization,
legally existing in the state, accessible to the general public and not
utilized more than 5% of the floor area for sale of merchandise.



   NOXIOUS MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals.



   NURSING, SHELTER, CARE OR REST HOME. An establishment for the care of
children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
disorder, but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or
injuries or for surgical care.



   OCCUPANCY. The occupation or use of a building, or parts thereof, by
any party.



   OCTAVE BAND. A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into
octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.



   ODOROUS MATTER. Any matter or material that yields an odor, which is
offensive in any way.



   OFFICE. A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, industry or government generally furnished
with desks, tables, files, communication equipment and the like.



   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA. Land which is improved and used, or a
structure which is designed and used exclusively for the storage of passenger
motor vehicles, either for accessory off-street parking spaces or business
off-street parking spaces when permitted herein by district regulations.



   OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A lot, or portion thereof, devoted to parking
spaces for motor vehicles along with adequate drives and aisles for
maneuvering to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more
than two automobiles.



   ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE. The nationally recognized model
building code prepared by the Council of American Building Officials, adopted
by the Indiana Administrative Building Council (ABC) and which includes those
supplements and amendments thereto.



   OPEN AIR MARKET. The retail sales of fruits, vegetables, perishable
foods and other home garden supplies and equipment when operated for a profit
and not conducted from a wholly enclosed building.



   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment. Such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.



   PARK BOARD. Chesterton Board of Park and Recreation.



   PARK DEPARTMENT. Chesterton Department of Parks and Recreation.



   PARKING AREA.



      1.   An area which is designed or used for the parking of one
automobile or motor vehicle, such space being exclusive of necessary drives,
aisles, entrances or exits and being fully accessible for the storage or
parking of permitted vehicles.



      2.   However, the location and size of handicapped parking
spaces shall conform with federal and state law.



   PARTICULATE MATTER. Dust, smoke or any form of airborne pollution in
the form of minute separate particles.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criteria established to control smoke and
particulate matter, noise, odorous matter, toxic matter, vibration, fire and
explosion hazards, glare and radiation hazards generated by, or inherent in,
uses of land or buildings.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). The development of an area of land as a
single entity for a variety of dwelling units and/or other uses, which may
not correspond in use, lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot
coverage and required open space to the regulations otherwise required by
this appendix.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (PUD ORDINANCE). A zoning ordinance
that does the following:



      1.   Designates a parcel of real property as a PUD District;



      2.   Specifies uses or a range of uses permitted in the PUD
District;



      3.   Specifies development requirements in the PUD District;



      4.   Specifies the planned documentation and supporting
information that may be required;



      5.   Specifies any limitation applicable to a PUD District; and



      6.   Meets the requirements of the 1500 Series of I.C. 36-7-4.



   PLAT. A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land, intended to be filed for record.



   PORCH, ENCLOSED. A covered entrance to a building or structure which
restricts the free entry of air, natural light or view by means of
permanently installed fixtures, and which projects out from the main wall of
said building or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with
the principal building or structure to which it is attached.



   PORCH, OPEN. An entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed
except for columns supporting the porch roof and railing which may be
attached thereto, and which projects out from the main wall of said building
or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.



   PRIMARY APPROVAL. The conferral of certain rights pursuant to this
appendix after specific elements of a plan have been agreed upon by the
town’s Advisory Plan Commission.



   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein. (For
illustration, see LOT.)



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department
duly authorized to furnish, pursuant to law, to the public, including, but
not limited to, cable telecommunications, electricity, natural gas,
telephone, telegraph, transportation, water or sewer.



   PUBLIC WAY. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other thoroughfare
dedicated to the use of the public. For purpose of this definition, PUBLIC
WAY shall mean only the actual surfaced area used by vehicles and person as
distinguished from the right-of-way which incorporates and is a larger area
than the public way.



   RADIO-FREQUENCY EMISSION (RF). A non-ionizing electromagnetic energy
used to transmit communications signals through space.



   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land containing tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operations, but not including depots, loading platforms,
train sheds, workhouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or water
towers.



   REAR YARD DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A drainage system through which storm water
runoff is conveyed from rear lot lines to a municipal drainage system by
means of drainage inlets and pipes.







   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A portable vehicular structure not built to 1974
federal standards for mobile homes or the ANSI 119.1 Mobile Home Design and
Construction Standards, as amended, designed for travel, recreational camping
or vacation purposes, either having its own motor power or mounted onto or
drawn by another vehicle, and including, but not limited to, travel and
camping trailers, truck campers and motor homes.



   REGULATED DRAIN. A ditch, storm sewer or swale that is located on a
right-of-way or other property which is regulated by public authority such as
the town’s Department of Storm Water Management, the county’s Drainage
Board, the state’s Department of Natural Resources or the Army Corp of
Engineers.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a peak discharge which can be
expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year
period, as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and
approved by the state. This flood is equivalent to a flood having a
probability of occurrence of 1% in any given year.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROFILE. A longitudinal profile along the thread of a
stream showing the maximum water surface attained by the regulatory flood.



   RINGELMANN CHART. A chart which is described in the U.S. Bureau of
Mines, Information Circular 6888, and on which are illustrated graduated
shades of grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke.



   RESEARCH LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings in which are
located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products,
except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.



   RETAIL SALES. Business practices which provide products and services
for the exchange of legal tender. Further, PRIMARY RETAIL SALES shall not
include the sale of or distribution of any form of pornographic material or
services. The use classification for a retail sales operation is determined
by the primary use of the operation.



   RETENTION POND. A stormwater storage area that is designated and
maintained to contain water when excess storm water occurs.







   RETIREMENT VILLAGE. A business venture for the establishment of a
retirement village for senior citizens that will provide for the privacy of
the individual residents in private dwelling units, but also including such
basic services as barber shops, beauty shops, gift shops, pharmacies and a
centralized kitchen and dining area. A RETIREMENT VILLAGE must also meet all
of the following criteria:



      1.   Have a centralized kitchen and dining area to accommodate
all occupants of the facility;



      2.   Have a full-time staff member present on site;



      3.   Comply with all ADA requirements;



      4.   Have a maximum of two persons per unit; and



      5.   At least one occupant of each unit must be at least 55
years of age.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
transportation facilities, public utilities or other special public uses.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency
shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat on which such
right-of-way is established.



   ROADSIDE FOOD SALE STAND. A temporary structure designed or used for
the display or sale of agricultural and other food products to the motoring
public.



   SATELLITE DISH. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish,
cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or
receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrial or orbitally based
uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are
commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television reception
only satellite dish antennas) and satellite microwave antennas.



   SECONDARY APPROVAL. The official action taken by the Plan Commission
after all conditions, engineering, plans and other requirements of any plat
given primary approval have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their
completion at the time of secondary plat approval, all as provided for in
this appendix.



   SENSITIVE OR UNIQUE NATURAL AREA. Any physical, vegetative, topographic
or hydrologic natural feature that is unique to this area or environmentally
sensitive.



   SERVICE STRUCTURES. Equipment or elements over four feet in height
providing service to a building or structure, including, but not limited to,
dumpsters, lift stations, utility vaults, air conditioning units, propane
tanks and any other apparatus used for similar purposes as the aforementioned.



   SETBACK. A line established by this appendix, generally parallel with
and measured from the lot line (property line), defining the limits of a yard
in which no building, other than a permitted accessory building or structure
may be located, except as otherwise provided in this appendix. (For
illustration, see LOT.)



   SHOPPING CENTER. An integral planned business development with a single
ownership or management, or under unified control, and developed and operated
principally for retail merchandising.



   SIGN. Any device or visual communication, when the display of this
device or visual communication is visible from any public right-of-way. The
definition of SIGN does not include anything inside of a building, murals,
fences, lawn ornaments or decorations.







   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign any part of which is electrically or
mechanically activated.



   SIGN, BENCH. A sign attached to or painted upon a bench or seat which
is located outside a building or structure. (For illustration, see SIGN.)



   SIGN, BILLBOARD. A sign which is a separate structure permanently
attached to a building, the ground or attached to a permanent structure
having a location upon the ground.



   SIGN, BONA FIDE TRIGGERING EVENT. A bona fide triggering event is an
occurrence which allows an owner or occupant to post an additional number of
temporary signs on the owner or occupant’s real property for a period of
time.



   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign whereon provision is made for letters or
characters to be placed in or upon the surface area either manually or
electronically to provide a message, illustration, picture or display. (For
illustration, see SIGN.)



   SIGN, DYNAMIC.  Any sign, the characteristics of which appear to
change, caused by any method other than physically removing or replacing the
sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the
display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of the sign.



   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign in which the illumination intermittently flashes
off and on, in whole or in part, including an animated sign. (For
illustration, see SIGN.)



   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign completely or principally self-supported by
posts or other supports independent of any building or other structure and
anchored in or upon the ground. (For illustration, see SIGN.)



   SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA. The maximum area enclosed within a connected
geometric shape completely enclosing, as a single unit, the shape of the sign
face including both copy, background and any frame or boxed display. Where a
sign has two or more display faces, the area of all faces will determine the
GROSS SURFACE AREA OF THE SIGN. The supporting structure of a sign that is
not enclosed within the connected geometric shapes will not be considered as
part of the GROSS SURFACE AREA OF THE SIGN.







   SIGN, ILLUMINATED (EXTERNAL). A sign illuminated by an external source
which is cast upon the surface of the sign.



   SIGN, ILLUMINATED, (INTERNAL). A light source contained within the sign
itself which becomes visible in darkness, by shining through a translucent
surface.



   SIGN, MONUMENT. Any ground-mounted sign with a base, which sign has a
maximum height, including the base, of eight feet as measured from existing,
pre-construction (unaltered) grade.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure or the ground and is generally designed to be moved from place to
place including sandwich signs, trailer signs and vehicle signs. (For
illustration, see SIGN.) These signs include, but are not limited to, signs
attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and/or
movable; paper, cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around or attached to
supporting poles; signs temporarily attached to cars, vans or other motor
vehicles when the vehicle is parked in a position to call attention to a
place of business, service or event.



   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign supported by a building or other structure
which projects over any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or easement, or
which projects more than 12 inches from the face of the building, structure
or supporting wall, including an overhanging sign. (For illustration, see
SIGN.)



   SIGN, PUBLIC. A sign, either permanent or temporary, which is
authorized and erected by public officials of the United States, the state or
the town for the public safety, health and welfare, including, but not
limited to, traffic signs, other municipal signs, railroad crossing signs,
danger, warning and other signs.



   SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected, constructed or maintained in whole or in
part upon or over the roof of a building or structure. (For illustration, see
SIGN.)



   SIGN, SANDWICH. A two-sided sign of a temporary nature not exceeding
ten square feet per side.



   SIGN, SPECIALITY.  Any visual device, such as a banner, flag, pennant,
spinner, streamer, feather sign, moored bump, gas balloon or any other sign
not otherwise defined by this chapter.



   SIGN, STREET NUMBER. The numerals that correspond with the address of
the lot, building or structure. These are subject to the requirements and
restrictions of Article VII of this appendix.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A temporary sign is characterized by materials,
construction, design and placement that allow the sign to be easily removed
and carried away. A TEMPORARY SIGN may not be attached to any structure,
affixed to the real estate or otherwise be permanent in nature.



   SIGN, WALL-MOUNTED. A sign affixed to any exterior surface of a
building. (For illustration, see SIGN.)



   SIGN, WALL-PAINTED. A sign painted on any exterior surface of a
building.



   SOIL FILL. Addition of any kind of soil or earth matter, including
topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, rock or similar materials or a combination
thereof, utilized to raise the elevation of land and/or to alter drainage
patterns.



   SOIL REMOVAL. Removal of any kind of soil or earth matter, including
topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, rock or similar materials, or combination
thereof, except such as is related to common household gardening and
agriculture.



   STORY. The portion of a building, except as hereinafter provided,
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or
if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it and including cellars and basements used for dwelling
or business purposes. A “mezzanine” shall be deemed a full STORY when it
covers more than 50% of the horizontal area of the story underneath said
mezzanine or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the
floor next above it is 24 feet or more.



   STORY, HALF. The part of a building between a pitched roof and the
uppermost full story, said part having a finished floor area which does not
exceed one-half the floor area of said uppermost full story or a basement not
used for dwelling or business purposes.



   STREET. A thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and a
principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way,
drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except an
alley. Improved public streets are those constructed according to standards
existing at the time of new construction.



   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street designated on the official thoroughfare plan
as “arterial”. Such streets are designated to carry large volumes of
traffic. Certain ARTERIAL STREETS may be designated as limited access
highways to which entrances and exits are provided only at controlled
intersections and access is denied to abutting properties.



   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street planned to facilitate the collection of
traffic from local streets and to provide circulation within neighborhood
areas and convenient ways for traffic to reach arterial streets. Such streets
are designated as “collector” on the official thoroughfare plan.



   STREET, LOCAL. A street designated primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.



   STREET, LOCAL COLLECTOR. A local street lying within a subdivision
which, although not shown as a collector on the official thoroughfare plan,
is built to collector specification and standards at the request of the
Commission.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground,
excluding only sidewalks and driveways.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change, other than incidental repairs,
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building such as
the addition, removal or alteration of bearing wall, columns, beams, girders
or foundations.



   SUBDIVIDER. A person engaged in developing or improving a tract of land
which complies with the definition of a subdivision. The SUBDIVIDER must be
the owner of the land to be subdivided.



   SUBDIVISION.



      1.   The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land, or
a part thereof, into more than two lots, tracts, or parcels of land for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership for
residential, business or industrial purposes; or the division of a single
lot, tract or parcel of land, or a part thereof, into more than two lots,
tracts or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building
development for mobile homes, residential, business or industrial purposes;
notwithstanding the above, and any one division of land into two lots, tracts
or parcels of land shall preclude further division of such lot, tract or
parcel of land by any other person; provided, however, that, this definition
shall not include division of land for agricultural purposes only, or the
sale of lots or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners that does
not create additional building sites. In determining whether land has been
divided pursuant to this definition, this definition shall apply to land as
it existed as of the date of passage of Ord. 92-03 which is 1-27-1992. Any
division of land from and after the passage of the above mentioned ordinance
which is 1-27-1992 shall fall within the definition of subdivision as set
forth above.



      2.   The following kinds of divisions are not SUBDIVISIONS and
are exempt from the rules of this appendix:



         a.   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or
tracts to correct errors in an existing legal description; provided that, no
additional principal use building sites are created by the division; and



         b.   A division of land for federal, state or local
government to acquire street right-of-way.



   SUPPLY YARDS. A business establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and
similar goods. SUPPLY YARDS do not include the wrecking, salvaging,
dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.



   SWIMMING POOL. Any body of water or receptacle for water having a depth
of two feet or more at any point and maintained by the owner or manager for
swimming purposes, to be governed under the regulations of the municipal code
for the town concerning SWIMMING POOLS.



   TEMPORARY BUILDING AND USE. A structure or use permitted by the
Building Commissioner to exist during periods of construction or
rehabilitation of the main building or used for special events, and shall be
used only during the period of construction or rehabilitation or special
event. In the event more than one storage trailer is to be used, then a
variance must be obtained from the Board.



   THEATER. Any building or structure which is designed or used primarily
to show business movies or plays for a profit.



   THOROUGHFARE. A public way or public place. This term includes the
entire right-of-way for public use of the thoroughfare and all surface and
subsurface improvements on it such as sidewalks, curbs, shoulders and utility
lines, and mains.



   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The development plan for the town now or hereafter
adopted, which includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth the
location, alignment, dimensions, identification and classification of
existing and proposed streets, highways and other thoroughfares.



   TOWER. See COMMUNICATIONS TOWER.



   TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance from ground level to the highest
point of the tower assembly or attached antenna or similar device, including
any attached communications facilities.



   TOWER SETBACK. The horizontal distance from the base of a tower to an
abutting property line, right-of-way, road, easement or structure.



   TOWN. The Town of Chesterton, Indiana.



   TOWN COUNCIL. Chesterton Town Council.



   TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL. A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which
by reason of an inherent deleterious property tends to destroy life or impair
health.



   TRAILER. Any vehicle, house-car, camp-car or any portable or mobile
vehicle on wheels, skids, rollers or blocks, either self-propelled or
propelled by any other means, which is used or designed to be used for
residential living, sleeping, business or construction purposes and herein
referred to as a TRAILER.



   TREE. A perennial woody plant, that ordinarily has one main stem or
trunk, develops many branches and grows to a height of 20 feet or more.



   TREES, LARGE. Those capable of attaining a height of 45 feet or more at
maturity.



   TREES, MEDIUM. Those capable of attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet at
maturity.



   TREES, SMALL. Those capable of attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet at
maturity.



   TREE PIT. The planting area located within a pedestrian walkway that is
intended for the tree growth.



   USABLE OPEN SPACE. Permanently reserved open space which is provided as
required by this appendix for the use of residents of dwellings or the
general public.



   USE. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or
leased.



   USE, LAWFUL. The use of any structure or land that conforms with all of
the regulations of this appendix, or any amendment thereto, and which
conforms with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements as
existing at the time of the enactment of this appendix, or any amendment
thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined.



   VEHICULAR USE AREAS (VUA). Any open or unenclosed area containing more
than 1,800 square feet of area and/or used by five or more of any type of
vehicle, whether moving or at rest, including, but not limited to, parking
lots, loading/unloading areas and sales and service areas. Driveways are
considered VEHICULAR USE AREAS whenever they are adjacent to public streets
or other vehicular use elements and where intervening curbs, sidewalks or
landscape strips do not eliminate adjacency.



   VETERINARY ANIMAL CLINIC. A place used for the care, diagnosis and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals and those who are in
need of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight
accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and or
recuperation. It may also include boarding that is incidental to the
principal activity or use.



   WAREHOUSE. Any building or structure in which the primary function of
the building or structure is to store materials or products for use at a
later date, excluding retail or wholesale sales even if secondary to the
principal use of storage.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. The technology by which communication or radio
signals are transmitted or received from one communication source to another.
This includes portable units, mobile units, fixed land based units, of
satellite radio, telephone or television, whether analog or digital, and not
otherwise exempted by federal regulations.



   YARD. The area of a lot not occupied by any building or structure.







   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending the full length of a front lot line, the
depth of which is the minimum distance between the front lot line and the
nearest part of the main building. (For illustration, see YARD.)



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full length of a rear lot line, the
depth of which is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and the
nearest part of the main building. On lots abutting streams, the REAR YARD
shall be considered the area between the main building and said stream. (For
illustration, see YARD.)



   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
yard and the rear yard, the width of which is the minimum distance between
the side lot line and the nearest part of the main building. (For
illustration, see YARD.)



   ZONING DISTRICTS. The districts into which the town has been divided
for zoning regulations and requirements as set forth in the zoning district
map.



   ZONING MAP. The map or maps incorporated into this appendix as part
thereof, designating zoning districts.



(Ord. 2009-17, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord.
2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



ARTICLE III. TOWN BOARDS, ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS



§ 301  TOWN COUNCIL.



   The Town Council is the legislative and executive branch of town
government. The Town Council’s powers and duties with respect to this
appendix of the town are as follows:



   A.   Hear and take final action, in its discretion, on the
Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto, the comprehensive zoning ordinance
and amendments thereto, PUD ordinances and amendments thereto, and
subdivision ordinances and amendments thereto;



   B.   Make appointments, fill vacancies and remove, if appropriate,
members of Plan Commission, BZA, Plat Committee and town employees under its
jurisdiction, all in accordance with state law;



   C.   The Town Council delegates its authority to name and rename
streets to its Plan Commission; and



   D.   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1015, as the same shall be amended from
time to time, the Town Council specifies that written commitments may be
required or allowed for proposals submitted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-608, as
the same shall be amended from time to time, and also for proposals for PUD
District ordinances. The procedures for the making, modification or
termination of a written commitment for proposals submitted under I.C.
36-7-4-608 and for PUD District ordinances are as follows.



      1.   Creation. A written commitment shall be created by either
the petitioner, the Town Council or the Plan Commission.



      2.   Form. A written commitment shall be in written form and
included as part of the petition and ordinance for a proposal submitted under
I.C. 36-7-4-608 and, in the case of PUD District ordinances, shall be in
written form and detailed on the written portion of the PUD District
ordinance and also on the plat of development for the PUD District in
recordable form acceptable to the office of the Recorder of the county.



      3.   Enforcement. Written commitments as allowed hereunder may
be enforceable by the Town Council, its Plan Commission or any property owner
within the land covered by a proposal submitted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-608
or, in the case of PUD District ordinances, any property owner within the PUD
District or any property owner within 300 feet of the preceding. Enforcement
by the owners of property within the PUD or property owners within the 300
feet of a PUD District are determined to be classes of specially affected
persons who may enforce a written commitment by the seeking of an injunction
and/or damages in a court of competent jurisdiction. The Town Council and/or
its Plan Commission is also considered a class of specially affected persons
who may enforce a written commitment concerning proposals under I.C.
36-7-4-608 or a PUD District ordinance. Additionally, the Town Council or its
Plan Commission may, through the Town Attorney, file suit against the
offending party in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking a restraining
order, temporary or permanent injunction, damages and also a fine of up to
$2,500 per day for each violation of an existing written commitment which is
deemed to be a violation of this appendix. Finally, no building or occupancy
permit shall be issued for land within the PUD District or property under
I.C. 36-7-4-608,  while a violation of any written commitment exists.



      4.   Notice and hearing. The notice and hearing required for
the granting, amending or termination of a written commitment shall be part
of the process for proposals under I.C. 36-7-4-608 and PUD District
ordinances. No termination or modification of a written commitment may be had
unless a public hearing is held by the Plan Commission, with due notice to
all parties located within 300 feet of a proposal pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-608
or parties located within 300 feet of the PUD District and given at least ten
days before the day set for the hearing. The rules of the Plan Commission
shall apply in determining how notice is to be given to interested parties
and who is required to give that notice.



      5.   Recording.



         a.   All written commitments made pursuant to the town
code shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and take effect
upon approval of the proposal. Unless a commitment is modified or terminated
in accordance with the procedures specified in this appendix, a commitment is
binding upon:



            1.   The owner of the parcel;



            2.   A subsequent owner of the parcel; and



            3.   A person who acquires an interest in the
parcel.



         b.   An unrecorded commitment is binding upon the owner
of the parcel. An unrecorded commitment is binding on a subsequent owner of
the parcel or a person acquiring an interest in the parcel only if the
subsequent owner or the person acquiring the interest has actual notice of
the commitment.



      6.   Validity. No written commitment shall affect the validity
of any covenant, easement, equitable servitude or other land use restriction
in accordance with the law.



   E.   The Town Council shall also have all other powers and duties as
allowed by state law.



§ 302  PLAN COMMISSION.



   A.   Establishment. The Plan Commission is hereby reestablished
pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-202, as the same shall be amended from time to time.



   B.   Composition, jurisdiction and appointment. The Plan Commission
shall consist of seven members whose jurisdiction, appointment and term shall
be as set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-200 et seq., as the same shall be amended from
time to time.



   C.   Organization. At the first meeting of each year, the Plan
Commission shall elect a President and a Vice-President from among its
members, and it may appoint and affix the compensation of a Secretary and
such employees as are necessary for the discharge of its duties, all in
conformity to and compliance with the salaries and compensation fixed by the
Town Council.



   D.   Rules of procedure. The Plan Commission shall adopt rules
concerning the filing of all petitions before it, the giving of notice, the
conducting of hearings, and all other matters within its jurisdiction. The
rules of practice and procedure of the Plan Commission are attached to this
appendix as an appendix. These rules may be changed at any time by the Plan
Commission by a majority vote of the entire membership without the necessity
of a public hearing being held. Any such changes will automatically be deemed
a change in this appendix.



   E.   Meetings and records. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall
be open to the public, unless executive sessions are conducted in accordance
with state law. The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings and
all official actions, prepare written findings of fact when required, and
record the vote of each member voting upon each question. All minutes and
records shall be filed at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and shall be
public records.



   F.   Powers and duties. The Plan Commission shall have the following
powers and it shall be its duty to:



      1.   Make recommendations to the Town Council concerning:



         a.   The adoption of a Comprehensive Plan and amendments
to the Comprehensive Plan;



         b.   The adoption or text amendment of:



            1.   An initial zoning ordinance;



            2.   A replacement zoning ordinance; and



            3.   A subdivision control ordinance.



         c.   The adoption or amendment of a PUD District
ordinance; and



         d.   Zoning map changes.



      2.   Render decisions concerning and approve plats, replats
and amendments to plat subdivisions under I.C. 36-7-4-700 et seq., as the
same shall be amended from time to time;



      3.   The Plan Commission:



         a.   Shall assign street numbers to lots and structures;



         b.   Shall renumber lots and structures; and



         c.   Shall name and rename streets.



      4.   The Plan Commission shall also have all other powers
given to it by the Town Council in ordinances and specifically has the power
to file suit to enforce violation of its zoning and/or subdivision ordinances
and all decisions made by it, and written commitments as set forth in this
section and pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1014, as the same shall be amended from
time to time; and



      5.   The Plan Commission shall also have all other powers and
duties as allowed by state law.



§ 303  ADVISORY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   A.   Establishment. The town’s Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
(hereafter “BZA”) is hereby reestablished in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-900, as the same shall be amended from time to time.



   B.   Composition, jurisdiction and appointment. The BZA shall
consist of five members whose jurisdiction, appointment and terms shall be as
set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-900 et seq., as the same shall be amended from time
to time.



   C.   Organization. At the first meeting of each year, the BZA shall
elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members, and it may
appoint and fix the compensation of a Secretary and such employees as are
necessary for the discharge of its duties, all in conformity to and
compliance with the salaries and compensation thereto fixed by the fiscal
body.



   D.   Rules of procedure. The BZA shall adopt rules concerning the
filing of appeals, the application for variances, special exceptions,
conditional uses, the giving of notice, the conducting of hearings and all
other matters within its jurisdiction. The rules of practice and procedure of
the BZA are attached to this appendix as an appendix. These rules may be
changed at any time by the BZA by a majority vote of the entire membership
without the necessity of a public hearing being held. Any such changes will
automatically be deemed a change to this appendix.



   E.   Meetings and records. All meetings of the BZA shall be open to
the public, unless executive sessions are conducted in accordance with
Indiana law. The BZA shall keep minutes of its meetings and all other
official actions, prepare written findings of fact, and record of the vote of
each member voting upon each question. All minutes and records shall be filed
in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and shall be public records.



   F.   Appeals. Any order, requirement, decision or determination by
an administrative official or a staff member may be appealed to the BZA by
any person claiming to be adversely affected by such an order, decision or
determination.



   G.   Powers and duties. The BZA shall have the following powers and
it shall be its duty to:



      1.   Hear and determine appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or
staff member made in relation to the enforcement of the zoning ordinance,
subdivision ordinance and the enforcement of the building and occupancy
permits as adopted under I.C. 36-7 et seq. and all sections therein
applicable;



      2.   In exercising its powers, the BZA may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from as in its opinion ought to be done in the
premises and to that end shall have all the powers from whom the appeal is
taken;



      3.   Hear and approve or deny variances from the development
standards of the zoning ordinance. A development standard variance may be
approved by the BZA only upon a determination in writing that:



         a.   The approval will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



         b.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner; and



         c.   The strict application of the terms of the zoning
ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property.



      4.   Hear and approve or deny variances of use from the terms
of this appendix. A use variance may be approved by the BZA only upon a
determination in writing that



         a.   The approval will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



         b.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner;



         c.   The need for the variance arises from some
condition peculiar to the property involved;



         d.   The strict application of the terms of this
appendix will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property
for which the variance is sought; and



         e.   The approval does not interfere substantially with
the Comprehensive Plan adopted under the 500 Series of I.C. 36-7-4.



      5.   Hear and approve or deny special exceptions only where
specifically allowed in Table A of § 505 of this appendix. There shall be no
cases or application therefore nor any particular situation in which this
appendix authorizes special exceptions without the approval of the BZA.
Further, no previous application shall set a precedent for any other
applications before the BZA. The BZA may grant a special exception for a use
in a zoning district if, after a public hearing, it makes findings of facts
in writing, that:



         a.   The requirements and development standards for the
requested use as prescribed in this appendix will be met;



         b.   The special exception shall be designed so that it
can be constructed, operated and maintained in a manner harmonious with the
character of adjacent property in the surrounding area;



         c.   The special exception shall not inappropriately
change the essential character of the surrounding area;



         d.   The special exception shall not interfere with the
general enjoyment of adjacent property;



         e.   The special exception shall represent an
improvement to the use or character of the property under consideration and
the surrounding area in general, it shall also be in keeping with the natural
environment of the site; and



         f.   The special exception shall not be hazardous to
adjacent properties, or involve uses, activities, materials or equipment
which be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property
through the excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odor, fumes or
glare.



            1.   The BZA may impose such reasonable conditions
upon approval of variances, special exceptions, conditional uses and home
occupations as it deems necessary in order that the findings of fact it makes
will be served.



            2.   The BZA may permit or require the owner of
the parcel of property to make written commitments concerning the use or
development of the property as specified under I.C. 36-7-4-1015, as the same
shall be amended from time to time. A commitment may be modified or
terminated only by a decision of the BZA made at a public hearing after
notice pursuant to BZA rules.



            3.   A use authorized by any special exception may
not be expanded, extended or enlarged unless authorized by the BZA under the
procedures for granting a special exception.



            4.   A special exception granted for a specific
use ceases to be authorized and is void if that use is not established within
a 12-month period of the date the special exception was granted, or if that
use is discontinued at that site for a six-month period during which time it
is not succeeded by the same use specifically authorized as a special
exception.



            5.   The application for a special exception and
the steps to petition for one, including a preliminary and public hearing,
shall be the same as those for a variance.



            6.   A variance or  special exception granted by
the BZA may be terminated by the BZA on its own motion or upon the filing of
an application therefore by an interested person or a member of the staff or
Plan Commission and, upon a finding made at a public hearing with ten days
notice given to the property owner for which the variance or special
exception was given, that the terms of this appendix or conditions of
approval or written commitments have not been complied with.



               A.   Conflict of interest. A member of the
BZA may not participate in a hearing or decision of the BZA concerning a
matter in which he has a direct or indirect financial interest or for other
reasons brought to the attention of the BZA and which disqualification is
approved by the BZA. The BZA shall enter in its records the fact that a
regular member has such a disqualification and the name of the alternate
member, if any, who participates in the hearing or decision. Said alternate
member, if any, shall be appointed by the authority of the appointing body of
the regular member who has been disqualified. Communication with BZA members
by any person with intent to influence action prior to a hearing or decision
regarding matters pending before the BZA is prohibited. However, the staff
may file with the BZA a written statement setting forth any facts or opinions
relating to the matter.



               B.   Powers and duties. The BZA also shall
have all other powers and duties as allowed by state law.



§ 304  PLAN COMMISSION AND BZA.



   For purposes of state law, the staff of the Plan Commission and BZA
shall be the department heads of the town, which include its Building
Commissioner, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Street Commissioner, Utility
Superintendent, Park Superintendent and Town Engineer.



§ 305  BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   The town’s Building Commissioner, in addition to other powers and
duties set forth in the town code, shall serve as the zoning administrator to
enforce the zoning and subdivision ordinances of the town. He or she is
charged with the enforcement of all town, state and federal laws, and
regulations pertaining to the erection, construction, alteration, repair or
removal of buildings and other structures in the town or pertaining to the
use and occupancy of real estate in said town. The Building Commissioner,
upon believing that any of the provisions of the town code are being
violated, may notify in writing the person responsible for such violations,
ordering the action necessary to correct such violations. Additionally, the
Building Commissioner has responsibility for review and issuance of all
building permits, inspection of buildings, structure and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of the town code and also for temporary
occupancy permits and permanent occupancy permits. The town’s Building
Commissioner is responsible for the maintenance of permanent and current
zoning records including, but not limited to, all plat maps, plats, Mylars,
PUD District ordinances and plats, special exceptions, conditional use
permits, amendments to this appendix, variances, appeals and applications
therefor. Finally, the Building Commissioner shall perform all other duties
as permitted by law and are assigned to him or her by the Town Council.



§ 306  TOWN ATTORNEY.



   The Town Attorney is legal advisor to all of the town boards including
the Plan Commission, BZA and Plat Committee. The Town Attorney shall advise
said boards and also be responsible for legal enforcement of the town code,
including this appendix.



ARTICLE IV. SIGNS



§ 401  SIGNS.



   No sign is allowed in any district, except as provided for in this
article.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 402  STATEMENT OF FINDINGS, PURPOSE, EFFECT AND SEVERABILITY.



   A.   Findings. The Town Council hereby finds as follows:



      1.   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character
and quality of the town;



      2.   Signs provide an important medium through which
individuals and groups may convey a variety of messages;



      3.   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and
detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety
and welfare of the town and its residents;



      4.   The town has an interest in regulating signs in an effort
to both provide adequate means of expression for citizens and to promote the
economic viability of the business community, while at the same time
protecting the town and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type,
size, location and character that would adversely impact the aesthetics of
the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community;
and



      5.   The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs
within the town has had a positive impact on traffic safety, property values
and the appearance of the community.



   B.   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish standards
for the regulations of signs in the town. This article is not intended to
regulate the message displayed on any sign, except where the sign contains
speech or expressive content that is unprotected by the First Amendment of
the United States Constitution, Article 1, § 9, of the state’s
Constitution or when town has a compelling interest. Nor is this article
intended to regulate any building design, display not defined as a sign or
any sign which cannot be viewed from a public right-of-way. The purpose of
this article is to:



      1.   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination
and other physical characteristics of signs within the town in order to
promote the public health, safety and welfare. This includes protecting
pedestrians and motorists in the town from harm related to distractions and
obstructions caused by improperly situated signs, and promoting the
convenience and enjoyment of travel and the free flow of traffic within the
town;



      2.   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment
of the town by preventing visual clutter that is hamiful to the appearance of
the community;



      3.   Protect property values within the town;



      4.   Preserve the beauty and the unique character of the town;



      5.   Promote and aid tourism, which is of importance to the
economy;



      6.   Ensure that signage is compatible with the character of
neighborhoods in which it is located; and



      7.   Improve the visual appearance of the town while providing
for effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional
guarantees and the town’s goals of public safety and aesthetics; provide
for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein.



   C.   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained
in the town if it is in conformance with the provisions of this article. The
effect of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:



      1.   Allow a wide variety of sign types and sizes in business
and industrial districts, and more limited sign types and sizes in other
districts, subject to the standards set forth in this article;



      2.   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination
or other physical characteristics negatively impact the environment and where
there are ample alternative channels of communication with a lesser impact on
the public health, safety and welfare of the community; and



      3.   Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this
article.



   D.   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision
will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 403  R-1 AND R-2 ZONING DISTRICTS; PERMITTED SIGNS AND PROVISIONS.



   Only signs that conform to the following standards are allowed;
provided that, said signs do not project beyond the property line and do not
overhang a public street, alley or sidewalk.







   A.   Permanent signs.



      1.   Signs that conform to subsections A.2. and A.3. below do
not require a permit before being posted. Signs to which subsection A.4.
below applies require a permit in accordance with the fee schedule found in
§ 5-44 of this code of ordinances.



      2.   In order to assist police, fire and emergency personnel
with carrying out their duties, a street number sign, non-dynamic only, must
be displayed, in accordance with the requirements and restrictions of Ch. 5
of this code of ordinances.



      3.   Each single- or two-family dwelling may have one
additional permanent, non-illuminated and non-dynamic sign on the lot, and
not exceeding two square feet in gross surface area.



      4.   Each public or quasi-public building or lot (including,
but not limited to, public or private educational institutions, churches,
libraries, hospitals, parks and playgrounds) is permitted additional,
permanent signage, excluding neon signs, not exceeding 45 square feet in
gross surface area.



   B.   Temporary signs.



      1.   Notwithstanding any other section, there may be three
temporary signs posted on a lot at any time subject to the following.



         a.   A temporary sign allowable under this section does
not require a permit if, it is not greater than six square feet in gross
surface area. No temporary sign may exceed a maximum height of four feet from
grade without a permit. All temporary signs must be situated within the lot
lines of the subject parcel and may not be situated in the public
right-of-way, non-dynamic and non-illuminated.



         b.   For the purposes of this section, a LOT means any
single parcel of land, or the parcels of land, occupied by a single principal
building or structure and its accessory structures.



      2.   Upon the occurrence of a bona fide triggering event, an
owner or occupant may post up to the maximum number of allowable signs, as
determined by the underlying bona fide triggering event. The total number of
signs allowed based on different triggering events is cumulative, subject to
the maximum number below. The burden is on the owner or occupant of the
property on which a sign is posted to demonstrate the existence of a bona
fide triggering event justifying the number of signs posted on the property,
upon request by the Building Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer.



      3.   The following are the only types of events which will
trigger the right of a property owner to post additional temporary signage:



         a.   A primary, general or special election taking place
in the town;



         b.   A public event occurring on the premises; and



         c.   A private event occurring on the premises.



      4.   There may be up to a maximum of ten temporary signs
posted at any time 30 days before and up to five days after a primary,
general or special election, taking place in the town.



      5.   There may be two temporary signs posted at any time 14
days before and up to two days after an on-premises public event. For the
purposes of this section, an “on-premises public event” means any event
taking place or scheduled to occur on that property, which is open to the
public at large.



      6.   There may be one temporary sign posted at any time seven
days before and up to two days after an on-premises private event. For the
purposes of this section, an ON-PREMISES PRIVATE EVENT means any event on
that property, which is not open to the general public (i.e., by invitation
only).



      7.   The number of allowable temporary signs is cumulative,
but at no time may there more than ten temporary signs on any lot, as defined
in subsection B.1.b. above.



      8.   Subject to the maximum number of signs and the issuance
of a permit, an owner or occupant may have one temporary sign larger than six
square feet gross surface area, up to a maximum of 32 square feet gross
surface area, with each side no larger than 16 square feet, and not exceeding
a maximum height of eight feet from unaltered grade.



         a.   Only one temporary sign larger than six square feet
in gross surface area may be located on a lot at any one time.



         b.   1.   A temporary sign larger than six square
feet in gross surface area requires a bona fide triggering event.



            2.   The Building Commissioner must issue the
permit upon application and payment of the permit fee, subject to § 5-44 of
this code of ordinances. The application must identify the applicant, the
property where the sign will be located, the applicant’s interest in that
property (as owner, tenant and the like), the bona fide triggering event, and
the date(s) of the triggering event.



            3.   The Building Commissioner may issue, and
require the applicant to affix to the sign, a small sticker indicating the
dates that the permit is valid.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 404  R-3 AND RB ZONING DISTRICT; PERMITTED SIGNS AND PROVISIONS.



   The restrictions, prohibitions and regulations for R-3 and RB Zoning
Districts are the same as R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts, with the following
additions.



   A.   1.   Apartment or condominium complexes consisting of one to
three buildings are permitted, in addition to those signs required by Ch. 5
of this code of ordinances, one permanent sign, per building.



      2.   Each sign must be attached to the building, must not be
projecting and must not exceed six square feet in gross surface area.



      3.   In no event may any such complexes be permitted more than
three additional permanent signs.







   B.   Apartment or condominium complexes of four or more buildings
are permitted one monument sign in lieu of permanent individual building
signs, to be constructed to the following specifications.







      1.   The sign may have not more than two display surfaces not
exceeding 45 square feet in total gross surface area.



      2.   The sign must not be placed closer than ten feet to any
property line.



      3.   The top of the sign must not be higher than six feet from
existing, unaltered grade.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 405  B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 AND I-2 ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The following regulations apply to B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 and I-2 Zoning
Districts.



   A.   Permitted signs.



      1.   Any sign permitted in § 403B.1. of this chapter is
permitted, subject to the same restrictions.



      2.   Single occupant buildings located at street level with a
setback of less than 30 feet are permitted one principal sign with a maximum
gross surface area of 80 square feet. Multi-unit, -tenant or -store buildings
with less than a 30-foot setback are permitted 120 square feet of signage to
be divided among the units.



      3.   Each business is permitted a permanent sign on a door or
immediately adjacent to the door, not to exceed six square feet in gross
surface area. A permanent sign permitted under this section will not be
included in the computation of the total signage, but is subject to the
permitting and fee schedule contained in § 5-44 of this code of ordinances.







      4.   A temporary sign is permitted corresponding to the
maximum allowable speed limit traveled on the road fronting the property as
follows:



         a.   Less than 30 mph: eight square feet, with the
highest point of the sign measuring no higher than six feet off the ground;



         b.   Equal to or more than 30 mph and less than or equal
to 45 mph: 24 square feet, with the highest point of the sign measuring no
higher than six feet off the ground; and



         c.   More than 45 mph: 48 square feet, with the highest
point of the sign measuring no higher than eight feet off the ground.



      5.   Additional temporary sign: one non-illuminated temporary
sign is allowed during construction work located on the premises, but not to
exceed 32 square feet in total gross surface area, and subject to a maximum
height of eight feet from existing, unaltered grade. The sign must be removed
within seven days after an occupancy permit is issued. A sign permit is
required for all such signs, and fee paid in accordance with § 5-44 of this
code of ordinances.



      6.   Specialty signs, including blade signs, banners and other
signs that would exceed the permissible dimensions of allowable temporary
signs, may be posted for a maximum of 30 days in a calendar year. All
portable specialty signs displayed pursuant to this section must be removed
at the close of each business day and when conditions exist which have the
potential of causing the sign to fall over or become a danger to the public
health and safety.



      7.   A business with a parking lot(s) may erect two permanent
signs per lot, each not to exceed four square feet in gross surface area and
not higher than four feet from grade. Such signs may be illuminated, subject
to the rules governing commercial property adjacent to residential zones, but
may not be dynamic.



      8.   Drive-in or drive-through merchandising businesses are
allowed the following additional signs:



         a.   A permanent sign for each point of ingress and
egress of the business. Each sign permitted under this subsection A.8. must
not exceed four feet in height from grade, or six square feet in gross
surface area. Each sign permitted under this subsection A.8. must be within
six feet of the curb area at the point of ingress or egress, must not
obstruct the view of motorists or pedestrians, and must not impede the free
flow and safe passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



         b.   No more than two permanent signs along the driveway
or drive-through to the pick-up area. Signs permitted under this subsection
A.8. must not exceed nine feet in height as measured from grade. The first
such sign may not exceed 32 square feet in gross surface area. A second sign,
if any, may not exceed 18 square feet in gross surface area.



      9.   If a building has a rear and/or side parking lot, or is
on a corner lot and adjoins a public street, an additional sign developed to
the same restrictions noted in this section is permitted on only one side or
rear of the building, provided the total gross surface area for all signs
does not exceed 80 square feet. Illuminated signs placed adjacent to a
residential district sign must be indirectly lighted in such a manner as not
to illuminate the adjoining residential property.



      10.   Each canopy or awning is subject to the maximum sign
square footage contained in subsection A.2. above. The maximum height of the
top of the canopy or awning may be no higher than 20 feet above the curb
level. Signage must be affixed flat to the surface of the canopy or awning,
and must not extend vertically or horizontally beyond it. There must be a
minimum clearance of eight feet between the bottom of the canopy or awning
and the sidewalk or ground.



      11.   The following regulations apply to non-residential
buildings, and business complexes which are situated more than 30 feet and
less than 100 feet from a public right-of-way.



         a.   A non-residential building or complex that meets
these set-back requirements may have any combination of wall-mounted, awning,
canopy or monument signs. Freestanding signs are not allowed under this
section.



         b.   The total combined gross surface area for all signs
must not exceed a maximum of 120 square feet, subject to the following
exceptions.



            1.   In any multi-unit, -tenant or -store building
or complex, each unit may have up to 25 square feet in gross surface area of
wall-mounted, awning or canopy signage, in addition to the maximum gross
surface area of 120 square feet.



            2.   This additional signage must be contained
within the boundaries of the unit or portion of the building actually
occupied by the tenant or store.



         c.   No building or complex covered by this subsection
A.10. may have more than one monument sign. Monument signs shall not exceed a
maximum size of 96 square feet gross surface area, regardless of the number
of units, tenants or stores located in the building or complex.



      12.   The following regulations apply to non-residential
buildings, and business complexes which are situated 100 feet or further from
a public right-of-way.



         a.   A non-residential building or complex that meets
this setback requirement may have any combination of wall mounted, awning,
canopy, monument or freestanding signs.



         b.   A building with only one unit or tenant may have a
maximum of 120 square feet gross surface area of signage, in total.



         c.   In any multi-unit, -tenant or -store building or
complex occupied and in existence prior to the effective date of this
appendix, each unit may have up to 25 square feet in gross surface area of
wall-mounted, awning or canopy signage, additional to the maximum gross
surface area of 120 square feet. This additional signage must be contained
within the boundaries of the unit or portion of the building actually
occupied by the tenant or store.



         d.   Freestanding or monument signs are limited to a
maximum of 120 square feet total gross surface area, regardless of the number
of units, tenants or stores in the complex.



         e.   Each tenant, unit, store or other division, is
permitted one door sign, not to exceed six square feet gross surface area,
which signage will not count towards the maximum signage permitted for the
building or complex nor towards the maximum signage permitted for the unit,
tenant or business. A door sign is subject to permitting and fee schedule
contained in § 5-44 of this code of ordinances.



   B.   Freestanding signs.



      1.   Location, height and area limitations. It is unlawful to
erect any freestanding sign the total height of which is greater than 18 feet
above the level of the street upon which the sign’s lot has frontage above
the unaltered ground level, whichever is lower, upon which the sign is to be
placed. The ground level may not be altered in any manner in order to erect a
sign that stands higher than that which is permitted herein. A freestanding
sign must not exceed 60 gross square feet on any display surface.



      2.   Placement. A freestanding sign must not be nearer than
ten feet to any building or structure, or nearer than 75 feet to any other
freestanding sign on the same side of the street, or within ten feet of any
property line.



      3.   Display surface. A freestanding sign having more than one
or more display surface planes may not have more than 120 square feet of
gross surface area.



   C.   Projecting signs. A business may erect one projecting sign no
less than seven feet, nor more than nine feet, in height, as measured from
grade. A projecting sign permitted by this section may be no greater than six
square feet in gross surface area and may not be internally illuminated. A
projecting sign may be set at a building corner at no greater than 135
degrees to each facade. In no event may a projecting sign, or the apparatus
attaching the sign to the building, proceed farther than four feet from the
facade of the building, and in no case may it extend over a curb or street
line. The total size of a projecting sign erected pursuant to this section
shall not be included in the maximum gross surface area permitted pursuant to
this article.



   D.   Sandwich signs. A business may display one sandwich sign not
exceeding ten square feet of gross surface area in accordance with this
section. The sandwich sign permitted by this section must be located on the
property of the business or on the sidewalk in the front profile of the
business; provided that, in the case of a sandwich sign located on a
sidewalk, the sign must be situated not less than one foot off of the street
or curb line and must allow not less than 36 inches of passage or the minimum
width permitted under the most current provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, whichever is greater. The total surface area of a sandwich
sign permitted pursuant to this section shall not be included in the maximum
gross surface area permitted pursuant to this article. All sandwich signs
must be removed at the close of business each day and when high winds or
other weather conditions exist which would knock over the sign.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 406  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited for erection,
construction maintenance, repair, alteration, location or relocation within
the town, except as exempt under § 410 of this appendix:



   A.   Flashing signs, excepting those public signs defined in Article
II, Definitions, of this appendix and those that give safety warnings;



   B.   Moving signs;



   C.   Signs with lamps or lights for letters, except neon signs;



   D.   Signs on fences, utility poles, street lights or trees;



   E.   Signs which resemble or are confusingly similar to any official
marker erected by the town, state or other governmental unit or agency, or
which by reason of position, shape or color would confuse or conflict with
the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal;



   F.   Signs extending over or placed upon a public sidewalk, alley or
right-of-way, except awnings and canopies, projecting signs as permitted in
§ 405C. of this chapter and sandwich signs as permitted in § 405D. of this
appendix;



   G.   Specialty signs, except as permitted under § 405A.6. of this
appendix; and



   H.   Signs containing obscenity or deemed harmful to public safety.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 407  RESERVED.



§ 408  RESERVED.



§ 409  RESTRICTIONS.



   All signs must conform as follows.



   A.   All size limitations listed elsewhere in this article are for
gross surface area per display unless otherwise indicated.



   B.   No sign may be placed in such a manner that it would block or
obscure the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle stopped at a stop sign,
traffic light or entrance to a public street for a distance of 400 feet in
any direction in which there is oncoming traffic.



   C.   No sign may be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, fire escape or
public walkway.



   D.   A freestanding sign must be securely built, constructed and
erected.



   E.   The sign owner must properly maintain all parts and supports,
including display surfaces, of the approved sign.



   F.   All dynamic signs must conform to the following regulations.



      1.   All dynamic signs must conform to all other provisions of
this appendix applicable to business signs.



      2.   A dynamic sign may not be permitted where such sign will
create a public nuisance or result in unsafe driving conditions.



      3.   A dynamic sign must not contain images that flash,
scroll, turn, twinkle or have any other type of movement. All images must be
still.



      4.   The display screen on a dynamic sign must not change
images more frequently than once every eight seconds. Changes from one image
to the next must fade gradually in a timeframe of not less than two seconds.



      5.   All dynamic signs must come equipped with automatic
dimming technology which automatically adjusts the brightness based on
ambient light conditions. No dynamic sign may exceed 0.3 foot candles above
ambient light as measured using a foot candle (lux) meter at a present
distance depending on the sign area to be measured as follows:



 

Area of Sign (square feet)
 
Measurement (Distance in Feet)




10
 
32


15
 
39


20
 
45


25
 
50


30
 
55


35
 
59


40
 
63


45
 
67


50
 
71


55
 
74


60
 
77


65
 
81


70
 
84


75
 
87


80
 
89


85
 
92


90
 
95


95
 
97


100
 
100


NOTES TO TABLE:

For signs with an area in square feet other than specifically listed in the
table, the measurement distance will be calculated using the following
formula:

 

Measurement Distance = Square root of (area of sign x 100)




 



      6.   Notwithstanding subsection F.5. above, dynamic signs must
not cause glare.



      7.   a.   All dynamic signs must be equipped with
adjustable light sensors capable of adjusting light intensity according to
ambient light levels (i.e., day and night). If the light intensity of the
dynamic sign is glaring, the Building Commissioner, or his or her designee,
will notify the owner or the owner’s representative, and the light
intensity must be corrected within 24 hours of notification to the owner or
the owner’s representative.



         b.   The owner must maintain at all times current
notification contact information in the office of Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 410  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions and regulations of this article do not apply to the
following:



   A.   Signs posted by, erected by, required to be posted or erected
by governmental units;



   B.   All non-illuminated signs or other displays on the interior
portion of a window;



   C.   When displayed by governmental units: flags of the town, the
state, the United States of America or official historic plaques of any
government jurisdiction or agency. Flag poles must not exceed 35 feet in
height;



   D.   The Town Council may authorize the Building or Streets
Department to hang signs that advertise a town-wide or community event or
drive, across or above Calumet Road, Indian Boundary Road, Broadway or Porter
Avenue, within a business or industrial district; and



   E.   Small informational signs to warn the public of hazards and
potential hazards, including, but not limited to, “No Dumping”, “Beware
of Dog”, are exempt as long as the signs do not exceed two square feet in
gross surface area.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 411  EXISTING SIGNS.



   All legal non-conforming signs may remain until:



   A.   Removed and replaced by a legal conforming sign;



   B.   The sign constitutes a danger or threat to public health or
safety as determined by the Building Commissioner and remains in such
condition for 30 days after notice of such condition is provided to the owner
by the Building Commissioner;



   C.   A permit, variance, condition or commitment, pursuant to which
the sign was allowed, expires;



   D.   The height, gross surface area or location of the sign is
changed; or



   E.   The business, or other entity, on the same property where the
sign is located has ceased to operate for six months or more, in which case
there is a rebuttable presumption that the legal non- conforming sign has
been abandoned and must be removed or replaced with a conforming sign. The
presumption may be rebutted by a showing by the owner of the real estate
where the sign is located that notice has been placed on record with the
Building Commissioner’s office regarding the cessation of the operation of
the business and the intention to resume the operation of a business, or
other entity, at that location on or before a specific date. In no event may
a legal non-conforming sign remain for more than one year after the business
on the same property where the sign is located has ceased operations.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 412  SIGN PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.



   Unless exempted by this article, a sign permit is required prior to
erecting, altering, or relocating any permanent or temporary sign. A person
may apply for a sign permit from the Building Commissioner and pay the fee
required by § 5-44 of this code of ordinances. All temporary signs less than
eight square feet shall not require a permit.



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 413  ENFORCEMENT.



   If the Building Commissioner finds that any sign or other structure
regulated herein is unsafe, or has been constructed, erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, he or she then
will give a ten-day written notice to the permittee thereof to remove the
sign or structure or bring the same into compliance with this article.
Failure to comply with said written notice is a violation of the town code.
The Building Commissioner may cause any sign or other structure, which is in
immediate peril to person or property, to be removed summarily and without
notice at the expense of the permittee or owner.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-11-2016)



ARTICLE V. DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 501  ZONING MAP.



   A map entitled “Chesterton Zone Map” is hereby adopted as part of
this appendix. The Zoning Map shall be kept on file and available for
examination at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 502  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The town is divided into the districts dated in this appendix as shown
by the district boundaries on the Zoning Map. The districts are:



 



B-1
 
Business


B-2
 
Business


B-3
 
Business


I-1
 
Industrial


I-2
 
Industrial


R-1
 
Residential


R-2
 
Residential


R-3
 
Residential


R-B
 
Residential Business


S-1
 
Special use - sexually-oriented business




 



(Ord. 2005-19, passed 11-14-2005)



§ 503  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   District boundaries shown within the lines of streets, streams and
transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow their centerlines. The
vacation of streets shall not affect the location of such district
boundaries. When the Building Commissioner cannot definitely determine the
location of a district boundary by such centerlines, by the scale or
dimensions stated on the Zoning Map, or by the fact that it clearly coincides
with a property line, he or she shall interplot the location of the district
boundary with reference to the scale of the Zoning Map and the purposes set
forth in all relevant provisions of this appendix. His or her decision shall
be appealable to the BZA.



§ 504  DISTRICTS.



   A.   Residential. Districts designated for residential use, R-1, R-2
and R-3, are limited to dwellings and public or semi-public uses which are
normally associated with residential neighborhoods. The only uses permitted
in the residential districts are those which would not detract from the
residential character of the neighborhood. The purpose of these three
districts is to create an attractive, stable and orderly residential
environment. However, the families per dwelling and the lot and yard
requirements are different in the three districts to provide for the various
housing needs and desires of the community. The R-1 designation is a low
density single-family residential area. The R-2 designation is a one- or two-
family residential area and R-3 designation is a multi-family residential
area.



   B.   Residential Business District (R-B). This district is composed
of only those business and service establishments which supply “convenience
goods” or “personal services”, satisfying the daily needs of the
abutting neighborhoods. It may also include office space which, by the nature
of the business, will not adversely impact property values, local traffic or
general welfare. While the district is intended for walk-in trade, adequate
and screened off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided and no
outside storage is allowed. Drive-through facilities shall be prohibited in
the R-B District.



   C.   Business. The districts designated for business, B-1, B-2 and
B-3, are limited to business, public and certain residential uses. By
establishing compact districts for such uses, more efficient traffic
movement, parking facilities, fire protection and police protection may be
provided. Industrial uses are excluded in order to reduce the hazards caused
by extensive truck and rail movements normally associated with such uses. The
purpose of these districts is to provided unified shopping districts
conveniently located. The B-1 designation comprises the high density,
downtown area of the town. The B-2 District is the medium density, business
district and represents the major extensions of the downtown business area
along the major arteries in the town. The B-3 district is a lower density,
open space type of use relating principally to automotive sales and service,
business requiring outside storage facilities and quasi-business industrial
facilities.



   D.   Industrial. The districts designated for industry, I-1 and I-2,
provide suitable space for existing industries and their expansion as well as
for future industrial development. Performance standards, parking
specifications and yard regulations are set forth in this appendix in order
to ensure safe industrial development that is compatible with adjacent uses.
The locations of the districts are near railroads or highways in order to
meet the transportation needs of industry. I-1, the Light Industrial
District, provides space for industries, which do not cause conditions that
would be objectionable to neighboring properties. I-2, the Heavy Industrial
District, provides a space for certain intensive industrial operations, which
may have some objectionable characteristics. Greater separation is required
between the industries in the I-2 District and residential or business uses
than is necessary in the I-1 District.



   E.   Special Use - Sexually-Oriented Businesses. This district is
detailed in § 610 of this appendix.



(Ord. 2005-19, passed 11-14-2005)



§ 505. PERMITTED USES; TABLE A.



   The permitted uses for each district are shown on Table A. The uses
that are listed for the various districts shall be according to the common
meaning of the term or according to definitions given in Article II of this
appendix. Uses not specifically listed or defined to be included in this
category under this article shall not be permitted unless a use variance is
petitioned for and granted by the BZA.



 

Table A: Permitted Uses

(P = Permitted; S=Special Exception)

(Uses not listed or without P or S are not permitted without obtaining a use
variance)



 
Permitted Uses by District


Land Usage Category
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
R-B
 
B-1
 
B-2
 
B-3
 
I-1
 
I-2




Accessory


   Accessory structure
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Agricultural


   Cropland and orchards
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P


   Greenhouse
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Plant nursery
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


Business Uses: Auto Service


   Automobile and trailer sales area
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


   Automobile part sales
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Automobile repair/major
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


   Automobile repair/minor
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Automobile service station
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Automobile wash establishment
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


   Auto/truck/trailer storage (outdoor)
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P


   Mobile home sales
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


Business Uses: Clothing Service


   Coin laundry
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Dressmaking shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Dry-cleaning service
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Fabric shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Business Uses: Food Sales/Service


   Bakery retail
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Delicatessen/convenience store (no gas)
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Drive-in
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


   Farmers market
 

 

 

 
P
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Grocery/supermarket
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Meat market
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Restaurant
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Roadside food sales stand
 

 

 

 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S
 
S


Business Uses: General Business


   Bank/credit union (no drive-through)
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Bank/credit union (with drive-through)
 

 

 

 

 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Bank machines (ATMs)
 

 

 

 

 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Offices
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Business Uses: Miscellaneous


   Bed and breakfast facility
 

 
S
 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Boat sales/service
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 



   Communications tower or facility
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



   Funeral home or mortuary
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 

 



   Hospital
 

 

 

 

 

 
S
 
P
 

 



   Hotel/motel
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 



   Mini-warehouse
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
S
 
P
 
P


   Photographic studio
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Veterinary animal clinic
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 

 



   Warehouse
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P


Business Uses: Personal


   Barber/beauty shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Child care center
 

 

 

 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Clinic/medical/dental
 

 

 

 
S
 
S
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Tanning salon
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Business Uses: Recreation


   Bar/night club
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Billiard/arcade room
 

 

 

 

 
S
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Bowling alley
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Country club
 
S
 
S
 
S
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P


   Dance studio
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Driving range
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P


   Golf course
 
S
 
S
 
S
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P


   Lodge or private club
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Theater, indoor
 

 

 

 

 

 
S
 
S
 

 



   Theater, outdoor
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
S
 

 



   Video store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



Business Use: Retail Sales


   Alcohol sales
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Antique shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Apparel shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Appliance store
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Convenience store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Department store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Drug store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Flower shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Furniture store
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Gift shop
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Hardware store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Jewelry store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Lumber yard
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 



   Music store
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Newsdealer/bookstore
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Office supply
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Shoe sales/shoe repair
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



Industrial Uses


   Manufacturing, general light
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P


   Manufacturing, light
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P


Miscellaneous Developments


   Nursing home
 

 

 
P
 
S
 

 
P
 
P
 

 



   Planned unit developments*
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



   Retirement village
 

 

 
P
 
S
 

 
P
 
P
 

 



   *May be permitted in all districts by ordinance only in accordance with
the requirements of Article VII


Public Facilities


   Airport
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P


   Business school
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 



   Church
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



   Essential services
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Municipal facilities
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


   Museum
 

 

 

 

 

 
S
 
P
 

 



   School, public/private
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 



Residential


   Boarding or lodging house
 

 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 



   Dwelling, multi-family, apartment
 

 
P
 
P
 

 
S
 

 

 

 



   Dwelling, single-family
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 



   Dwelling, two-family (duplex)
 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 



   Home occupation
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 





 



§ 506  LOT, YARD AND HABITABLE LIVING AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum lot area, minimum lot area per family, minimum lot
width, minimum depth of front yard, minimum distance from side street,
minimum width of each side yard, minimum depth of rear yard and minimum
habitable square feet per unit for each district shall be as shown on the
following tables:



Table B: Yard, Lot and Habitable Living Area



 

District
 
Minimum Lot Area
 
Minimum Lot Area per Family
 
Minimum Lot Width




R-1
 
9,500 sq. ft.2
 
9,500 sq. ft.
 
75 feet


R-24
 
7,200 sq. ft.2
 
4,000 sq. ft.
 
75 feet


R-3
 
6,000 sq. ft.2
 
2,000 sq. ft.
 
75 feet


R-B
 
6,000 sq. ft.2
 
2,000 sq. ft.
 
75 feet


B-1
 
3,000 sq. ft.2
 
3,500 sq. ft.
 
30 feet


B-2
 
7,200 sq. ft.2
 
3,500 sq. ft.7
 
70 feet


B-3
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
5,000 sq. ft.7
 
75 feet


I-1
 
20,000 sq. ft.
 
N/A
 
100 feet


I-2
 
80,000 sq. ft.
 
N/A
 
200 feet




 



 

District
 
Minimum Depth Front Yard
 
Minimum Distance from Side Street
 
Minimum Width Side Yard1
 
Minimum Depth Rear Yard1
 
Minimum Habitable Sq. Ft. per Unit


(Single)
 
(Multiple)




R-1
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
10 feet
 
25 feet
 
950 sq. ft.
 
N/A


R-24
 
25 feet
 
15 feet
 
8 feet
 
25 feet
 
750 sq. ft.
 
650 sq. ft.


R-3
 
20 feet
 
15 feet
 
8 feet
 
10 feet
 
750 sq. ft.
 
600 sq. ft.6


R-B
 
20 feet
 
15 feet
 
8 feet5
 
10 feet
 
750 sq. ft.
 
600 sq. ft.6


B-1
 
0 feet
 
0 feet
 
0 feet3
 
0 feet
 
750 sq. ft.
 
600 sq. ft.


B-2
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
8 feet
 
10 feet
 
750 sq. ft.
 
600 sq. ft.6


B-3
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
10 feet
 
10 feet
 
750 sq. ft.
 
600 sq. ft.6


I-1
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


I-2
 
40 feet
 
40 feet
 
40 feet
 
40 feet
 
N/A
 
N/A




 








NOTES TO TABLES:


1

Principal structure.

2

If the lot is not served by a town sanitary sewer system approved by the
state’s Board of Health, the lot size shall be determined by rules and
regulations of the county’s Department of Public Health, but in no event
shall be less than 15,000 square feet.

3

Where a B-1 Business District lot is contiguous to a residential district,
the lot shall conform to the residential district’s minimum side yard
requirements.

4

Where land is presently subdivided into lots of record in R-2 Districts,
which lots are 50 feet in width and contain at least 6,000 square feet, the
requirements set forth above for R-2 Districts, with the exceptions of
minimum habitable square feet per unit, the minimum depth front yard, side
yard and rear yard, shall not apply.

5

In new construction where a part or all of the building contains business use
that abuts a residentially zoned or developed property, side yard setbacks
shall be increased to 20 feet.

6

The dwelling units in a retirement village shall be at the minimum of 440
square feet for an efficiency apartment with a kitchenette, 575 square feet
for a 1-bedroom apartment, 720 square feet for a 2-bedroom apartment.

7

The minimum square feet for a retirement village shall not be less than 2,000
square feet.

 



   B.   No portion of a principal structure, whether upon or enclosed,
including garages, carports, balconies, roofs or platforms, one foot above
normal grade level, shall project into any minimum front, side or rear yard.
Detached accessory structures shall not be located closer than ten feet from
the nearest portion of the principal structure, nor closer than five feet to
the side and rear lot lines.



   C.   Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this
appendix, and then held in separate ownership different from the ownership of
adjoining lots, may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the
use regulations of the district in which it is located, even though its area
and width are less than the minimum requirements of this appendix, if said
building conforms with other requirements of this appendix.



   D.   1.   Footings for structures whether slab, lineal or pier
type, shall be constructed at a depth of not less than three feet below the
finished grade. Finished grade shall be established as the final grade
whether natural, cut or filled. Soil shall not be graded at a grade of more
than 5% from the property line to one-half the distance of the required
setback line, and no grade shall in any area exceed 35%.



      2.   The low point of finished grade shall not be above the
elevation of an existing finished grade along the side or rear lines of
parcel or lot and shall not be above any walk or more than six inches above
the crown of the facing street or streets.



   E.   The lot coverage permitted for all structures upon lots in
districts zoned residential shall not exceed 30% of the area of an interior
lot or exceed 40% of the net area of a corner lot. Where residence property
adjoins a part or other permanent open space the coverage may be increased to
40% and 50% respectively for interior and corner lots.



§ 507  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No principal structure shall exceed 35 feet in total height, above the
average ground level, and no accessory structures shall exceed 16 feet in
height, above the average ground level, unless approved by the BZA; provided
that, this section shall not apply to any building or structure owned by the
town, or its agencies and subdivisions.



§ 508  NUMBER OF STRUCTURES OR BUILDINGS.



   A.   No lot may contain more than one principal structure or
building used for non-agricultural purposes.



   B.   All other structures located on a lot must qualify as accessory
buildings and uses to the principal structure and conform with all other
regulations concerning same as set forth in this appendix.



§ 509  SIZE REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL SALES STRUCTURES.



   No retail sales structure or structures in combination, on a single lot
or contiguous lots, shall equal or exceed 60,000 square feet of building area
unless permitted as part of a Planned Unit Development District approved
pursuant to Article VII of this appendix.



(Ord. 2006-05, passed 4-10-2006)



§ 510  TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS.



   A.   Purpose. A traffic impact analysis (TIA) assesses the impact of
a proposed development, zoning change or special use approval on the
transportation system. Its purposes are: to ensure that proposed developments
or zoning changes that affect the transportation network are minimized and/or
mitigated; to identify any traffic problems associated with access from the
site to the existing transportation network; to delineate solutions to
potential problems; and to present improvements to be incorporated into the
proposed development.



   B.   When required. On review of a site plan submitted as part of an
application for a building permit for a proposed multi-family, business or
industrial site, a site drawing submitted in support of a petition for
primary plat approval, a petition for a rezoning, a petition for a use
variance or a petition for a planned unit development, the Building
Commissioner, the Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals may request
that the Town Engineer review the site plan, site drawing, petition for
rezoning or petition for use variance to determine whether a TIA will be
required. All costs associated with a TIA required under this section shall
be paid by the applicant/petitioner. The Town Engineer shall provide a notice
of TIA requirement if the Town Engineer determines:



      1.   In the case of a petition for a rezoning or use variance,
that the proposed use is likely to generate 100 or more trips during the
adjacent roadway’s peak hour(s) or the use’s peak hour(s);



      2.   In the case of a site plan or primary plat site drawing,
that the potential development may generate 100 or more trips during an
adjacent roadway’s peak hour(s)or the development’s peak hour(s); or



      3.   That localized safety or capacity conditions, regardless
of the potential trips generated, require a TIA, including:



         a.   Current traffic problems in the area of the
proposed development, such as high crash counts and congested or confusing
intersections;



         b.   Current or projected levels of service of the
roadway adjacent to the development will be significantly affected;



         c.   The limited ability of the adjacent, existing or
proposed roadway system to handle increased traffic, or the feasibility of
improving the roadway system to handle increased traffic; or



         d.   Any other location or site specific problems deemed
by the Town Engineer to justify a TIA.



   C.   Notice of TIA requirement. The Town Engineer will provide the
notice of TIA requirement to the owner or petitioner. The owner or petitioner
may appeal the decision of the Town Engineer to require a TIA in writing to
the Town Council within ten days of the date the notice is issued.



   D.   Contents of TIA. If a TIA is required, it shall be prepared by
an individual, group, firm or corporation having demonstrated professional
emphasis and experience in transportation planning, engineering and in the
preparation of similar analyses. Prior to preparing the TIA, the owner or
petitioner, by its engineering representative, shall meet with the Town
Engineer to establish the parameters of the TIA. The TIA document must bear
the seal and signature of a licensed professional engineer. Each TIA shall
generally conform to the latest version of the state’s Department of
Transportation Manual “Applicant’s Guide to Traffic Impact Studies” and
shall address, at a minimum, the following.



      1.   Introduction.



         a.   Site and study area boundaries;



         b.   Existing and proposed site uses;



         c.   Existing and proposed nearby uses; and



         d.   Existing and proposed roadways and intersections.



      2.   Analysis of existing conditions.



         a.   Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes;



         b.   Capacity analyses at critical points; and



         c.   Levels of service at critical points.



      3.   Analysis of future conditions without development.



         a.   Daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes;



         b.   Capacity analyses at critical points; and



         c.   Levels of service at critical points.



      4.   Trip generation. Daily and peak hour(s) site-generated
traffic volumes;



      5.   Trip distribution. Direction and approach of
site-generated traffic;



      6.   Traffic assignment. Utilization of study-area roadways
and intersections by site-generated traffic;



      7.   Analysis of future conditions with development.



         a.   Future daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes;



         b.   Capacity analyses at critical points; and



         c.   Levels of service at critical points.



      8.   Recommended improvements.



         a.   Proposed improvements (on and offsite);



         b.   Capacity analyses at critical points; and



         c.   Levels of service at critical points.



      9.   Conclusion. Executive summary of study findings.



   E.   Submission of TIA.



      1.   The Town Engineer shall review the TIA to determine
whether it conforms to the requirements of subsection D. above. The Town
Engineer may require modifications to the TIA based onsite conditions and/or
project design changes that have occurred subsequent to the meeting required
by subsection D. above.



      2.   Modifications so requested shall be identified in writing
by the Town Engineer.



      3.   Once a TIA conforming to the requirements of subsection
D. above has been submitted, the Town Engineer shall identify, in writing,
any or all of the traffic improvements that have been recommended in the
applicant’s TIA, or which the Town Engineer recommends, which traffic
improvements shall then become a required part of the applicant’s proposal.



      4.   The Town Engineer, with the approval of the applicable
board, may retain an independent consultant on behalf of the town to assist
with the review of the TIA. In such case, the Town Engineer shall have a
reasonable amount of time after retaining the independent consultant to
identify, in writing, any or all of the traffic improvements that have been
recommended in the applicant’s TIA or by the Town Engineer or the town’s
independent consultant, which traffic improvements shall become a required
part of the applicant’s proposal.



      5.   A conforming TIA shall be submitted by the applicant
prior to any public hearing on the applicant’s proposal. The submission of
a conforming TIA and the identification of recommended traffic improvements
under this section does not required the town or any of its boards or
officials to approve the proposal. The cost of any paid consultant to the
town or its Engineer shall be paid by the applicant. No building permit shall
be issued if any fees or costs incurred under this section are unpaid.



(Ord. 2006-21, passed 8-28-2006)



ARTICLE VI. USES, MISCELLANEOUS USES, PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 601  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to effectuate the
gradual elimination of non-conforming structures and uses of land and
structures in combination.



   B.   Burden of proof. The party alleging the existence of a legally
non-conforming structure or use bears the burden of demonstrating that the
structure or use was legally existing at the time of a change in ordinance
which rendered the structure or use non-conforming.



   C.   Continuation of non-conforming uses. An illegal non-conforming
use may not be permitted to continue and shall be enforced through existing
town ordinances. A legal non-conforming use may be continued, but may not be
extended, expanded or changed unless to a conforming use, except as permitted
by the BZA.



   D.   Enlarging, altering or repairing legal non-conforming
structures. A legal non-conforming structure may continue provided that it
shall not be enlarged or altered in a manner that increases its non-
conformity. A legal non-conforming structure or portion thereof may be
altered in order to decrease or eliminate the non-conformity. Nothing in this
appendix shall be construed to prohibit the alteration of a legal
non-conforming structure when such alteration is required to bring the
structure into compliance with the Building Commissioner’s order in the
case of a structure determined to be unsafe.



   E.   Repairing or replacing destroyed or removed structures. A legal
non-conforming structure or portion of such structure which has been partly
or completely destroyed or removed by accidental cause, including fire,
flood, explosion, acts of God or any other casualty, may be repaired or
replaced; provided:



      1.   The structure cannot be repaired or replaced in a manner
which makes the structure legally conforming;



      2.   The owner or agent makes application for a building
permit within three months from the date of the destruction or removal and
all necessary construction is completed within six months from the date of
destruction;



      3.   The replacement structure is placed on the same footprint
of the old structure, is not higher that the old structure, retains the same
or substantially similar architectural design, is constructed of similar or
upgraded materials, all to the extent possible and to the extent permitted by
the building code and all applicable regulations; and



      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement
floor, is two feet above the regulatory flood level and all necessary,
applicable permits are obtained by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources.



   F.   Abandonment of legal non-conforming use.



      1.   In the event that a legal non-conforming use has ceased
for six months or more, there is a rebuttable presumption that the use has
been abandoned and may not be resumed without approval of the BZA. The
presumption may be rebutted by a showing by the owner or proponent of the use
that notice has been placed on file with the Building Commissioner’s office
regarding the cessation of the use and the intention to resume the use at a
later, definite date.



      2.   In no event shall an owner resume a legal non-conforming
use that has ceased for more than one year.



   G.   No application to signs. This section shall not be construed to
apply to signs.



(Ord. 2009-17, passed 10-26-2009)



§ 602  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.



   Accessory uses, buildings and structures such as private garages, tool
sheds, fences, retaining walls and landscaping are permitted in all districts
in conjunction with a primary use, building or structure provided that they
do not change the character of the district in which they are located and
that they meet all other requirements of the town code. A private swimming
pool may be permitted as an accessory use if it is surrounded by a wall or
fence so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children. In addition, the
following regulations concerning accessory buildings or uses shall be follows.



   A.   An accessory building or use shall not be erected in any
minimum side yard setback or in any front yard.



   B.   All accessory buildings or uses on a lot shall not cumulatively
occupy more than 30% of a required rear yard of said lot.



   C.   No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten
feet to any principal building, nor shall it be located closer than five feet
to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where the rear lot line is
coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be
closer than five feet to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an
accessory building or use be located within a dedicated easement or
right-of-way.



   D.   No detached accessory building shall exceed one story or 16
feet in height, except that in the industrial districts accessory buildings
may equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said district;
provided that, the building or use meets all setback and other requirements
of the town code.



   E.   Accessory buildings, structures or uses shall not be
constructed prior to the construction of the principal building, structure
and use. This means that the first building or structure placed upon a lot
shall be considered a principal building or structure and all additional
buildings shall be considered principal structures unless they qualify as
accessory buildings, as defined in this appendix, and governed by all
regulations concerning same.



§ 603  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   There shall be provided in all districts, except the B-1 Business
District, at the time of erection or enlargement of any principal structure,
off-street parking spaces for automobiles with adequate access to all spaces.
The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or
building uses, shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy as hereinafter prescribed. All spaces required under this section
must be located totally off of the street right-of-way. Any spaces located on
the street right-of-way will not count towards parking spaces required under
this section.



 


 
Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure




Business


When the words ‘usable floor space’ are used for the following uses and
parking spaces required, usable floor space shall mean the total square
footage of the building less the square footage of areas used solely for
office space, restrooms, areas used exclusively for employees such as locker
rooms and lunch room areas, and areas used for storage of files or inventory
that is not accessible to public.


   Auto wash
 
1 space per employee, plus 3 stacking spaces per bay


   Beauty parlor, barber shop
 
1.5 for each service chair, plus 1 per each employee


   Funeral homes, mortuary establishments and the like
 
1 for each 3 persons allowed in establishment as established by local, county
or state fire, building or health codes


   Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of
a plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade, shoe repair and other
similar services
 
1 for each 800 square feet of usable floor space (for that floor area used in
processing, 1 additional space shall be provided for each 2 persons employed
therein)


   Gasoline service stations
 
2 spaces per service bay and 1 space per 200 square feet of accessory retail
sales area


   Hotel, motel, bed and breakfast or retirement village
 
1 per each living or sleeping unit and 1 for each 3 employees (full or part
time), plus required spaces for any accessory use such as bar or restaurant


   Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages,
food or refreshments
 
1 for each 80 square feet of usable floor space or 1 for each 2 persons
allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or
state fire, building or health codes whichever figure is higher


   Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners
 
1 for each 2 washing and/or dry-cleaning machines


   Motor vehicle sales, RV and boat sales
 
1 for each 200 square feet of show room and sales area and 2 for each service
stall


   Planned business or shopping center


      In a regional center
 
1 space per 250 square feet gross floor area


      In a convenience center with arterial street frontage
 
1 space per 250 square feet gross floor area


   Retail stores, except as otherwise specified herein
 
One space per 250 square feet gross floor area


Industrial


   Industrial or research
 
5, plus 1 for every 1.5 employees in the largest working shift; space on site
shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant
construction


   Salvage, junk yard
 
1 per 2 employees


   Sanitary, garbage and refuse
 
1 per 2 employees


   Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices
 
5, plus 1 for every employee in the largest working shift, or 1 for every
1,700 square feet of usable floor space whichever is greater


   Warehouses, mini
 
1 space per 300 square feet of administrative office space, plus 1 space per
each 50 storage spaces


   Towers (cable TV, radio, microwave, utility, TV)
 
1 per employee per shift


   Utility substation
 
1 per 2 employees


Institutional


   Elementary and junior high schools
 
1 per teacher, employee and administrator and 1 per 3 seats in largest
assembly


   Fraternity, sorority, dormitory
 
4 per 1,000 square feet of habitable area


   Hospitals
 
1.5 per bed


   Library
 
1 space per 300 square feet gross floor area


   Nursery school, day nurseries and child care centers
 
1 for each 350 square feet of usable floor space and 1 per 2 employees


   Places of worship


      With fixed seating
 
1 space per 4 seats in main sanctuary or auditorium, plus 1 space per each
300 square feet of classroom and other meeting areas


      Without fixed seating
 
1 space for each 30 square feet of floor area in main sanctuary, plus 1 space
per each 300 square feet of classrooms and other meeting areas


   Private club or lodge hall
 
1 per 3 persons allowed within as established by local or state fire or
health codes


   Residential health care facilities
 
1 for each 4 beds


   Senior high schools, dance schools, music schools, trade schools and
vocational schools
 
1 per employee, plus 1 per 3 students based on rated design capacity


Offices


   Banks, financial civic offices
 
1 for each 250 square feet of floor area


   Business offices or professional offices, except as indicated
immediately below
 
1 for each 300 square feet gross floor area


   Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions,
including personal services
 
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area


Recreational


   Bowling alley
 
4 per bowling land and required spaces for any accessory use such as a bar or
restaurant


   Community or recreation building
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area


   Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks,
exhibition halls and assembly halls without fixed seats
 
1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established
by local, county or state fire, building or health codes


   Golf clubs and courses
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area in any main building,
plus 1 space for every 2 practice tees in the driving range, plus 3 parking
spaces for each green in the playing area plus spaces required for each
accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar


   Health clubs
 
1 for each 3 persons allowed within maximum occupancy


   Parks, public or private
 
3 parking spaces for each acre of park area


   Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assembly
 
1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of benches, plus 3/4 per each employee


   Swimming pool or natatorium
 
1 space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area


   Tennis clubs
 
1 parking space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area, excluding court
area, plus 3 parking spaces per each court; the applicant shall be
responsible for reserving space for parking that may be required in order to
obtain permission for tournaments, shows and other activities


   Theaters, cinemas, gymnasiums, auditoriums and similar places of public
assembly
 
1 space per 4 seats; the total requirement may be reduced by 1 parking space
for every 4 guest rooms contained in an attached hotel


Residential


   Apartments, per dwelling unit
 
 


      Efficiency units
 
1


      One-bedroom
 
1.25


      Two or more bedrooms
 
2


   Boarding house
 
1 for each sleeping room


   Home occupation
 
1 additional parking space over residential requirement


   Housing for the elderly
 
1 for each 2 units and 1 for each employee; should units revert to general
occupancy, then the requirements for requirements for


   Mobile home park
 
2 for each mobile home site and 1 for each employee of the mobile home park


   Nursing home
 
1 for 4 beds, plus 1 per 2 employees


   Residential, in R-1
 
3 for each dwelling unit


   Residential, in R-2 and R-3 Single-Family and Duplexes
 
2 for each dwelling unit


   Tourist rooms in existing residential buildings
 
1 per sleeping room




 



   A.   Off-street marking space requirements.



      1.   Off-street parking spaces may be located within required
side and rear yard setbacks; provided that, in any business or industrial
district that abuts a residential district directly or across the street
there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of 20
feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of
access driveways and the property line abutting a residential district. In
any business or industrial district shall be maintained a minimum
unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten feet between the nearest point of
the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways and any street
right-of-way as indicated on the Thoroughfare Plan.



      2.   Off-street parking for other than residential use shall
be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building in which it is
intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the
nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown on all
lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant.



      3.   Required residential off-street parking spaces shall
consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage or combination
thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve.



      4.   Any area once designated as required off-street parking
shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are
approved elsewhere by the Building Commissioner.



      5.   Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this
appendix in connection with the operation of an existing building or use
shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a
similar new building or new use.



      6.   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide
the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking
spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several
individual uses computed separately.



      7.   The storage of merchandise is prohibited on off-street
parking spaces.



      8.   For those uses not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use
similar in type as determined by the Building Commissioner.



      9.   When units or measurements determining the number of
required parking spaces result in the requirements of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including one-half shall require one parking space.



   B.   Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and
maintenance. Whenever the off-street parking requirements require the
building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lot shall
be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
standards and regulations.



      1.   No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a
permit is hereafter issued by the Building Commissioner. Applications for
permit shall be submitted to the Building Department in such form as may be
determined with two sets of site plans for the development and construction
of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this appendix will be fully
complied with. Such permit may be combined with permits for principal
structures.



      2.   Plan for layout of off-street parking facilities shall be
in accord with following minimum requirements:



 

Parking Angle in Degrees
 
Maneuvering Lane Width
 
Parking Space Width
 
Plus Parking Space Length
 
Total Width of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lanes
 
Total Width of Two Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lanes


0 (parallel)
 
12 ft.
 
8 ft. 6 in.
 
23 ft.
 
20 ft. 6 in.
 
29 ft.


30 –53
 
12 ft.
 
9 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
32 ft.
 
52 ft.


54 – 74
 
15 ft.
 
9 ft. 6 in.
 
20 ft.
 
36 ft. 6 in.
 
58 ft.


75 – 90
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
60 ft.



 



      3.   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of
maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. This
section shall not apply to one- or two-family residential unit’s off-street
parking.



      4.   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means
of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles.
Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than
single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for
single-family residential use.



      5.   All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic
movements except that a 90- degree pattern may permit two-way traffic.



      6.   Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking
lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use
shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any
single family residential district.



      7.   Where the off-street parking area borders on any
residential (R-1, R-2, R-3) district, a screening wall shall be erected with
a minimum height of six feet so as to ensure that the contents of the
off-street parking area are screened from the view of the adjoining
residentially zoned district. The screening wall required by this section
shall be by plantings that do not lose their foliage in winter months so that
the screening provided is on a year-round basis. In the event plantings
cannot be accomplished in the specific area, a combination of plantings,
fencing or masonry screening walls or partitions will be acceptable so long
as the intent of this section is fully complied with.



      8.   The entire parking area, including parking spaces and
maneuvering lanes, required under this appendix, shall be provided with
asphalt or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by
the Street Commissioner. The parking area shall be surfaced within one year
from the date the occupancy permit is issued. Off-street parking areas shall
be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking
area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or
towards buildings.



      9.   All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking
area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the
parking area only.



      10.   In all cases where a wall extends to an alley, which is
a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be
permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from access to the parking
area.



      11.   No parking lot or part thereof shall cause interference
with or obstruct the view of traffic, a traffic sign or traffic signal.



      12.   Drainage and runoff calculations must be submitted for
review before obtaining a building permit to construct a parking lot.



      13.   Additional parking lot requirements are delineated in
§§ 803 and 804.



   C.   Off-street loading and unloading. On the same premises with
every building, structure or part thereof, involving the receipt or
distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided
and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading
in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated
rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows.



      1.   Within an industrial district, all spaces shall be laid
out in the dimension of at least ten feet by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in
area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches
shall be provided with a pavement having an asphalt or portland cement binder
so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. All spaces in I-1
and I-2 Districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor
area:



 

Gross Floor Area (in Square Feet)
 
Loading and Unloading Space Required


1 – 1,400
 
None


1,400 – 20,000
 
1 space


20,000 – 100,000
 
1 space, plus 1 space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square
feet


100,001 and over
 
5 spaces



 



      2.   All loading and unloading in an industrial district shall
be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in
no instance be permitted in the front yard. In those instances where exterior
side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a
public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place on said exterior
side when setback is equal to at least 50 feet.



§ 604  TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.



   A.   Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction
work, seasonal sales or emergencies may be permitted by the Building
Commissioner, if the proposed site is acceptable and neighboring uses are not
adversely affected. They shall be removed promptly when their function has
been fulfilled. Permits for temporary structures may be issued for a period
up to 24 months.



   B.   Residing in basement or foundation structures shall not be
permitted.



§ 605  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Home occupations, as defined in Article II of this appendix, shall be
subject to the following requirements.



   A.   The principal use of the structure or dwelling unit shall
remain residential and the operator of the home occupation shall reside in
the dwelling unit.



   B.   No more traffic shall be generated by a home occupation than
would be normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.



   C.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
which creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses which can be detected off the
premises.



   D.   In case of electrical interference, no equipment or process
shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage
off the premises.



§ 606  OFF-STREET LOADING.



   Every building which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles
of material or merchandise shall provide off-street loading berths of a size
and arrangement appropriate for the types of vehicles utilizing this space.
In no case will loading or unloading be permitted within public rights-of-way.



§ 607  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses established or placed into operation after the effective date
of this appendix shall comply with the following performance standards in the
interests of protecting the public health, safety and welfare and lessen
injury to property. No use in existence on the effective date of the
ordinance shall be so altered or modified to conflict with those standards.



   A.   Fire protection. Firefighting equipment and prevention measures
acceptable to the town’s Fire Department shall be readily available and
apparent when any activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or
explosive materials is conducted.



   B.   Electrical disturbance. No use shall cause electrical
disturbance adversely affecting radio, television or other equipment in the
vicinity.



   C.   Noise. No use shall produce noise in such a manner as to be
objectionable because of volume, frequency, intermittence, beat, shrillness
or vibration. Said noise shall be muffled or otherwise controlled so as not
to become detrimental; provided, however, public safety sirens and related
apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be exempt from this standard.



   D.   Vibration. No use shall cause vibrations or concussions
detectable beyond the lot lines without the aid of instruments.



   E.   Odor. No use shall emit across the lot lines malodorous gas or
matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along the
lot lines.



   F.   Air pollution. No use shall discharge across the lot lines fly
ash, dust, smoke, vapors, noxious, toxic or corrosive matters, or other air
pollutants in such concentration as to be detrimental to health, animals,
vegetation or property.



   G.   Heat and glare. No use shall produce heat or glare in such a
manner as to create a nuisance perceptible from any point beyond the lot
lines.



   H.   Water pollution. No use shall produce erosion or other
pollutants in such quantity as to be detrimental to adjacent properties and
conflict with water pollution standards established by public agencies.



   I.   Waste matter. No use shall accumulate within the lot or
discharge beyond the lot lines any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in
violation of applicable public health, safety and welfare standards and
regulations.



§ 608  TRAILERS AND SIMILAR EQUIPMENT.



   From and after the effective date of this appendix, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any trailer or similar
equipment parked or located within the town for the purpose of human
habitation without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Building
Commissioner. The application for said permit shall state the lot or legal
description of the land upon which such trailer or similar equipment is to be
parked or located, the length of time for which it is proposed to keep said
trailer or similar equipment within the town, the number, age and sex of the
persons who are to occupy the same, and what arrangements will be made for
utilities such as heat, light, water and sewage and waste disposal. After
receiving any such application and being duly advised in the premises, the
Building Commissioner may issue temporary permit for the parking and use of
such trailer or similar equipment within the town for a period to be stated
in such permit, but not for more than six months at any one time. The fee for
such period shall be $25 for each permit or renewal thereof, unless situated
within an approved mobile home park.



§ 609  MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   The establishment, location and use of manufactured homes as residences
shall be permitted in any zone permitting installation of a dwelling unit
subject to all the requirements and limitations applying generally to such
residential use in the district; and, provided that, such homes shall meet
the following requirements and limitations.



   A.   The homes shall meet all requirements applicable to
single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement, location,
building and occupancy permits and other certifications as may be required by
the town, state or federal law.



   B.   The homes shall be attached and anchored to a permanent
foundation in conformance with the regulations in the state’s One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code and with manufacturer’s installation
specifications.



   C.   The homes shall be covered with an exterior material
customarily used on site-built residential dwellings, and such material shall
extend over the top and such material shall meet the town’s site-built
residential dwelling homes’ standard.



   D.   The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily
used on site-built residential dwellings, such as asbestos, fiberglass,
shake, asphalt shingles or tile materials, which shall be installed onto a
surface appropriately pitched for the materials used.



§ 610  SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   A.   Intent of regulation. The purpose of this section is to
preserve the integrity and character of residential neighborhoods in the town
to prevent the concentration of sexually-oriented businesses or uses in areas
where the adverse effects of such businesses would have a deleterious impact
upon property values, and to protect minors from the objectionable
operational characteristics of such businesses and uses by restricting their
close proximity to churches, parks, schools and residential areas. In
adopting this section, the town recognizes that there are important and
substantial government interests that require reasonable regulation of the
time, place and manner of such businesses within the town’s jurisdiction.
These important and substantial government interests include adverse
secondary effects such as increased crime and urban blight, diminished
property values and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.



   B.   Definitions. The following words, term and phrases, when used
in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



      ENTRANCEWAY or GATEWAY. An intersection of streets or
thoroughfares that mark entry into the town or more specifically into certain
areas of the town. The location of such ENTRANCEWAYS or GATEWAYS include:



         a.   SR 49 and CR 1100 N;



         b.   SR 49 and Porter Avenue;



         c.   SR 49 and Indian Boundary Road;



         d.   SR 149 and CR 1050 N;



         e.   Indian Boundary Road and Calumet Avenue;



         f.   Porter Avenue and Calumet Road;



         g.   Broadway and Wood Street;



         h.   Calumet Avenue and CR 1100 N;



         i.   11th Street and CR 1050 N;



         j.   Gateway Boulevard and SR 49;



         k.   Voyage Boulevard and SR 49;



         l.   Sidewalk Road and SR 49;



         m.   CR 1100 N and Pearson Road; and



         n.   CR 200 W and CR 1050 N.



      LEWD MATTER. Any matter which:



         a.   The average person finds, when applying
contemporary community standards and when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest;



         b.   Depicts or describes patently offensive
representations simulated:



            1.   Ultimate sexual acts, normal, perverted or
actual; or



            2.   Masturbation, excretory functions or the
exhibition of the genitals or genital area.



         c.   Nothing herein is intended to include or proscribe
any matter which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it
is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.



      MOTION PICTURE FILM. Any:



         a.   Film or plate negative;



         b.   Film or plate positive;



         c.   Film designed to be projected on a screen for
exhibition;



         d.   Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in
negative, positive or digital form, designed for exhibition by projection on
a screen; or



         e.   Video tape or any other medium used to
electronically or digitally reproduce images on a screen.



      NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.



         a.   The appearance of bare human buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or



         b.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully
cover a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola
or nipple of the female breast.



      SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which clothing
covers no more than the genitals, anus, pubic region and areola of the female
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.



      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter
establishment, escort agency or nude model studio, each of which are more
particularly defined as follows.



         a.   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form
of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors or similar machines or other image producing machines, for viewing
by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



         b.   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY SHOP or ADULT VIDEO
STORE. A commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues, or devotes a significant or substantial portion of
its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or viewing, for any
form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:



            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”;



            2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which
are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others; and



            3.   An establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or
viewing of materials depicting or describing “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, and still be categorized
as adult bookstore, adult novelty shop or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being
categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty shop or adult video store, so
long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale,
rental or viewing, for any form of consideration, the specified materials
which depict or describe “specified anatomical areas” or “specified
sexual activities”.



         c.   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant
“bottle club” or similar commercial establishment, whether or not
alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features:



            1.   Persons who appear nude or in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity;



            2.   Live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual
activities”; or



            3.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.



         d.   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment which:



            1.   Offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and which advertises the availability of this sexually-oriented type
of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by
means of any off-premises advertising including, but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or television; and



            2.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period
of time less than ten hours or allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the
sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours.



         e.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial
establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.



         f.   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium
or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration,
regularly features persons who appear nude, in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized by exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”.



         g.   ESCORT. A person who, for any form of
consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease for another person.



         h.   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



         i.   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of, or in connection
with, “specified sexual activities”, or where any person providing such
treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his or her
“specified anatomical areas”. The definition of sexually-oriented
businesses shall not include the practice of massage in or by any licensed
hospital, licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or any nurse
or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath, or by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional
or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program, or by
any person so licensed to perform such activities.



         j.   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical
areas” for money or any form of consideration and is to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons.



         k.   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or
commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes
offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of engaging in “specified
sexual activities” or the exposure of “specified anatomical areas”, or
activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity. The definition of “sexually-oriented businesses” shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of following:



         a.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or



         b.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:



         a.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



         b.   Sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;



         c.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;



         d.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence; or



         e.   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection
with, any of the activities set forth in subsections a. though d. above of
this definition.



   C.   Prohibitions. No sexually-oriented businesses shall be
permitted unless such business site or proposed site is located in a district
identified as “S-1”, subject to the following further restrictions.



      1.   No such use shall be located within a 1,000-foot radius
of any other such use.



      2.   No such use shall be located within a 1,000-foot radius
of any parcel used for residential purposes, or a parcel located in a
residential zoning district or any portion of a planned unit development
designated for residential purposes.



      3.   No such use shall be located within a 1,000-foot radius
of any school, child care center, child care home, nursing shelter, care or
rest home, religious institution, park, playing field, pool or billiard hall,
coin-operated amusement center, dance center, ice or roller skating rink,
park or other public recreational facility typically catering to minors,
indoor or outdoor theater, art gallery, museum, library or other area where
large numbers of minors travel or congregate.



      4.   No such use shall be located within a 1,000-foot radius
from the intersection of any two streets that constitute an entranceway or
gateway into the town, as defined by this section.



      5.   The distance between one sexually-oriented business and
another such use shall be measured in a straight line, with regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior structural wall
of each such business. The distance between a sexually-oriented business and
any church, school, park or other establishment referenced in subsection B.5.
above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the sexually-
oriented business to the nearest property line of the church, school, park or
other such use. If a sexually- oriented business is part of or included
within an integrated center, only the portion of said center or leased space
occupied by such sexually-oriented business shall be included in determining
the closest exterior structural wall of said establishment.



      6.   No such use shall be permitted to operate as an accessory
use unless it is permitted by this section.



   D.   Exterior display. No sexually-oriented business shall be
conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening
from any public view.



   E.   Signs. Signs for such establishments shall not display any
pictures, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or other pictorial
representations of a sexually-oriented nature, and may contain only the legal
name and address of said establishment. The total number of business wall
signs for any single establishment shall not exceed two.



      1.   Sign surface area. The sign surface area of a business
wall sign for a sexually-oriented business shall not exceed an amount equal
to 5% of the front building facade of the first floor elevation (first ten
feet) of the premises occupied by the sexually-oriented business, or 40
square feet, whichever is the lesser, of all signs combined. The maximum sign
surface area of a freestanding sign, where permitted, shall not exceed 40
square feet gross per side.



      2.   Lighting. Signs and sign structures may be illuminated;
provided, however, such illumination shall not be by way of exposed neon,
exterior lighting (e.g., spot or floodlights), or any flashing or animated
lights (either interior to the sign, on the exterior of the sign or as a
border to the sign).



   F.   Penalty. It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct,
reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain or use any structure or land in
violation of any of the provisions of this appendix, in addition to the
penalties provided herein, the Plan Commission, BZA or the Town Council may
institute a suit for injunction directing removal of a structure erected in
violation of this appendix or for the remedying of any other violation of
this appendix. Any person, firm or other legal entity who violates any
provision of this appendix may be cited into a court of law and subject to §
1-9 of this code of ordinances, and provides for a fine not to exceed $2,500
per day for each day that the violation exists. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2005-19, passed 11-14-2005)



ARTICLE VII. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS



§ 701  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   A.   A planned unit development (PUD) is a privilege that will be
granted in only those cases that it is determined by the adoption of a PUD
ordinance that a PUD will promote proper development which is of benefit to
the town community as a whole. A PUD is not a right which can be claimed
solely by apparent compliance with standards established in this article.



   B.   This article encourages innovations in development so that the
growing demands for housing may be met by greater variety of type, design and
siting of dwellings which promotes the conservation and more efficient use of
land. This article also encourages the conservation and more efficient use of
land for non-residential development. This article recognizes that a rigid
set of space requirements along with building and use specifications would
frustrate the application of these concepts. Accordingly, where a PUD
District ordinance is deemed appropriate, the land may be designated and
developed as a PUD District in strict accordance with the ordinance that must
be adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1500 et seq.



§ 702  OBJECTIVES.



   In order to carry out the intent of this article, a PUD should endeavor
to provide:



   A.   A choice in the types of environment, occupancy tenure, types
of housing, types of ownership and community facilities available to existing
and potential residents;



   B.   Usable open space and recreational areas;



   C.   Convenience in the location of accessory, commercial and
service areas;



   D.   Preservation of natural topographical and geological features
with emphasis on:



      1.   Prevention of soil erosion;



      2.   Conservation of existing surface and sub-surface water;
and



      3.   Preservation of tree cover, unique or sensitive natural
areas and/or preservation of quality open space.



   E.   A safe and efficient network of streets;



   F.   An efficient network of utilities;



   G.   The development of land consistent with the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan; and



   H.   A more efficient utilization of the land than what might be
obtained through other development procedures.



§ 703  DELEGATION.



   No authority to conduct secondary review of a PUD District ordinance
under I.C. 36-7-4-1509(c) is granted as the Town Council expects that any PUD
District ordinance presented to it shall express in detailed terms the
development requirements that apply, as opposed to development requirements
being expressed in general terms. In situations where the PUD District
ordinance includes detailed terms of development requirements that apply,
secondary review of the PUD District ordinance is not required. However, all
platting requirements of this appendix is hereby adopted as the procedure for
platting all parcels of real property for which a PUD District ordinance is
adopted.



§ 704  PROCEDURE FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ORDINANCE
CONSIDERATION.



   A.   A petitioner, who must hold either legal or equitable title to
the real estate in question, files a concept plan at the office of the
town’s Clerk-Treasurer at least 20 days prior to the next regular meeting
of the Plan Commission for preliminary review by department heads. Any
revisions as a result of the preliminary review by department heads shall be
filed at least ten days prior to the next regular meeting of the Plan
Commission. The concept plan does not require a formal application, a fee or
the filing of a proposed PUD District ordinance.



   B.   The Plan Commission shall review the concept plan and its
related documents. The Plan Commission may call upon other public and/or
private consultants as necessary to provide a sound review of the concept
plan. This review of the plan is only concerned with general conceptual merit
and in no way shall commit to any future acceptance or rejection of the
detailed PUD District ordinance.



   C.   Once concept plan review has been deemed completed by the Plan
Commission, the petitioner may submit its formal proposed PUD District
ordinance to the Plan Commission. These documents must be filed at least 20
days prior to the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission for preliminary
review by department heads. Any revisions as a result of the preliminary
review by department heads shall be filed at least ten days prior to the next
regular  meeting of the Plan Commission, unless the Plan Commission waives
this requirement, and the petitioner must pay all applicable fees at this
time.



   D.   The Plan Commission will then determine whether the proposed
PUD District ordinance is in proper form and contain all of the information
required by this article and, in the event that these questions are answered
in the affirmative, shall then set this matter for a public hearing in
accordance with its rules and regulations for public hearings.



   E.   A petitioner must meet with the town’s Department of Parks
and Recreation for purposes of obtaining the Park Board’s recommendation to
the Plan Commission concerning open space for this development.



   F.   The Plan Commission holds a public hearing on the proposed PUD
District ordinance.



   G.   When official action is taken by the Plan Commission on the
proposed PUD District ordinance, the Plan Commission must certify its
official action to the Town Council with either a favorable recommendation,
an unfavorable recommendation or no recommendation.



   H.   The Town Council shall consider the proposal for a PUD District
ordinance in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-608.



   I.   In the event a PUD District ordinance is adopted, the
petitioner may then proceed with primary and secondary plat approval before
the Plan Commission utilizing the same procedures and requirements as set
forth in the subdivision regulations found in Article X of this appendix of
the town code as if the same had been reprinted herein in its entirety.
However, in order to assist petitioners in this process, petitioners shall be
allowed to initiate the primary plat approval process during the PUD District
ordinance process so that the same night the public hearing takes place for
the PUD District ordinance, a properly prepared petitioner may request the
Plan Commission to set a public hearing for primary plat approval for the
development.



(Ord. 2015-04, passed 4-27-2015; Ord. 2006-05, passed 4-10-2006)



§ 705  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   No building or structure shall be closer than 25 feet to any
lot line dividing land inside the PUD District from land zoned or used as
residential outside the PUD District.



   B.   All of the regulations of this appendix concerning both uses
and development standards shall apply to the PUD District, unless the PUD
District ordinance provides for and specifically delineates the variances
requested from the use districts and development standards set forth in this
appendix.



§ 706  SITE AND STRUCTURE REGULATIONS.



   A.   Site and structure regulations for PUD Districts shall adhere
to the following regulations.



      1.   Plot and lot sizes, dimensions, structure heights and
locations thereon may be freely disposed and arranged in conformity to the
overall density standards recommended by the Plan Commission or stated in
this article. Minimum lot size, frontage and maximum lot coverage are
specified in this appendix, however, in order to vary this appendix
regulations concerning same, a request must be made. The Plan Commission may
be guided by common, good planning practice.



      2.   District regulations governing side and rear yard sizes
in residential areas may be varied. However, proper buffering and landscaping
must be included in the proposed PUD District ordinance when conflicting or
dissimilar land uses abut.



      3.   A minimum of a 30-foot front yard setback shall be
provided on any county road, state or federal highway, or on any thoroughfare
designated as arterial or collector in the thoroughfare component of the
Comprehensive Plan. This minimum may be altered in the sound discretion of
the Plan Commission and Town Council in mixed use or non-residential portions
of the PUD District Ordinance as specifically delineated in same.



      4.   All open spaces between structures shall be protected by
fully recorded covenants running with the land.



      5.   Every residential dwelling unit, business or industrial
complex or building shall have access to a public street, court, walkway or
other area dedicated to public use or subject to an easement for access. The
boundaries and extent of the lot or plot upon which any single unit detached
or attached dwelling is located shall be clearly defined and monumented.



      6.   Right-of-way and pavement widths for internal ways,
streets and alleys shall be determined from sound planning and engineering
standards in conformity with the estimated needs of the full development
proposed and the traffic to be generated not only from the development, but
from adjoining parcels of land and shall be adequate and sufficient in size,
location and design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking, loading
needs and the access of firefighting equipment and other emergency vehicles.



   B.   The developer of a PUD District shall furnish public water and
sanitary sewage facilities based on agreement with the appropriate municipal
officials and/or utility companies. The developer shall provide all necessary
storm drainage, highway access, paved service streets, parking facilities,
fire hydrants, off-street lighting and other public improvements deemed
necessary by the town, and shall make reasonable provision for service to the
connection with adjoining properties held in other ownership.



§ 707  USABLE OPEN SPACE.



   Usable open space is of paramount importance to any proposed PUD
District ordinance. Usable open space is considered to be land easily
adaptable for active recreational uses such as softball fields, soccer fields
and the like along with passive uses such as recreational trails, picnic
areas and the like. At a bare minimum, any PUD District ordinance proposal
must contain provisions for lands for local park and recreational purposes in
accordance with §§ 1000-101 through 1000-103 of this appendix.



§ 708  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   A.   The PUD District ordinance should substantially conform to the
Comprehensive Plan with respect to type, character and intensity of use and
public facilities. Exceptions to the town’s Comprehensive Plan may be made
in the adoption of a PUD District ordinance when there would be a direct and
substantial benefit to the town.



   B.   The PUD shall be located in an area in which transportation
systems, police and fire protection, other public facilities and utilities,
including sewage and water, are or will be available when the parcel is
developed and are adequate for the uses proposed; provided, however, that,
the petitioner may make provisions for such facilities or utilities which are
not presently available.



   C.   There is no minimum PUD size contained in this appendix.



   D.   In examining the proposed PUD District ordinance, the Town
Council and its Plan Commission shall consider the following:



      1.   Compatibility of the development with surrounding land
uses;



      2.   Availability and coordination of water, sanitary sewers,
storm water drainage and other utilities;



      3.   Management of traffic in a manner that creates conditions
favorable to health, safety, convenience and the harmonious development of
the community. In considering the criteria listed under this number, the
proposed PUD District ordinance must provide for the following:



         a.   The design and location of the proposed street and
highway access points minimize safety hazards and potential congestions;



         b.   The capacity of adjacent streets and highways is
sufficient to safely and efficiently accept traffic that will be generated by
the new development; and



         c.   The entrances, streets and internal traffic
circulation facilities in the proposed PUD District ordinance and development
plan are compatible and, wherever feasible, connectible with existing and
planned streets and adjacent developments.



      4.   Whether the major components of the PUD District are
appropriately located and are able to continue to function as a sole and
separate unit if all phases of the PUD are not completed, taking into
consideration factors such as the infrastructure guarantee procedures and
subdivision regulations all as found in this appendix;



      5.   Building setback lines;



      6.   Density of proposed development;



      7.   Building coverage;



      8.   Building separation;



      9.   Vehicle and pedestrian circulation;



      10.   Parking;



      11.   Landscaping;



      12.   Height, scale, materials and style of improvements;



      13.   Signage;



      14.   Open space including park and recreational space;



      15.   Outdoor lighting;



      16.   Conformance to town standards;



      17.   Whether or not the PUD is a genuine PUD or represents an
attempt to circumvent the prescribed zoning and/or subdivision regulations
without a resulting benefit to the town’s community as a whole;



      18.   Effects on public health, safety, morals and welfare;



      19.   Preservation of natural topographical, geological
features with emphasis upon:



         a.   Prevention of soil erosion;



         b.   Conservation of existing surface and subsurface
water;



         c.   Preservation of sensitive or unique natural areas;
and



         d.   Preservation of major trees or other environmental
enhancing features.



      20.   Other requirements considered appropriate by the Town
Council and its Plan Commission.



§ 709  PERMITTED USES.



   Table A located in the § 505 shall apply to uses for the proposed PUD
District ordinance. However, the uses may be varied by complete compliance
with this article in the sound discretion of the Town Council upon receiving
advice from its Plan Commission.



§ 710  CONCEPT PLAN.



   A.   In order to allow the Plan Commission and the petitioner to
reach an understanding of the basic design requirement prior to detailed
design, the developer shall submit as its concept plan the following:



      1.   An area map showing the property proposed to be developed
as a PUD and also adjacent property owners and existing uses located within
300 feet of the parcel in question;



      2.   A legal description of the parcel proposed as a PUD;



      3.   A list of all requested variances from this appendix that
the petitioner wishes to be a part of this PUD;



      4.   A list including location of all proposed uses to be
contained within the PUD; and



      5.   A sketch plan approximately to scale, though it need not
be to the precision of a finished engineering or architectural drawing, that
clearly shows the following:



         a.   The existing features of the site including
topography;



         b.   The proposed location of the various uses and their
areas in acres;



         c.   The general outlines of the proposed interior
roadway system and all existing rights-of-way and easements, whether public
or private;



         d.   Delineation of the various residential areas
indicating for each such area its general extent, size and composition in
terms of total number of dwelling units and approximate percentage allocation
by dwelling type;



         e.   Delineation of the various non-residential areas
such as commercial or industrial areas, indicating for each such area its
general extent, size and composition in terms of total number of buildings
and approximate percentage allocation by unit type;



         f.   A calculation of the residential density in
dwelling units per gross acre including interior roadways;



         g.   The interior open space system including land to be
utilized for park and recreational purposes;



         h.   Where portions of the site are subject to flooding,
the plan shall indicate extent and frequency;



         i.   Where areas lie in aircraft approach and holding
patterns such areas shall be indicated;



         j.   The proposed provision for disposition of storm
water and sanitary sewage and source of water service;



         k.   The substance of any covenants, grants, easements
or any other restrictions to be imposed upon the land or buildings including
easements for public utilities;



         l.   The proposed provisions for streets, walkways and
parking including locations and widths;



         m.   The general description of the availability of
other community facilities such as schools, fire protection services, parks
and how these facilities will be affected by the proposal;



         n.   General statement as to how common open space is to
be owned and maintained; and



         o.   If the development is to be phased, a general
indication of how the phasing is to proceed.



   B.   The purpose of the concept plan is to obtain as much
information about the proposed PUD as possible and to make advice and
assistance available to the petitioner, and to allow the Plan Commission, the
town’s department heads and the petitioner to discuss the proposal and
determine whether a PUD based, in general, upon the concept plan appears to
be in general compliance with this article.



§ 711  PUD DISTRICT ORDINANCE.



   A.   Once the Plan Commission has concluded the concept plan process
by giving its advice to the petitioner, the petitioner may then formally
submit an application on the form prescribed by the Plan Commission for a PUD
District ordinance. The proposed PUD District ordinance shall express, in
detailed terms, all development requirements that apply to the proposed PUD
District. It is understood and agreed to by the petitioner that all town
standards, use and development standards shall apply to the PUD District
unless the variances to same are specifically delineated in the written text
portion of the PUD District ordinance.



   B.   All PUD District ordinances will consist of two components, the
first being the written text of the ordinance and the second being the
detailed plan for the development of this parcel in the form of a drawing as
set forth in this section.



      1.   The written text portion of the PUD District ordinance
shall contain at least the following:



         a.   Name and address of petitioner;



         b.   Legal description of proposed PUD District;



         c.   A copy of the recorded document showing
petitioner’s ownership interest in this parcel;



         d.   All town standards, use and development standards
unless the variances to same are specifically delineated;



         e.   Delineation of all uses and area in acres of each
proposed use;



         f.   Total number of residential units and percent of
each type of each residential uses;



         g.   Delineation of each business and/or industrial use,
and total area in acres of each business and/or industrial use;



         h.   Phasing schedule of development;



         i.   Detailed description of location and proposed use
for all proposed open and/or recreational spaces;



         j.   General description of community services available
to the proposed PUD District’s residents including schools, fire
protection, parks and all public/private utilities;



         k.   General statement on proposed ownership and
maintenance of common open space;



         l.   Proposed construction schedule; and



         m.   A general statement demonstrating how the proposed
PUD District ordinance conforms to:



            1.   The objectives of PUD Districts as set forth
in § 702 of this appendix, which shall include a specific written submission
addressing the items in § 708S. of this appendix, having to do with
preservation of natural topographical and geological features of the land in
a proposed PUD District; and



            2.   A list of all proposed written commitments
concerning the use and development of the land contained in the proposed PUD
District ordinance.



      2.   The drawing portion of the PUD District ordinance showing
the plan of development for this parcel shall include 15 copies of the
proposed plan of development with the following information:



         a.   An area map showing the property under
consideration and all properties and easements within 300 feet of
petitioner’s property;



         b.   A topographic map showing contour intervals of not
more than two feet of elevation shall be provided;



         c.   The drawing shall include:



            1.   The name and address of the petitioner;



            2.   Legal description of proposed PUD District;



            3.   North point, scale and date;



            4.   Boundaries of the properties platted to scale;



            5.   Existing water courses;



            6.   A development plan showing location, proposed
use and height of all buildings;



            7.   Location and proposed development of all open
spaces including parks, playgrounds and open reservations;



            8.   All areas where natural vegetation will be
preserved shall be noted;



            9.   Location of outdoor storage, if any; and



            10.   Location of all existing and proposed
infrastructure improvements, including  roads, sidewalks, pedestrian ways,
bike paths and the like, drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences,
retention or detention ponds and the like, descriptions of the methods of
sewages and solid waste disposal and water utility, and location of such
facilities, location and size of all signs, location and design of all
streets, parking and truck load areas with ingress and egress drives relating
to same and including proposed lighting for parking or truck loading areas.



         d.   A transparent overlay or separate map showing all
soils, areas and their classifications, including those areas with moderate
to high susceptibility to flooding and moderate to high susceptibility to
erosion.



   C.   In its review, the Plan Commission and/or Town Council may wish
to consult with the Town Engineer, the Town Attorney, its other departments,
including, but not limited to, representatives of federal and state agencies
including the Soil Conservation Service, Department of Natural Resources,
Army Corps of Engineers, and the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management. Independent consultants or companies may be retained by the Town
Council or its Plan Commission to seek assistance to properly review the
proposed PUD District ordinance. All consultant and other fees required by
this appendix to be paid by the petitioner shall be paid on an ongoing
monthly basis throughout the entire PUD District and platting process with
the last payment required within 30 days after the conclusion of the PUD
District ordinance process and then again within 30 days after the conclusion
of the platting process. All fees required must be paid regardless of whether
the proposed PUD District ordinance of the applicant is approved, amended,
rejected or withdrawn by the petitioner or dismissed for lack of prosecution
of same by the petitioner. The Town Council or its Plan Commission may also
require such additional information in any proposed PUD District ordinance
that appears to said boards to be of assistance in its consideration of this
matter.



§ 712  WRITTEN COMMITMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEES.



   A.   When adopting or amending a PUD District ordinance, the Town
Council may do any or all of the following:



      1.   Impose reasonable conditions on a proposed PUD; and/or



      2.   Allow or require the petitioner, as owner of the real
property contained within the PUD District ordinance, to make a written
commitment concerning the use and development of this parcel in a manner
authorized by I.C. 36-7-4-1015.



   B.   The circumstances under which a written commitment can be made,
modified or terminated will be all circumstances in which the making,
modification or termination of a written commitment is deemed to be in
furtherance of the intent and the objectives contained in this article as
determined in the discretion of the Town Council, in the case of the adoption
or amending of a PUD District ordinance. The Town Council may require or
allow a written commitment, or may approve or disapprove modification or
termination of a written commitment to any extent it deems appropriate in
attempting to further the intent and objectives of this article.



   C.   The Town Council may permit or require a written commitment by
the petitioner which shall be in written form, and detailed on the written
portion of the PUD District ordinance and also on the plat of development for
the PUD District in recordable form acceptable to the office of the Recorder
of the county. The written commitment may be enforceable by the town or its
Plan Commission or any property owner within the PUD District or any property
owner within 300 feet of the PUD District. Enforcement by the owners of
property within the PUD District or property owners within 300 feet of the
PUD District are determined to be classes of specially affected persons who
may enforce a written commitment by the seeking of an injunction and/or
damages in a court of competent jurisdiction. The Town Council and/or its
Plan Commission is also considered a class of specially affected persons who
may enforce a written commitment in the same manner in which private citizens
may as set forth above. Additionally, the Town Council or its Plan Commission
may, through the Town Attorney, file suit against the offending party in any
court of competent jurisdiction seeking a restraining order, temporary or
permanent injunction, and also a fine of up to $2,500 per day for each
violation of the existing written commitment. Additionally, no building or
occupancy permit shall be issued for land within the PUD District while a
violation of the written commitments exist.



   D.   The notice and hearing required for the granting, amending or
termination of a written commitment shall be part of the process for
consideration of the PUD District ordinance. No termination or modification
of a written commitment may be had unless a public hearing is held by the
Plan Commission, with due notice to all parties located within 300 feet of
the PUD District and given at least ten days before the date set for the
hearing. All other rules of the Plan Commission shall apply in determining
how notice is to be given to interested parties and who is required to give
that notice.



§ 713  PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PLAT APPROVAL.



   A.   Once a PUD District ordinance is adopted by the Town Council,
the petitioner then may make application upon such forms and upon the payment
of all required fees with the Plan Commission, who shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over the platting contained within a PUD District.



   B.   No building permits for the construction of any structures,
other than public improvements required for the PUD District, shall be issued
until the secondary plat of the PUD has been approved and recorded and also
until the written guarantee for the infrastructure has been posted and
accepted by the Plan Commission.



§ 714  AMENDING A PUD DISTRICT ORDINANCE.



   A.   Any  amendments to a  PUD District ordinance will be
processed in the same manner as a zone map change in accordance with this
appendix and the Code of Indiana.



   B.   There shall be a public hearing and recommendation by the Plan
Commission, with proper notice therefor.



   C.   The Town Council shall act upon the recommendation at a
properly noticed public meeting within 90 days of certification of the PUD
amendment by the Plan Commission.



§ 715  FEES.



   A.   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or any other entity that files a petition for a PUD District
ordinance shall be charged a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees
established by the Town Council, as noted in this appendix as is amended by
the attached fees for PUDs. Additionally, any person, firm, corporation,
partnership, limited liability company or any other entity shall also be
responsible for any costs incurred in the filing of the secondary plat or
amendments thereto with the County Recorder and the costs of any paid
consultants to the Town Council or its Plan Commission including, but not
limited to, that of the Town Attorney and the Town Engineer who shall be paid
at their prevailing hourly rate for the time in which the work is performed.



   B.   No building permits shall be issued for any construction in any
PUD District for which the aforementioned fees and costs are unpaid.



§ 716  GENERAL.



   In administering its responsibilities pursuant to this appendix, the
Town Council and/or its Plan Commission may promulgate any rule, enter into
negotiations or procedures consistent with this appendix and/or state law.



ARTICLE VIII. FENCE AND LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 801  INTENT AND PURPOSES.



   The intent and purpose of the landscaping requirements of this article
is to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise and
pollution, air pollution, visual pollution, air temperature and artificial
light glare; to improve the appearance of property and VUAs abutting public
rights-of-way; to require buffering between certain non-compatible land uses
to minimize the opportunities of nuisances; and to protect, preserve and to
promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of surrounding
neighborhoods.



§ 802  APPLICABILITY.



   The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all zoning
districts in the town, except B-1, in the following cases.



   A.   Whenever there is a new construction of a primary business
structure or a platting of a PUD, a subdivision or subdivision phase,
applicable requirements for all sections of this article shall be met.



   B.   Whenever there is an addition or enlargement of 10,000 or more
square feet to an existing business building, applicable requirements of all
sections of this article shall be met.



   C.   Whenever any addition, enlargement or remodeling of less than
10,000 square feet requires additional parking, the requirements of § 803A.
of this appendix shall apply for VUAs and the plan set forth in § 805 of
this appendix shall apply and be submitted as part of the building permit
application.



§ 803  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   The town recognizes that landscaping, greenspace and greenbelts provide
aesthetic and environmental benefits, and promote harmony between different
land uses. All requirements of this section shall apply to business or
industrial development for which a building permit is applied for after the
effective date of this appendix.



   A.   Parking lots, VUAs.



      1.   Landscaping perimeters of vehicular use areas (VUA).



         a.   Along streets. To reduce headlights intrusion in
areas where a business VUA adjoins a street, a minimum of one tree per each
40 feet of street frontage shall be planted between the street and VUA.
Additionally, a continuous screen of plant material, berms, architectural
elements or a combination thereof not to exceed 36 inches in height shall be
incorporated. Trees, landscaping and sidewalks shall be installed as to
provide a safe barrier between vehicles and pedestrians and not to interfere
with traffic line of sight.



         b.   Adjacent to another VUA. The requirements of
subsection A.1.a. above shall apply, and be planted within a minimum
greenspace boundary of ten feet in width.



         c.   Adjacent to residential properties. A continuous
planting, hedge, fence, wall and/or berm, having 75% winter opacity and a
minimum height of six feet within a three-year period from planting shall be
installed.



      2.   Landscaping parking lot interiors. In order to reduce the
negative micro-climate impacts of paved areas, reduce the effects of dust,
glare and noise, slow the accumulation of storm water and to beautify the
town, the following minimum landscape requirements shall apply to all parking
lots of 15 spaces or more.



         a.   All business parking spaces shall be located within
70 feet from the center point of a shade tree, established or installed.



         b.   For each 100 square feet of VUA or fraction
thereof, a minimum of five square feet of interior landscape planting area
shall be provided.



         c.   All tree center points for parking lot trees must
be located within a minimum nine-foot wide continuous pervious planting
strip, no smaller than 200 square feet in area and bounded by curbs and wheel
stops.



         d.   A minimum 40-foot wide landscaped strip shall be
required to divide a parking area exceeding 30,000 square feet. Pedestrian
walkways may be included in this strip.



         e.   Shade tree species planted must be chosen from the
approved medium and large street tree lists in the town’s Arboricultural
Specifications Manual and shall have a minimum trunk size of two- inch
caliper.



         f.   Trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five
feet above the ground and the remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs,
living ground cover or turf, not to exceed three feet in height.



         g.   Parking lot landscape islands shall be designed to
facilitate the flow of traffic and to accommodate snow removal.



         h.   It is encouraged that parking lots be designed to
save groupings of existing trees by designing around them. Tree protection
measures shall be required during construction.



   B.   Screening special needs. This section describes the standards
and minimum requirements that shall be met for higher impact uses such
service structures, storage areas and detention/retention basins and ponds.



      1.   Landscaping for service structures. Service structures
shall be screened from all residentially zoned or developed areas,
residentially designated PUDS, and from the street in all zoning districts.
Where required, a continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall and/or berm, having
a minimum 75% winter opacity within a three-year period from planting is
required. Screening shall enclose any service structure on all sides unless
it must be frequently moved or serviced, then screening on all but one side
is required. The average screening height shall be one foot more than the
height of the enclosed structure, but shall not be required to exceed ten
feet.



      2.   Landscape requirements for screening storage areas. All
outside business or industrial storage including, but not limited to, display
prefabricated metal or wood storage sheds, bulk materials, building supplies,
retail merchandise (excluding plant material) and storage areas for boats and
recreational vehicles, shall be screened from adjoining residentially
developed or zoned property, residentially designed PUDs and the public
right-of-way. The use of evergreen vegetation such as arborvitae and spruces
is encouraged. Solid fences or masonry walls may be used.



      3.   Detention/retention basins and ponds. Detention/retention
basins and ponds and conservation areas shall be landscaped to create a
park-like amenity. Such landscaping should include shade and ornamental
trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges and/or other planting materials approved
by the Building Commissioner and Town Engineer.



      4.   Landscape conflicts. There shall be no planting within
five of underground utility lines and no large or medium trees under utility
wires. Cars shall not be allowed to overhang landscaped areas by more than
two and one-half feet, and wheel stops or curbs shall be provided.



§ 804  SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS.



   A.   Landscape materials.



      1.   Plant material used shall conform to the standards of the
American Nursery and Landscape Association.



      2.   Shrubs shall be a minimum height of 18 inches at planting
time. Screening shrubs shall meet the minimum design height and opacity
requirements within three years from planting.



      3.   Trees shall have a minimum planting size of five feet
height for coniferous trees and two- inch caliper for deciduous trees.



      4.   Existing landscape materials in good health and form that
have been protected by tree protection measures may be used to satisfy these
requirements in whole or in part when, in the opinion of the reviewing town
authority, such material meets the requirements and achieves the objectives
of this section.



   B.   Installation standards.



      1.   Plant material shall be healthy and installed in
accordance to current planting procedures established by the American
Association of Nurserymen to ensure long term survival. Planting beds shall
be mulched.



      2.   Trees shall be installed in accordance with the town’s
Arboricultural Specifications Manual. Any tree pits shall be a minimum five
feet in diameter.



   C.   Landscaping at parking lot driveway and street intersections. A
sight triangle shall be observed in all intersections. Within this sight
triangle, no landscape material shall be permitted, except for grass or
ground cover. Trees shall be permitted as long as only the tree trunk is
visible between the ground and eight feet above the ground. The sight
triangle requirements are set forth in Part B, § B(2)(k) of the town
standards.



   D.   Ground cover. Ground cover shall be planted to present a
finished appearance and 75% or complete coverage after three years, with a
maximum spacing of eight inches on center.



   E.   Maintenance requirements.



      1.   The current property owner of any property affected by
this article shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping
required herein.



      2.   All landscaping required by this article shall be
maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, orderly
appearance and shall be kept free of refuse and debris.



      3.   Any plant material that dies or is removed must be
replaced within one year by the current property owner.



§ 805  PLAN SUBMISSION.



   A.   Conformance. Landscape plans in conformance with this article
shall be submitted at the time of the building permit application.



   B.   Landscape plan content. Landscape plans required to be
submitted pursuant to this section for business or industrial developments,
subdivisions and PUDs shall show:



      1.   Location, quantity, size and type, including botanical
and commons name, of proposed landscaping material shown in relation to other
site features such as utilities, easements, natural water features and storm
water containment areas as required in § 803 of this appendix;



      2.   General stands of natural woodland delineated by canopy
cover, predominant species, density and average DBH;



      3.   Individual specimens of natural trees to be used to meet
landscaping requirements shall be noted by tree center point, present canopy
cover, species and DBH;



      4.   Drawings of any solid screens proposed noting whether
vegetation, fence, wall or berm or combination of these and any berms
proposed and their relationship to site drainage;



      5.   Typical elevations and/or cross sections as may be
required at a larger scale to adequately convey the aspects of the plan; and



      6.   Title block with the pertinent names and addresses,
property owner name and signature, person drawing plan, scale, date and north
arrow.



   C.   Building permits. No building permit shall be issued until the
required plans have been submitted and approved. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until the landscaping is completed pursuant to § 803 of this
appendix as determined by an on-site inspection by the Building Department,
unless a performance bond in the form of cash or an irrevocable letter of
credit that will cover 110% of the costs of all required materials and labor
has been posted with the Building Department, and which shall then be placed
on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. The amount of the performance
bond shall be determined by the Town Engineer. Any letter of credit issued
hereunder shall be and issued by a financially sound financial institution
with its principle place of business in the state and with the same terms
that are utilized in the letters of credit for infrastructure in the town,
all of which must be approved by the Town Attorney.



   D.   Performance bond. After the performance bond in form of cash or
an irrevocable letter of credit has been posted, the landscaping material
required in the approved plans shall be installed within six months after the
date of posting the bond or irrevocable letter of credit. The cash or letter
of credit shall be drawn immediately in the event installation of the
required landscaping is not done within the time frame set forth above.



§ 806  FENCES AND HEDGES.



   A.   Fences, hedges or other similar structures or growths adjacent
to public rights-of-way (excluding alleys) shall not exceed four and one-half
feet in height.



   B.   In residential, residential-business or business zones, fences,
hedges or other similar structures or growths may be six feet in height.
However, no six-foot fence shall be constructed in the front building plane
of the owner’s or the adjoining property, or within five feet of alley
rights-of-way in any residential zones.



   C.   In I-1 and I-2 Zones, fences, hedges or other similar
structures or growth shall not exceed eight feet in height. Fences in I-1 and
I-2 six feet or higher may be topped by barbed wire, not withstanding
subsection D. below.



   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or
maintain any fence or other similar structure composed in whole or part of
barbed wire or electrified wire along any public street or alley within the
town.



   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any thorn hedge
or other similar growth within five feet of any public street or alley
right-of-way within the town.



   F.   This section shall not be applicable to fences, hedges or
similar structures within the town owned, controlled by or within the custody
of any municipal corporation, municipal body or state and federal government
agencies.



ARTICLE IX. COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION FACILITIES



§ 901  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this article are:



   A.   To regulate the construction, erection, placement and
modification of commercial communications facilities;



   B.   To protect the town from communications facilities which are
incompatible with existing or future land use, or with health, safety or
welfare of it citizens;



   C.   To facilitate installation of facilities in areas that will
cause the least disruption, obtrusiveness and visibility to residential, park
or greenspace areas;



   D.   To facilitate long-range planning of necessary wireless
communications facilities infrastructure and technology, and to provide the
community with the benefits from new technological advances in communication;
and



   E.   To consistently and fairly permit the construction, placement
and modification of business communications facilities without unduly
burdening wireless service providers.



§ 902  SCOPE OF APPLICATION.



   All construction, placement and modification of business communications
facilities within the town shall conform to the requirements of this article,
all state and federal regulations, and the Uniform Building Code.



§ 903  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   All communications facilities shall comply with the following
regulations as shown by the submittal of necessary documentation and/or
inclusion on a site plan or the making of written commitments. No building
permit shall be issued until complete compliance is demonstrated.



      1.   Lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial
means and shall not display strobe lights unless such is specifically
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state
authority for a particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design
of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots or
similar areas may be attached to the tower.



      2.   Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a
communications facility for signs other than warning or equipment information
signs is prohibited.



      3.   Abandoned or unused towers or portions of  towers.
Abandoned or unused communications facilities shall be removed within 180
days from the date of ceasing operations. A copy of the notice to the Federal
Communications Commission of intent to cease operations of the lot or parcel
of the facility is leased, a copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease
which requires the removal of the communications facility upon cessation of
operations at the site shall be submitted at the time of application for a
building permit.



      4.   Antenna capacity/wind load. Communications facilities
shall be certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer in the
state to conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading
requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the Electronic Industry
Association.



      5.   Radio-frequency emissions (RF). Documentation shall be
provided to show the proposed communications facility will comply with the
latest health and safety standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission on RF emissions and exposures.



      6.   Tower color. The color of the proposed tower will be of a
light tone or color (except as required by the FAA) so as to minimize visual
impact.



      7.   Communications facility report. A report shall be
submitted to the town describing the type of proposed communications
facility, its effective range and technical reasons for its design and
placement. If the proposed communications facility cannot be accommodated on
an existing or approved facility within a one-mile search radius of the
proposed site, the report shall specify the reasons and conditions along with
supporting proof. And in an effort to promote long-range planning to minimize
the number of towers and their impact on the community, providers of
commercial wireless communications service shall include a plan delineating
existing and any proposed and/or anticipated facilities with a five-mile
radius of the corporate boundaries of the town.



      8.   Visual impact statement. A statement and visual material
shall be provided (i.e., a plan, pictures and the like) indicating where
within a one-mile radius any portion of the proposed facility can be seen
from ground level.



   B.   All communications facilities shall comply with the following
regulations as shown by he submittal of necessary documentation and/or
inclusion on a site plan. No building permit shall be issued until complete
compliance is demonstrated.



      1.   Placement. Towers shall be sited within the rear yard
unless located on a vacant lot or parcel.



      2.   Setbacks. Minimum setback requirements for communications
facilities shall be based on the following; provided, setbacks are not less
than the requirements of the underlay or overlay zone.



         a.   Monopole-type towers shall provide a minimum
setback of the tower designed fail area, plus 10% of the tower height.



         b.   Guyed- and lattice-type towers shall provide a
minimum setback of the tower designed fail area, plus 25% of the tower height.



         c.   Towers sited on a lot or parcel which borders on a
residential and/or business district shall provide a minimum setback of 150%
of the tower height from said residential district and 75% of the tower
height from said business district unless subsections B.2.a. or B.2.b. above
is greater.



         d.   Communications accessory or ancillary buildings
shall comply with setback requirements as established under § 506 of this
appendix for accessory structures.



      3.   Height. The maximum tower height allowed in the town
without a variance from the BZA is 40 feet.



      4.   Screening. The lowest ten feet of a communications
ancillary building and tower shall be visually screened on a year-round basis
with suitable vegetation and/or nearby buildings or structures.



§ 904  COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall (through his or her own action or those of persons he
or she hires or directs) commence to erect, alter, construct or relocate any
communications facility without first obtaining a building permit from the
Building Commissioner. No person shall engage in any work requiring a permit
without having the permit in his or her possession at the job site.



§ 905  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   Application for a building permit for any communications facilities may
be made by the owner or agent of the facility or by a person acting on the
agent’s behalf. Applications shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made on a form provided by the Building Commissioner and shall
contain or have attached thereto the following information:



   A.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;



   B.   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property, if not the applicant;



   C.   Name, address and telephone number of the contractor who will
erect, alter, construct or relocate the communications facility (if not
applicant);



   D.   Name, address and telephone number of the person or firm for
whom the communications facility is installed (if not the applicant);



   E.   A detailed site plan of the parcel or lot showing the position
of the communications facilities in relation to building(s) or structure(s),
easements, rights-of-way and applicable setback lines;



   F.   A detailed site plan identifying any structure(s), height,
use(s) within the tower designed fail area as certified by a structural
engineer;



   G.   Two blue prints or ink drawings to scale of the plans and
specifications and method of construction, attachment to building or other
structure or placement in the ground;



   H.   A copy of the stress sheets and calculations owing the
structure’s dead load and wind pressure capacities as certified by a
structural engineer, including foundation requirements;



   I.   A description of any right-of-way cuts and/or utility service
to be installed;



   J.   Written consent or other proof of authorization of the owner of
the building, structure or land to which or on which the communications
facility is to be erected;



   K.   Copies of any necessary easements;



   L.   Such other information as the Building Commission may require
to demonstrate full compliance with this article, or any applicable
requirement of state or federal law; and



   M.   It shall be the duty of the applicant to inform the town of any
changes in ownership of the facility or ownership of the property in question.



ARTICLE X. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 1. GENERAL



§ 1000-1  SHORT TITLE.



   Article X shall be known as the “Subdivision Regulations of
Chesterton”.



§ 1000-2  PURPOSES.



   This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for
the following purposes:



   A.   To assist the orderly and efficient development of the town;



   B.   To provide for the coordination of new streets with existing
and planned streets or highways;



   C.   To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the town;



   D.   To ensure the coordination with and extension of community
facilities and utilities; and



   E.   To secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by
providing uniform procedures and standards.



§ 1000-3  APPLICABILITY; COMPLIANCE.



   This article shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the town
and shall require compliance as follows.



   A.   No person proposing a subdivision shall proceed with any
grading or improvements for streets or the installation of public utilities
until the primary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved by the
Plan Commission.



   B.   No person proposing a subdivision shall construct or commence
the construction of any building in a subdivision, until the secondary plat
of the subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission and recorded in
accordance with the provisions hereof and a copy of the recorded plat is
filed with the Building Commissioner.



   C.   No permit to erect, alter, repair or replace any building upon
land in a subdivision shall be issued until a plat of the subdivision has
been approved by the Plan Commission and recorded, and improvements required
by the Plan Commission have been constructed or the construction thereof
guaranteed as provided in this chapter.



§ 1000-4  EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards or dimensions
specified in this chapter and those contained in other regulations,
resolutions or ordinances of the town, county or state, the highest standards
shall govern.



§ 1000-5  JURISDICTIONAL AREA.



   This chapter shall apply to all incorporated land within the town.



CHAPTER 2. PLAT SUBMISSION PROCEDURE



§ 1000-22  ADVISORY MEETING.



   A person desiring approval of a plat of a subdivision may appear before
the Plan Commission to discuss his or her proposal before filing an
application for primary plat approval. No fee or formal application is
required for this meeting. Its purpose is to save the subdivider time and
money. The subdivider should be prepared to discuss the details of his or her
proposed subdivision, including such items as the proposed use, existing
features of the area, existing covenants, land characteristics, availability
of community facilities and utilities, size of development, play areas or
public areas, proposed protective covenants, proposed utilities and street
improvements. The subdivider may submit a sketch plan as outlined in §
1000-36 of this appendix.



§ 1000-23  PRIMARY PLAT.



   A.   Application for approval. A subdivider desiring approval of a
subdivision plat shall submit an application for approval of a primary plat
to the Plan Commission office at least ten days prior to the meeting at which
the Plan Commission is expected to consider such application and plat.



   B.   Application contents. The application shall be accompanied by
the following:



      1.   Five copies of all drawings and data as set forth in §
1000-37 with the exception of “C. Engineering Plans”, which shall require
four copies, that are to be filed by 10:00 a.m. 20 days prior to the public
hearing on primary plat approval for preliminary department head review.
After the preliminary review by department heads, 12 copies of all revised
drawings and data as set forth in § 1000-37 with the exception of “C.
Engineering Plans,” which shall require four copies, that are to be filed
by 10:00 a.m. ten days prior to the public hearing on primary plat approval;
and



      2.   A check or cash in the aggregate amount of $75 for each
lot in the subdivision to cover the town’s costs of plan review, inspection
of public improvements, legal fees and administrative costs which are
incurred as a result of the subdivision application.



   C.   Review and tentative approval or rejection of application;
hearing and notice thereof.



      1.   The Plan Commission shall review the application and give
it tentative approval or return the application to the subdivider with
reasons for disapproval. If tentatively approved, the Plan Commission shall
set a date for a public hearing and inform the subdivider in writing of the
date thereof. Further, the subdivider shall, by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation within the town give the general public notice of the
time, date, place and subject matter of the public hearing. At least ten days
prior to the date set for such hearing. At least seven days prior to the date
set for the public hearing the subdivider shall notify all owners of property
lying within 300 feet of the property proposed to be subdivided of the time,
date, place and subject matter of the public hearing. Such notice shall be in
writing and shall be delivered by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at such address as
is found on file in the Office of the Auditor of the county.



      2.   The subdivider shall present evidence of the certified or
registered mailing to such owners to the Plan Commission prior to the
commencement of the public hearing. The subdivider shall present evidence of
proof of publication and that the publication fees have been paid prior to
the commencement of the public hearing.



   D.   Action on application after hearing. After the hearing, the
Plan Commission shall approve the plat proposed in the application subject to
receipt of an acceptable secondary plat as set forth in § 1000-38 of this
chapter, or shall conditionally approve or disapprove the plat, setting forth
its reasons and providing the subdivider with a copy. If the plat is
disapproved, the subdivider may submit a new primary plat.



   E.   Wetlands. No subdivision shall be approved in the town that
includes land shown as wetlands on the National Wetland Inventory Maps or the
maps attached to Ord. 91-12 since adopting this subsection E., and marked as
Exhibit “A”, unless the subdivider has obtained all required state and
federal permits including, but not limited to, permits from the Army Corps of
Engineers and the state’s Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 2015-04, passed 4-27-2015)



§ 1000-24  SECONDARY PLAT.



   A.   Submission. After primary plat approval is obtained, the
subdivider shall submit a secondary plat to the Planning Director as set
forth in § 1000-38 of this chapter. Secondary plats may be submitted in
phases so long as each phase conforms to all requirements for subdivisions
and primary plat approval found in this appendix. The first secondary plat
shall be filed not later than two years after primary plat approval with each
successive secondary plat to be filed no later than two years from the
approval of the last filed secondary plat. If two years have elapsed
following the approval of the primary plat without secondary plat approval in
the case of a subdivision with only one phase, the Planning Director may
require the subdivider to submit a new primary plat for approval. In the case
of a phased subdivision, if two years have elapsed following the approval of
the last filed secondary plat without a secondary plat approval being filed
for the next phase, the Planning Director may require the subdivider to
submit a new primary plat for approval.



   B.   Accompanying material. The secondary plat shall be accompanied
by:



      1.   Ten black or blueline prints and three Mylar sepias of
the plat. Additional Mylars may be submitted for the developer’s use. Once
the Mylars are signed, 12 black or blueline prints of the signed and approved
secondary plat shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for recording
purposes; and



      2.   A certificate from the appropriate town department that
all improvements required by this chapter and all other applicable town
ordinances have been installed in strict accordance with the town standards,
or a guarantee that the improvements will subsequently be installed by the
owner in the form of a surety bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, or any
other guarantee that is first approved by the Planning Director that will
cover 110% of the costs of all required improvements as estimated by the Town
Engineer. The aforementioned guarantees for the costs of the required
improvements shall be posted at the time of secondary plat approval and shall
provide for the following:



         a.   The guarantee binds the undersigned, their heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of 30
months from and after               , which date is necessarily the
same date of secondary plat approval; and



         b.   The improvements required by the town shall be
completed by                   , hereinafter referred to as
“owner”, in accordance with all requirements of the town code and the
plans have been approved for this   (insert Subdivision or Plan Unit
Development)  no later than           , which date is necessarily two
years from the date of secondary plat approval. Accordingly, the expiration
date for this guarantee is                   .



   C.   Approval or disapproval.



      1.   The Planning Director, (or his or her designee), after
consultation with legal counsel, the Town Engineer, and other department
heads, is authorized to approve secondary plats for the town. He or she may,
however, refer the secondary plat to the Advisory Plan Commission for
consideration if, in his or her sole discretion, he or she determines that
the secondary plat constitutes a substantial deviation from the approved
primary plat. In such cases, the Plan Commission shall review the submitted
secondary plat to determine whether the developer shall be required to submit
an amended primary plat.



      2.   If the Planning Director, after consultation with legal
counsel, the Town Engineer and other department heads, finds that the
secondary plat is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, he or
she shall affix the Plan Commission’s seal upon the plat, and shall endorse
the plat and return it to the subdivider.



      3.   If disapproved, he or she shall attach to the original
tracing of the secondary plat a statement of the reasons for such action and
return it to the subdivider.



   D.   Recording. Once a secondary plat is approved by the Planning
Director, the Building Commissioner shall present the appropriate number of
copies of the approved secondary plat to the County Recorder within 120 days.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-14-2008)



CHAPTER 3. PLAT SPECIFICATIONS



§ 1000-36  SKETCH PLAN.



   A.   The subdivider may prepare a sketch plan to present to the Plan
Commission at the advisory meeting.



   B.   This plan may be drawn as a pencil sketch and does not require
precise dimensions or any special sheet size.



   C.   This sketch plan may be used to show the Plan Commission the
location, proposed street and lot layout and any other significant features
of the proposed subdivision.



§ 1000-37  PRIMARY PLAT.



   Unless specifically waived by the Plan Commission, the following
drawings and data shall be submitted with the application for primary plat
approval. These drawings and data may be on separate sheets or combined in
one sheet, depending on the size and complexity of the proposed subdivision:



   A.   Site drawing. A site drawing of the proposed subdivision and
all lands within at least 100 feet of its boundaries showing:



      1.   Vicinity map indicating location within the town;



      2.   Zoning of the tract and adjacent properties;



      3.   Contours of the site at vertical intervals of two feet if
the general slope is less than 10%, and at intervals of five feet if the
general slope is greater than 10%;



      4.   Character and location of natural or artificial features
existing on the land which would affect the design of the subdivision, such
as wooded areas, streams, direction and gradient of ground slope,
embankments, retaining walls, buildings or non-residential usage of land:



      5.   Names of owners of properties contiguous to the
subdivision;



      6.   Existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way,
including dedicated widths, roadway widths, approximate gradients; types and
widths of pavements, curbs and sidewalks;



      7.   Existing and proposed easements, including widths and
purposes;



      8.   Utilities, including the size, capacity and location of
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage facilities and water lines;



      9.   Areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or storm
waters;



      10.   Subsurface conditions, including information about
ground water levels and stability of subsoils;



      11.   Tract boundary lines by calculated distances and
bearings; and



      12.   Title, graphic scale, north point and date.



   B.   Subdivision plat. A subdivision plat of the proposed
subdivision drawn at a scale no small than 100 feet to one inch showing:



      1.   Subdivision name;



      2.   Names and addresses of owner, subdivider and person who
prepared the plan;



      3.   Street pattern, including the names (which shall not
duplicate existing streets in the town unless it is an extension of an
existing street), widths of rights-of-way of streets, widths of easements for
alleys and approximate grades of streets;



      4.   Layout of lots, including dimensions, numbers and
building setback lines or front yard lines;



      5.   Parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public or community use;



      6.   Key plan, legend, notes, graphic scale, north point and
date; and



      7.   In the event the subdivider desires to phase the
subdivision through the filing of multiple secondary plats, the phase
boundaries shall be clearly set forth on the subdivision plat.



   C.   Engineering plans. Engineering plans for the proposed
subdivision showing:



      1.   Profiles, cross-sections and specifications for proposed
street improvements;



      2.   A grading plan showing elevations of proposed
improvements on each lot, and swales, ditches and storm sewers affecting
drainage of each parcel and of the subdivision generally;



      3.   Profiles and other explanatory data concerning
installation of storm sewers, sanitary sewers and utility crossings;



      4.   A report on the feasibility of connection to an existing
sewerage system, including distances to the nearest public sewer, and service
load of the subdivision;



      5.   If connection to a public sewerage system is not
feasible, a report on the feasibility of a separate sewerage system and
treatment works for the subdivision, including the design, population, type
and location of the treatment plant and the receiving steam;



      6.   If connection to a public or private sewerage system is
not feasible, a report on the feasibility of on-lot sewage disposal,
including a detailed drawing of the physical conditions of the site,
contours, finished grades, watercourses, ground water table elevations and
the results of soil percolation tests for each individual lot conducted in
accordance with the recommended practices of the state’s Board of Health;



      7.   A Tree Allocation Plan pursuant to § 1000-78 of this
appendix; and



      8.   The subdivider’s engineer must certify on the
engineering plans that all infrastructure in the subdivision will comply with
the existing requirements of the ADA.



   D.   Restrictions. A draft of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be adopted in the secondary subdivision plat.



   E.   Certificate of approval. A certificate for completion by the
Plan Commission shall be shown on the primary plat as follows:



 



CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 

In accordance with the Chesterton Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, this plat
was given conditional approval as a Primary Plat by the Plan Commission at a
                                meeting held on the      
      day of               , 20          .

 

                                                   
                               

   President

 

                                                   
                               

Secretary

 



 



§ 1000-38  SECONDARY PLAT.



   The secondary plat shall conform to the approved primary plat and shall
be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch. The secondary plat
shall show:



   A.   Subdivision names, names and addresses of owner, and
subdivider, source of title of land as shown by the books of the County
Recorder, graphic scale, north point and date;



   B.   Survey data with certification by a registered land surveyor,
showing:



      1.   Acreage or part thereof of each lot, and calculated
distances and bearings of the subdivision boundaries, lots, utility
easements, streets, alleys, building setback lines; and parcels of reserved
or dedicated land for community purposes;



      2.   Location and distances to the nearest established street
corners of official monuments, and of the streets intersecting the boundaries
of the subdivision;



      3.   Location, type, material and size of monuments;



      4.   Complete curve data; and



      5.   Lot numbers, street names and addresses.



   C.   Notations as to whether improvements are dedicated or not;



   D.   The following certificates:



      1.   Certificate of dedication.



 



CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION

 

We, the undersigned owner of the said real estate shown and described hereon,
do hereby, as shown, plat and subdivide said real estate and designate the
same as                                 (name)          
            . All streets within the plat are hereby conveyed and
dedicated to the public. An easement is hereby granted to the Town of
Chesterton, Indiana, and all other utilities in Indiana, severally and their
respective successors and assigns to install, lay, erect, construct, renew,
operate, repair, replace and maintain sewers, water mains, gas mains,
conduits, cables, poles, wires either overhead or underground with all
necessary braces, guys, anchors and other appliances in, upon, along and over
the strip of land designated by dotted line on the plat and marked
“easements” or public utilities for the purpose of service to the public
in general with sewer, water, gas, electric and telephone service, including
the right to use the streets where necessary and to overhang lots with aerial
service to serve adjacent lots, together with the right to enter upon the
easement for public utilities at all times for any purpose aforesaid, and to
trim and keep trimmed any trees, shrubs or saplings that interfere with such
service. No permanent building shall be placed on said easement, but same may
be used for any purposes that do not interfere with the use of said easement
for such public utilities.

 

WITNESS our hands this                         day of        
                            , 20          .

 

 

(SEAL)

 



 



      2.   Certificate of acknowledgment.



 



CERTIFICATE OF ACKNOWLEDGMENT

 

State of Indiana

Chesterton, Indiana

 

Before me, the undersigned, a notary public in and for said Town and State
aforesaid, personally appeared said             (individual,
partnership or corporation)    by                            
                      for the said individual, partnership or
corporation who acknowledges the execution of the foregoing plat of      
(name)      with the dedications and restrictions thereon expressed to be
their (his)(her) voluntary act and deed for the uses and purposes therein set
forth.

 

WITNESS my hand and notarial seal this                          
day of                                     , 20       
  .

 

(SEAL)                      Notary Public          
                                                   
             

 

My commission expires                                    
          , 20            .

 

The County of my residence is                                
                      .

 



 



      3.   Land surveyor’s certificate.



 



LAND SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE

 

I,                                                  
, hereby certify that I am a Land Surveyor licensed in compliance with the
laws of the State of Indiana, and certify that this plat correctly represents
a survey completed by me on                     , 20         
      , and that all monuments shown actually exist and that their
location, type and material are accurately shown.

         

Land Surveyor                                          
           

 

Ind. Reg. No.                                          
             

 



 



      4.   Certificate of approval.



 



CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 

Under the authority provided by Chapter 174, Acts of 1947, enacted by the
General Assembly of the State of Indiana, and all Acts amendatory thereto,
this plat was given secondary approval by its Planning Director on behalf of
the Town of Chesterton, Indiana, on the                        
day of                                   , 20         
  .

 

Planning Director                                        
               

 

Secretary                                            
                       

 



 



   E.   In the event there is a conflict between any items shown on the
approved Mylar and the standards contained in the town code as it exists at
the time of secondary plat approval, the approved Mylar will be governed and
interpreted by the standards contained in the town code.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-14-2008)



CHAPTER 4. DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 1000-51  GENERALLY.



   The Plan Commission shall not approve any plat unless the land whereon
buildings are to be constructed shall be of such character that it can be
used for building purposes without danger health or peril from fire, flood or
other hazard.



§ 1000-52  NATURAL FEATURES.



   Existing natural features which would add value to the subdivision and
the town, such as trees, valleys, watercourses, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved, insofar as possible, through
harmonious design of the subdivision.



§ 1000-53  STREETS.



   A.   The Plan Commission shall not approve any plat unless all
streets shown thereon shall be of sufficient width and proper grade, and
shall be so located as to accommodate the probable volumes of traffic
thereon, afford adequate light and air, facilitate fire protection, provide
access of firefighting equipment to buildings and provide a coordinated
system of streets conforming to the town’s Major Thoroughfares Plan.



   B.   A local street shall be so planned as to discourage through
traffic.



   C.   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a
street or alley along a boundary of the tract being subdivided, the remainder
of such street or alley, to the prescribed width, shall be platted within the
proposed subdivision and improved by the subdivision petitioner so that the
street meets the town standards for street construction.



   D.   Half streets shall not be provided, except where it is
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of these regulations, or where it becomes necessary to
acquire the remaining half by condemnation so it may be approved in the
public interest.



   E.   1.   Cul-de-sac streets not exceeding 600 feet in length
shall include a completely paved turnaround which shall be provided at the
closed end with an outside curb radius of at least 50 feet and a right-of-way
radius of at 60 feet. Cul-de-sac streets longer than 600 feet shall not be
approved unless a variance is obtained prior to platting from the BZA and, if
so approved, shall include a completely paved turnaround which shall be
provided at the closed end with an outside curb radius of at least 65 feet
and a right-of-way radius of at least 75 feet.



      2.   The maximum grade of the turnaround portion of the
cul-de-sac shall be 5%.



   F.   Alleys shall not be provided in residential districts, but
shall be included in business and industrial areas where needed for access
purposes.



   G.   The minimum distance between the centerlines of parallel or
approximately parallel streets intersecting a cross-street from opposite
direction shall be 125 feet.



   H.   Intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided.



   I.   Dead-end streets shall be prohibited unless provided with a
turnaround or cul-de-sac arrangement. Temporary dead-end streets will be
permitted where the approved plat shows that the street will be extended to
conform to the provisions of this chapter. A circular right-of-way at the
termination of a temporary dead-end street must be shown on the approved
plat. The excess right-of-way and paved turnaround shall be relinquished only
at that time in which the dead-end street is extended.



   J.   Right-of-way requirements may be increased where anticipated
traffic flow warrants it, or if drainage easements should reasonably parallel
such thoroughfares. Such increased width will be established by the Plan
Commission with the advice of the Engineer.



   K.   Minimum right-of-way widths, paving widths, angle of
intersection, curb radius, distance along sides of sight triangles,
horizontal alignments, vertical alignments, as well as maximum grades shall
be in accordance with the following table:



 


 
Arterial Streets
 
Collector Streets
 
Local Streets
 
Cul-De-Sac Streets
 
Crosswalks
 
Alley




Grades for 25 feet before intersection (in percent)
 
3
 
3
 
3
 
3
 
-
 
3


Horizontal alignment, minimum radii of centerline (in feet)
 
600
 
400
 
200
 
100
 
-
 
100


Maximum grade (in percent)
 
7.5
 
10
 
12
 
12
 
-
 
12


Minimum angle for intersection (in degrees)
 
90
 
80
 
70
 
70
 
-
 
70


Minimum curb radius (in feet)
 
35
 
25
 
15
 
15
 
-
 
5


Paving width streets (in feet)
 
40
 
36
 
30
 
30
 
6
 
20


Right-of-way width (in feet)
 
100
 
70
 
60
 
50
 
12
 
33


Site triangles, distance along sides of through street/stop street (in feet)
 
500/30
 
500/30
 
250/25
 
250/25
 
-
 
50/20


Vertical curves, minimum sight distance (in feet)
 
500
 
350
 
200
 
100
 
-
 
100




 



      1.   The latest editions of the Recommended Standards for
Wastewater Facilities and the Recommended Standards for Water Works, copies
of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer for public
inspection, shall be used for the design lay-out of sewer lines and water
lines within the subdivision and such standards shall govern any connection
and extension of any such system to the subdivision.



      2.   The town’s standards, copies of which are on file in
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection, shall be used for
the design, layout and construction of streets, curbs, sidewalks, storm
sewers, water facilities, sewer lines and other public facilities as
described therein. In addition, these standards shall apply to all
construction in the town not simply those for subdivisions and PUDs.



§ 1000-54  BLOCKS.



   Blocks shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length. Pedestrian ways and/or
easements may be required near the center of the block.



§ 1000-55  LOTS.



   The lot and yard sizes shall conform with the requirements of this
appendix and the lots shall be designed in accord with the following design
standards.



   A.   Every lot shall be provided with access adequate for the use of
public safety vehicles and other public or private street system, improved in
accordance with this chapter and connected to the general street system.



   B.   Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets wherever feasible.
Pointed or very irregular lots shall be avoided unless such variations shall
improve the overall neighborhood design.



   C.   Double-frontage lots shall be avoided.



   D.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than required building
lots and there is no covenant preventing resubdivision of the lots, such lots
or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit a logical location and openings
of future streets and resubdividing with provision for adequate utility
connections for each subdivision.



§ 1000-56  EASEMENTS.



   A.   Easements for utilities and drainage shall have a minimum width
of 12 feet with access available to all portions of said easement. Six feet
of one lot adjoining six feet of another lot shall constitute a 12-foot
easement. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way of width sufficient
for the purpose. Water and sanitary sewer lines shall be located within a
street right-of-way but to the extent possible, not under paved areas.



   B.   Easements at the rear of lots or between the areas of two or
more adjoining lots shall be 20 feet in width, ten feet of one lot and ten
feet of another lot shall constitute a 20-foot easement.



§ 1000-57  WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.



   The water supply, storm sewer and sewage disposal systems for the
subdivision shall meet the design standards and requirements of the state’s
Board of Health and the town.



CHAPTER 5. IMPROVEMENTS



§ 1000-71  GENERALLY.



   All of the required improvements specified in this article shall be
constructed in accordance with the town standards for construction and all
other applicable town, county and state regulations.



§ 1000-72  MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.



   Concrete monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines
forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision. Iron or steel markers
shall be set at the beginning and ending of all curves along street property
lines.



§ 1000-73  STREETS.



   All streets shall be built in accordance with the town standards and
shown on the plans and profiles for the subdivision. It is noted that the
town standards apply to street construction, which also includes curbs and
gutters, sidewalks and parkways.



§ 1000-74  STORM DRAINAGE.



   The construction of storm sewers and a storm drainage system shall be
in accordance with the town standards.



§ 1000-75  WATER SUPPLY.



   A.   Where public water supply is available, as determined by the
town’s Utilities Service Board (Utility Board), the subdivider shall
connect to such public water supply and construct a system of water mains
with a connection for each lot.



   B.   Where public water is not available, the subdivider shall
supply acceptable evidence of the availability of water. The subdivider may
be required to make one or more test wells in the area to be platted if such
evidence is deemed not acceptable. Copies of well logs from such test wells
which are obtained shall include the name and address of the well driller and
shall be submitted with the plan to the Plan Commission.



   C.   If a private water supply is permitted, individual private
wells shall be located at least 25 feet from property lines; 50 feet from all
septic tanks; approximately 100 feet from all tile disposal fields and other
sewage disposal facilities; ten feet from all cast iron sewer lines; 30 feet
from any vitrified sewer tile lines; and shall not be located within any
floor plan.



§ 1000-76  SEWERS.



   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary
sewer system which has been approved by all necessary state and local
agencies prior to any construction. The Plan Commission, after receiving the
advice of the Utility Board, may require the subdivider to connect such
system to the municipal sanitary sewer system. Where the municipal sewer
system is not reasonably accessible to the subdivision, and in the judgment
of the Plan Commission, after the advice of the Utility Board, extension of
the municipal sewer system to the subdivision will not take place in the
reasonably foreseeable future, an approvable package sewage treatment plant
serving the entire subdivision may be permitted. The Plan Commission may
require the package sewage treatment facility to be dedicated to the town be
operated as an interim facility by the Utility Board. Additionally, sanitary
sewage facilities shall be built in accordance with the town standards.



§ 1000-77  UTILITIES.



   Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served by
utilities, and the necessary easements shall be provided. Electric, gas and
other utility distribution lines shall be installed within public
rights-of-way or within properly designated easements. To the fullest extent
possible, all utility lines shall be placed underground. Underground utility
lines located in street rights-of-way shall not be installed beneath existing
or proposed paved areas, except when crossing streets or otherwise where
absolutely necessary. Paved streets shall not be cut to accommodate utility
lines. These areas shall be bored.



§ 1000-78  LANDSCAPE TREE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   1.   In order to partially mitigate the negative
environmental effects of impervious surface in street construction, loss of
greenspace and vehicles associated with land development, the following tree
plantings shall be required in all new subdivisions and phases thereof:



         a.   Minimum one tree per 40 feet of roadway measured
from the centerline of the roadway; and



         b.   Minimum one tree per platted lot.



      2.   All trees required pursuant to this section shall be
considered required infrastructure and included in the infrastructure
guarantee.



   B.   Placement of trees by the developer shall be on site as follows:



      1.   On individual lots within the front yard plane for
residential and anywhere on the lot for other properties; or



      2.   On community property such as the street right-of-way or
designated park land. Public land tree plantings must comply with the
town’s Tree Ordinance found at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, as the
same may be amended from time to time.



   C.   In the event the Plan Commission determines it is not feasible
to locate all required trees within the subdivision in question, it will
assign to the developer one of the following alternatives:



      1.   Plant the required trees off-site at locations within the
town and approved by the Plan Commission as set forth above and show proof of
same; or



      2.   Pay to the town what the Plan Commission determines to be
the equivalent dollar value for all required trees, their planting and the
cost of maintenance of same for a period of two years. Any funds received
pursuant to the above shall be placed in a town fund designated for public
tree planting and maintenance activities.



   D.   There shall be no planting within five feet of underground
utility lines and no large or medium trees under utility wires. Cars shall
not be allowed to overhang landscaped tree areas by more than two and
one-half feet, and wheel stops or curbs shall be provided.



   E.   Tree species planted pursuant to this appendix must be chosen
from the approved tree list in the town’s Arboricultural Specifications
Manual and have a minimum of two-inch caliper for deciduous trees and minimum
planting height of five feet for coniferous trees. Trees shall be installed
in accordance with the town’s Arboricultural Specifications Manual. Any
tree pits shall be a minimum of five feet in diameter.



   F.   The current property owner of any property affected by this
appendix shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping trees
required herein. The only exception to this requirement shall be for those
trees planted within the town’s right-of-way. In such cases, the town shall
be responsible for maintenance of landscaping trees placed in this
right-of-way.



   G.   A landscape tree plan shall be submitted as part of the primary
plat submission for all subdivisions and shall show the number, location and
species shown for any trees proposed to be planted in the street right-of-way
or designated park land. Individual trees on lots and not located in public
right-of-way need only to be identified by number of the trees per lot.



§ 1000-79  STREET SIGNS.



   Street name signs of a type adopted or approved by the Plan Commission
shall be installed at each street intersection by the subdivider, on a
location specified by the Plan Commission.



§ 1000-80  SIDEWALKS.



   In all subdivisions, a four-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be
constructed within the right-of-way along both sides of all streets within or
abutting such subdivision.



§ 1000-81  STREET LIGHT AND FIRE HYDRANTS.



   Every and all petitioners for a subdivision or a PUD in the town shall
enter into and be bound by the street light and fire hydrant agreement found
as Exhibit “H” of the Plan Commission’s rules and regulations, as the
same may be amended from time to time.



§ 1000-82  SUMP DRAINAGE.



   In all cases where any proposed building foundations in a subdivision
will be at or below the water table, the subdivider shall provide, for the
purpose of sump drainage, non-perforated polyethylene or PVC pipe with a
minimum diameter of six inches. This pipe shall be connected to the storm
drainage system and shall be placed in the grass area one foot behind the
curb at the depth of three feet minimum. A capped, multiple-reducing tee
shall be provided at each lot in a location convenient for connection of a
sump pump discharge by the builder. Standards for the sump drainage as
required by this section shall be set forth in the drawing that is attached
to the ordinance adopting this section and made a part of the town standards.



CHAPTER 6. DEDICATION OF PARK AND RECREATIONAL LANDS



§ 1000-101  PARK LANDS REQUIRED IN SUBDIVISIONS AND PUDS.



   As a condition of approval of a primary and secondary plat of
subdivision for residential real estate or for residential PUDs, each
subdivider or developer will be required to have land set aside and used for
park and recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the development in accordance with standards, criteria and
formula set forth in this article. Prior to the public hearing on any primary
plat or residential subdivisions or PUDs, the subdivider or developer will be
required to submit his plan and meet with the Park Board.



§ 1000-102  GENERAL STANDARD.



   A.   It is hereby found and determined that the public interest,
convenience, health, welfare and safety require that a minimum of seven acres
of property for each 1,000 persons residing within this town be devoted to
local park and recreational purposes.



   B.   These standards are based upon present available studies and
shall be reviewed periodically and amended when necessary.



§ 1000-103  FORMULA FOR PARK AND RECREATIONAL LAND.



   A.   Criteria for requiring park and recreational land.



      1.   Requirement and population ratio.



         a.   The ultimate density of a proposed development
shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for park and
recreational use. Until changed or modified by the Town Council in the manner
provided below, the total requirement shall be seven acres of land per 1,000
of ultimate population in accordance with the following classifications:



 

Typical Unit Category
 
Acreage Requirement per Development Unit


Apartment/other multi-family dwellings
 
.0087


Duplex
 
.0102


Single-family
 
.0102



 



         b.   Determination as to PUD-residential shall be made
by reference to the site and development plan submitted.



         c.   The determination of “average persons per
dwelling unit” shall be re-determined from time to time by the Plan
Commission, which determination shall be based upon an estimate of present
and reasonably foreseeable future number of persons, and shall in no event
exceed the average number of persons determined by reference to the current
or best available figures for the county, as published by the United States
Department of Census, Northwest Indiana Regional Plan Commission or a bureau
or a department of similar responsibility.



      2.   Standards. Master Plan and/or national standards as
adopted by the Park Board shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A
central location which will serve equally the entire development is most
desirable. In large developments, sites should be located throughout the
development according to established standards for park area distances.



      3.   Standards for private recreation improvements. The
town’s Parks and Recreation Board shall give its report and recommendation
to the Advisory Plan Commission for land to be set aside and designated as
park and recreational land which shall be in accordance with the following
standards:



         a.   That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open
areas required to be maintained pursuant to this appendix shall not be
included in the computation of such private open space;



         b.   The private ownership and maintenance of the open
space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance or
restrictions;



         c.   The use of the private open space is restricted for
park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land
in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or
eliminated without the consent of the Plan Commission;



         d.   That the proposed private open space is reasonably
adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into
consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and
location; and



         e.   That facilities proposed for the open space are in
substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the
Comprehensive Plan.



   B.   Alternatives to development and maintenance of private
recreation improvements.



      1.   In the event the developer does not wish to comply with
the standards above, upon agreement with the Park Board, the developer or
subdivider may dedicate land to the town for the aforementioned purposes and
in conformance with the aforementioned standards, or make a cash contribution
in lieu of dedication of land to be held and used by the Park Board, or a
combination of both, dedication and cash contribution. In the event this
section is utilized by the developer or subdivider and agreed to by the Park
Board, the developer or subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or make the
cash contribution prior to the time of the signing of the secondary plat of
subdivision or PUD.



      2.   Open space covenants or private park or recreational
facilities shall be submitted to the Plan Commission prior to approval of a
secondary plat of subdivision and shall be recorded contemporaneously with
the secondary plat of subdivision or PUD plat, whichever is applicable.



   C.   Procedure.



      1.   The developer or subdivider is required to meet with the
Park Board prior to the public hearing for preliminary approval of his or her
petition. All items required by this article shall be set forth on the
primary plat of subdivision or PUD and at the public hearing for primary
approval the Park Board shall make its recommendations to the Plan Commission
and in doing so is guided by the terms of this article. These recommendations
shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for final determination.



      2.   In making its final determination, the Plan Commission
shall be guided by the standards contained in this article.



   D.   Improved sites. All sites shall be developed in a condition
ready for full service of electrical, water, sewers, sidewalks and streets
(including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the
location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor.



   E.   Applicable only to residential zoned subdivisions.



CHAPTER 7. PLAT COMMITTEE



§ 1000-111  ESTABLISHED.



   A Plat Committee is established in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-701,
effective 2-1-1992.



§ 1000-112  APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS.



   The Plat Committee shall consist of three persons, with at least one of
the members being a member of the Plan Commission. Each appointment of a
member of the Plat Committee is for a term of one year beginning 2-1-1992,
but the Plan Commission may remove a member from the Plat Committee. The Plat
Committee must mail notice of the removal, along with written reasons, if
any, for the removal, to the member at his or her residence address. The
appointments to the Plat Committee shall be made by the Plan Commission at
its first meeting in 1992 and its first meeting in each year thereafter.



§ 1000-113  JURISDICTION.



   A.   The Plat Committee established under this article shall have
jurisdiction over all subdivisions of land that do not involve the opening of
a new public way, is less than five acres in total size, contains five lots
or less, and comply in all other respects with this appendix. The Plat
Committee may grant primary and secondary approval without public notice and
hearing, subject to appeal to the Plan Commission.



   B.   Within ten days after primary plat approval under this
subsection B., the Plat Committee shall provide for due notice to interested
parties of their right to appeal its decision to the Plan Commission under
I.C. 36-7-4-708. INTERESTED PARTIES shall mean the petitioner and all owners
of real estate located within 300 feet of the subdivision. The notice
required under this subsection shall be given in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-706. The Plat Committee may take action only by a majority vote of the
entire Committee.



   C.   In taking action, the Plat Committee shall be guided by the
same criteria that the Plan Commission operates under in determining whether
to grant primary and secondary plat approvals. The Plat Committee shall make
written findings of its decisions which shall be signed by its Chairperson.



§ 1000-114  ADOPTION OF RULES.



   The Plat Committee may adopt rules governing its duties as set forth
hereunder, which must be approved by official action of the Plan Commission.



ARTICLE XI. BUILDING OCCUPANCY AND TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMITS



§ 1100-1  PERMITS.



   No permit shall be issued unless the proposed structure or use of
structure or land is in complete conformity with the provisions of this
appendix and all other ordinances, or unless a written order is received from
the BZA, the Plan Commission or a court in accordance with this appendix and
state legislation.



   A.   A building permit shall be obtained before any structure may be
constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structually altered. If a
building permit is issued, the applicant shall apply for an occupancy permit,
which permit shall not be issued until the structure is complete and
compliance with all ordinances is in evidence.



   B.   An occupancy permit shall be obtained before any person may:



      1.   Occupy or use any vacant land;



      2.   Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged, structurally altered or placed on property;



      3.   Change the use of a non-conforming use;



      4.   a.   Occupancy permit may be obtained upon completion
of heating, electrical, plumbing and enclosure of structure and filing with
the Town Engineer and Building Commissioner as-built drawings showing actual
location, size, design and material of all sewer lines; water lines,
including shut-off valves, meters, buffalo boxers; storm sewers; lift
stations; and any other facility to which the town or any agency thereof may
require access or which, upon completion, will become public property; and
location survey showing actual location of improvements on lot or parcel.



         b.   A temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a
period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of
land or structures, provided that such temporary permit may include such
conditions and safeguards as necessary to protect the safety of the occupants
and the public.



      5.   The Building Commissioner may issue temporary occupancy
permit only under the following circumstances.



         a.   The Building Commissioner has inspected the
premises and finds the same to substantially comply with the ordinances of
the town, the rules and regulations of the Administrative Building Council of
the state when applicable, and that the premises are safe and habitable.



         b.   The reason for the inability of the Building
Commissioner to issue an occupancy permit shall be reduced to writing,
delivered to any person over the age of 18 years who is going to occupy the
premises.



         c.   The Building Commissioner received from all
proposed occupants of the premises over 18 years of age a written indemnity
holding the town harmless from any and all causes of action for damage or
injury which may result by reason of issuing said temporary occupancy permit
and a statement which may be part of the indemnity acknowledging the cause
for which no occupancy permit is issued and further acknowledging that if the
cause is not cured within the time prescribed by the Building Commissioner
those who occupy the premises agree to vacate unless otherwise so ordered by
the Building Commissioner.



      6.   No occupancy permit shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner unless he or she is satisfied that all corners of the lot or
parcel to be occupied have been staked with a five-eighths-inch diameter by
36-inch steel rod or a one-inch by 36-inch steel pipe by a registered land
surveyor in the state.



   C.   No building permit or occupancy permit shall be required for:



      1.   Lot and yard improvements such as play equipment and
landscaping;



      2.   Signs with a value of less than $25; and



      3.   Routine maintenance.



   D.   For any repair or remodeling of existing structures or
buildings where structural changes or electrical or plumbing changes are
involved, a building permit shall be required. However, if electrical or
plumbing work is done in a private single-family home by the owner of the
home, a building permit will not be required for this specific work.



   E.   Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a plat which
is drawn to scale and shows clearly and completely:



      1.   The location, dimensions and nature of the property;



      2.   The location and dimension of any existing or proposed
structures;



      3.   All adjoining thoroughfares and any existing or proposed
access to these thoroughfares;



      4.   The existing and proposed use of all structures and land;
and



      5.   Such other information as may be necessary to determine
conformance with this appendix.



   F.   If the work described in any permit has not begun within 180
days from the date of issuance thereof, same permit shall expire.



   G.   If  the work described in any permit has not been
substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof,
said permit shall expire.



§ 1100-2  FEES.



   The following filing fees shall be charged for applications for permits
or for petitions: (No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this section
shall be returnable to the applicant or petitioner.)



   A.   Building permit: as set forth in § 5-44 of this code of
ordinances, and electrical permits as set forth in § 5-87 of this code of
ordinances; and



   B.   Occupancy permit: $20 in addition to the fees in § 5-44 of
this code of ordinances.



ARTICLE XII. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES



   It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge,
change, maintain or use any structure or land in violation of any of the
provisions of this appendix. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
the Plan Commission, BZA or the Town Council may institute a suit for
injunction directing removal of a structure erected in violation of this
appendix or for the remedying of any other violation of this appendix. Any
person, firm or other legal entity who violates any provision of this
appendix may be cited into a court of law and subject to § 1-9 of this code
of ordinances, and provides for a fine not to exceed $2,500 per day for each
day that the violation exists. Each day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



APPENDIX I. SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES



BZA



 



BZA


   Administrative decision appeal
 
$50


   Development standard variance


      Residential zone
 
$50


      Business zone
 
$175


      Industrial zone
 
$300


   Special exception
 
$300


   Special meeting
 
$900


   Use variance
 
$300




 



Plan Commission



 



Plan Commission


   Each secondary plat filed
 
$1,000


   Request for reduction in letter of credit
 
$400


   Special meeting
 
$1,000


   Subdivision Ordinance change
 
$150


   Subdivision primary plat
 
$75 for each lot in the subdivision


   Zoning change
 
$150


   Zoning Ordinance change
 
$150




 



Planned Unit Development District Ordinances



 

Planned Unit Development District Ordinances


   Application fee
 
$500, plus $50 for each 1- or 2-family residential dwelling unit proposed for
the development and $100 per each multi-family dwelling unit or business or
industrial building proposed to be located in the PUD District. Attorney fees
shall be determined in accordance with the attorney’s prevailing hourly
rate which is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. Consultant fees
shall be determined by written proposal by the consultant and acceptance by
either the Plan Commission or Town Council


NOTES TO TABLE:

* The fees set forth above may be amended by the Plan Commission or BZA,
whichever is applicable, by official action taken by the applicable board at
a public meeting.



 



APPENDIX II. RULES OF THE ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION



ARTICLE I. MEETINGS.



   A.   The regular meetings of the Plan Commission shall be the third
Thursday of each month at 6:30 p.m., unless otherwise announced by the
President at the last preceding regular meeting. Public hearings shall be set
for 6:30 p.m., or as soon thereafter as it may be heard on the agenda that
evening. The Plan Commission will attempt to handle preliminary matters such
as setting public hearings or special inquiries prior to any public hearing
set at that particular meeting.



   B.   Special meetings.



      1.   Special meetings of the Plan Commission may be called by
the President or by two members upon written request to the Secretary. The
Secretary shall send a written notice, fixing the time and place of the
meeting, to all members and press entitled to notice at least 48 hours in
advance of any special meeting. The Secretary shall also post a copy of the
said notice in the Town Hall at least 48 hours before any specially called
meeting.



      2.   A special meeting may be requested by petitioner, and if
the Plan Commission grants such special meeting, the petitioner will be
required to pay a fee of $1,000 to the Clerk-Treasurer within two business
days following the granting of the request in order to defray the town’s
cost for the special meeting.



      3.   Written notice of a special meeting is not required if
the time of the special meeting has been fixed in a regular meeting.



   C.   Emergency meetings may be called by the President or Secretary
giving notice as provided in I.C. 5-14-1.5-5(d).



   D.   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. No action
of the Plan Commission is official, however, unless authorized by a majority
of the full Plan Commission at a regular or properly called special emergency
meeting.



   E.   All meetings shall be governed by an agenda, which shall be
posted prior to the meeting at the entrance to the location of the meeting.



   F.   Decisions of the Plan Commission shall be by roll call vote of
the members. Upon request of any member of the Plan Commission, any vote
shall be taken by written ballot, signed by the member voting and then read
aloud by the Secretary.



   G.   The Secretary of the Plan Commission or, in his or her absence,
a Secretary pro tem appointed by the President or presiding officer shall
keep the official minutes of all proceedings, which shall include:



      1.   Date, time and place of meeting;



      2.   The members present and absent;



      3.   The general substance of all matters proposed, discussed
or decided; and



      4.   A record of all votes taken, by individual members, if
there is a roll call. The Secretary shall submit the minutes of the previous
meetings to the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission for approval.
When approved, the record shall be signed by the President and attested by
the Secretary. Once approved, the minutes shall be filed with the office of
the Clerk-Treasurer and shall be open to the public for inspection and
copying.



ARTICLE II. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   A.   At its first regular meeting in January, the Plan Commission
shall elect, from its members, a President and Vice-President. Officers may
be elected at the final December meeting if all members will remain on the
Plan Commission for the following year.



   B.   The Vice-President shall have the authority to act as President
of the Plan Commission during the absence of the President. In the event of
resignation or removal of the President, a new President shall be elected
from the members at its next meeting.



   C.   1.   The Plan Commission shall fill the office of Secretary
at its first regular meeting in January.



      2.   The person so appointed need not be a member of the Plan
Commission.



      3.   It shall be the duty of the Secretary to prepare minutes
of all its meetings and to administer all official records of the Plan
Commission.



      4.   The official records of the Plan Commission shall be
located at the Town Hall.



   D.   The Plan Commission may appoint employees necessary to the
discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Plan Commission and shall
recommend the compensation for such employees to the Town Council.



   E.   The Plan Commission shall appoint one of its citizen members to
the BZA for a term of four years or whenever that member’s term on the Plan
Commission expires, whichever is sooner. That appointment shall be made at
its first regular meeting in January the year the appointment is to be made.



   F.   1.   The Plan Commission shall appoint a Plat Committee and
a Secretary for the committee at its meeting in January every year. The Plat
Committee consists of three persons, with at least one member being a member
of the Plan Commission.



      2.   The appointments take effect beginning February 1 and
shall be for a term of one year.



   G.   A member of the Plan Commission may not participate in a
hearing or decision of the Plan Commission concerning a matter in which he
has a direct or indirect financial interest or for other reasons brought to
the attention of the Plan Commission and which disqualification is approved
by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall enter in its records the
fact that a regular member has such a disqualification and the name of the
alternate member, if any, who participates in the hearing or decision. Said
alternate member, if any, shall be appointed by the authority of the
appointing body or the regular member who has been disqualified.



ARTICLE III. PETITION AND PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   A.   A petitioner seeking official action of the Plan Commission
shall file the appropriate petition in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer on
forms prescribed. The Clerk-Treasurer shall forward all petitions received to
the Secretary of the Plan Commission. Petitions include:



      1.   An amendment to the Unified Comprehensive Zoning and
Subdivision Control Ordinance;



      2.   Rezoning of a parcel of land;



      3.   Subdivision of land; and



      4.   Seeking a PUD District ordinance.



   B.   1.   All petitions must be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer by
12:00 noon, at least ten days prior to the next regular meeting of the Plan
Commission.



      2.   Untimely filed petitions shall not be heard until the
next month’s regular Plan Commission meeting, unless a special meeting is
requested and granted pursuant to these rules.



      3.   However, the Plan Commission may waive the requirements
of this section upon a showing of good cause by the unanimous vote of all
members present.



      4.   The purpose of the time requirements of this section is
to allow Plan Commission members the opportunity to examine and study any
petition and to conduct any investigation deemed advisable.



   C.   All such petitions not initiated by the Plan Commission itself
shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the form of a certified check or
money order of:



 

Planned Unit Development District ordinances application fee
 
$500, plus $50 for each 1- or 2-family residential dwelling unit proposed for
the development and $100 per each multi-family dwelling unit or business or
industrial building proposed to be located in the PUD District


Subdivision Ordinance change
 
$150


Subdivision primary plat
 
$75 for each lot in the subdivision


Zoning change
 
$150


Zoning Ordinance change
 
$150


NOTES TO TABLE:

Attorney fees shall be determined in accordance with the attorney’s
prevailing hourly rate which is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Engineer fees shall be determined in accordance with the Engineer’s
prevailing hourly rate which is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Consultant fees shall be determined by written proposal by the consultant and
acceptance by either the Plan Commission or the Town Council.



 



   D.   If the Plan Commission finds that a petition is in good order
and all items contained within the applicable checklist have been provided,
the Plan Commission will set a time and place for a public hearing on the
matter. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given to
the petitioner by the Plan Commission.



   E.   1.   The petitioner shall include with every petition
requiring a public hearing a scale map showing the location and ownership of
property within 300 feet of the perimeter of the property, which is the
subject matter of the petition, as those owners are shown of record in the
office of the Auditor of the county. At least ten days prior to the date set
for public hearing, the petitioner shall notify the owners of property within
the aforesaid 300 feet of the date, time, place and subject matter of the
public hearing. Such notice shall be accomplished by either:



         a.   Certified mail, return receipt requested, the form
of which notice is set forth in Exhibit C of these rules and regulations; or



         b.   By actual delivery to such owner, written notice
which will be evidenced by the owner’s written signature acknowledging the
receipt of such notice.



      2.   Notice is waived by any person entitled to notice but who
did not receive the same if that person attends the public hearing.



   F.   Proof of notification  shall be turned into the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office by Monday of the week of the hearing, for
forwarding to the Plan Commission Secretary.



   G.   1.   At least ten days prior to the date of the public
hearing, the petitioner shall cause notice of the public hearing to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The only
newspaper that qualifies at this time is the Chesterton Tribune. The form for
the notice of public hearing shall be Exhibit E (Notice of Public Hearing
before the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission).



      2.   The petitioner shall pay all costs of the notice of
public hearing and provide proof of publication to the Plan Commission and
proof of payment of the costs of the public hearing.



ARTICLE IV. AGENDA.



   A.   Each petition filed before the Plan Commission shall be in
proper form using the attached Exhibits, shall be numbered serially beginning
with the year of the petition, and placed on the Plan Commission’s agenda
(e.g., the first petition of 2001 will be numbered 01-1, the second petition
will be 01-2 and the like).



   B.   The agenda for all regular meetings shall be as follows:



      1.   Call meeting to order;



      2.   Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag;



      3.   Approval of minutes of previous meeting;



      4.   Comments from the public;



      5.   Preliminary hearings;



      6.   Concept review;



      7.   Public hearings;



      8.   Old business;



      9.   New business;



      10.   Miscellaneous matters; and



      11.   Adjournment.



ARTICLE V. CONDUCT OF HEARING.



   A.   Every person appearing before the Plan Commission shall abide
by the order and directions of the President. Discourteous, disorderly or
contemptuous conduct shall not be tolerated and will be dealt with as the
Plan Commission directs.



   B.   1.   The order for all public hearings will be as follows:



         a.   Petitioner presents all facts and arguments in
support of the petition;



         b.   All person wishing to speak in support of the
petition shall be heard;



         c.   All person wishing to speak in opposition to the
petition shall be heard;



         d.   Petitioner has right of rebuttal;



         e.   Public comment portion of the public hearing will
be closed by President;



         f.   Plan Commission asks for comments from staff;



         g.   Plan Commission may ask questions of any person
concerning the petition;



         h.   Plan Commission may discuss the matter;



         i.   Public hearing shall be closed upon motion and
affirmative vote of the majority of the entire Plan Commission; and



         j.   Plan Commission makes dispositive motion on the
petition.



      2.   At any point during the proceedings, the Plan Commission
may, in its sole discretion, continue the public hearing upon an affirmative
vote of a majority of the members of the entire Plan Commission. Once a
public hearing is closed, it shall remain closed unless the Plan Commission,
by a majority vote of the members of the entire Plan Commission, decides to
reopen same.



   C.   In presenting a petition, the burden shall be upon the
petitioner to convince the Plan Commission of the petition’s merits. The
petitioner should supply all information necessary for a clear understanding
of the proposal including, but not limited to, charts, plats, diagrams,
elevation of soil and roads, distances and lengths thereof and any other
exhibits deemed desirable by the Plan Commission. One reason for a
continuance of any hearing shall be the Plan Commission’s judgment that the
petitioner has not provided sufficient information for a decision at that
time.



   D.   1.   In considering changes to the Chesterton Zoning Map,
the Plan Commission shall, in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-603, pay reasonable
regard to:



         a.   The Comprehensive Plan;



         b.   Current conditions and the character of current
structures and uses in each District;



         c.   The most desirable use for which the land in each
District is adapted;



         d.   The conservation of property values throughout the
jurisdiction; and



         e.   Responsible development and growth.



      2.   All petitioners for changes to the Chesterton Zoning Map
shall present to the Plan Commission written and/or oral material which
addresses the five factors set forth above along with any other facts or
circumstances the petitioners deem appropriate. The petitioners shall also
utilize Exhibit F in submitting proposed findings to the Plan Commission for
its consideration. The Plan Commission shall utilize Exhibit F as a form in
arriving at any recommendation on a petition to change the Chesterton Zoning
Map.



ARTICLE VI. DISPOSITION OF CASES THROUGH PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   A.   Persons wishing to submit petitions before the Plan Commission
should contact the Building Department’s office of the town to receive a
copy of these rules and regulations with checklists which are provided to
help the petitioner better understand the practice and procedure before the
Plan Commission. The cost is $10.



   B.   Petitions accompanied by necessary plans and specifications
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer in 17 copies. The
petitioner shall pay the required filing fee to the Clerk-Treasurer, who
shall give petitioner a receipt for the same. The Clerk-Treasurer shall note
the date the petition is filed, and shall promptly notify the Secretary of
the Plan Commission, who shall have the responsibility to distribute the
petitions to the various members of the Plan Commission.



   C.   All petitions must be filed by 12:00 noon ten days prior to the
next regular meeting of the Plan Commission in accordance with Article III.B.
of these rules and regulations.



   D.   All public hearings are set by the Plan Commission at its
regular or special meetings. Since it is the desire of the Plan Commission
not to burden any one particular meeting with too many public hearings, the
petitioner must appear before the Plan Commission to obtain a date and time
for any public hearing requested.



   E.   The 17 petitions required to be submitted in accordance with
subsection B. above shall be submitted by the Plan Commission’s Secretary
as follows: seven to Plan Commission members, one for town’s file, one for
the Building Commissioner, one for the Town Engineer, one for the Street
Department, one for the Utilities Department, one for the Park Department,
one for the Fire Department, one for the Police Department, one for the
Clerk-Treasurer and one for the Town Attorney. The Plan Commission urges the
petitioner to take the initiative in utilizing the advice of the various town
department heads concerning petitioner’s plans. This initiative can be
taken by contacting the Building Commissioner to schedule an appearance at a
department head meeting. The department head meeting shall address matters
such as streets, utilities, drainage and all other matters deemed advisable
by the department heads.



   F.   It shall be the petitioner’s responsibility to comply with
the notice requirements set out in these rules and regulations in Article
III. A scaled plat showing ownership within 300 feet is required to be
attached to the petition and evidence of actual notice or notice by
registered or certified mail is required to be presented prior to any public
hearing for any rezoning, plat of subdivision, PUD District ordinance.



   G.   The Commission may dismiss a case for want of prosecution or
lack of jurisdiction. When a petitioner has failed to appear at two
consecutive meetings, the case shall be dismissed for want of prosecution.



   H.   A petitioner may not withdraw a case after a roll call vote has
been ordered by the President.



   I.   All cases dismissed for want of prosecution or decided
adversely to the petitioner shall not be allowed to be refiled until one year
from the date of the applicable action taken. All cases withdrawn by the
petitioner shall not be again placed on the docket within a period of six
months after the date of withdrawal.



   J.   Attached to these rules are the forms to be used by the
petitioner in complying with these rules and regulations. They are:



      1.   Petition to the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission for a
Change to the Chesterton Zoning Map (Exhibit A);



      2.   Petition to the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission for
Plattage of Property (Exhibit B);



      3.   Form of Notice to Property Owners Within 300 Feet
(Exhibit C);



      4.   Form of Acknowledged Delivered Notice on Owners Within
300 Feet (Exhibit D);



      5.   Form of Notice of Public Hearing Before the Advisory Plan
Commission (Exhibit E);



      6.   Recommendation on a Petition for a Change in the
Chesterton Zoning Map Before the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission (Exhibit
F);



      7.   Findings and Action Taken on Petitioner’s Request for
Primary Plat Approval for a Subdivision before the Chesterton Advisory Plan
Commission (Exhibit G);



      8.   Street Light and Fire Hydrant Agreement (Exhibit H);



      9.   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Infrastructure Guarantee
(Exhibit I);



      10.   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Sidewalk Guarantee (Exhibit
J);



      11.   Surety Bond Infrastructure Guarantee (Exhibit K);



      12.   Surety Bond Sidewalk Guarantee (Exhibit L);



      13.   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Infrastructure Maintenance
Guarantee (Exhibit M);



      14.   Irrevocable Letter of Credit Sidewalk Maintenance
Guarantee (Exhibit N);



      15.   Surety Bond Infrastructure Maintenance Guarantee
(Exhibit O);



      16.   Surety Bond Sidewalk Maintenance Guarantee (Exhibit P);



      17.   Petition for a Planned Unit Development District
Ordinance (Exhibit Q); and



      18.   An Ordinance of the Town of Chesterton, Porter County,
Indiana, Establishing a Planned Unit Development District (Exhibit R).



ARTICLE VII. FINAL DISPOSITION OF CASES



   A.   The Plan Commission or its designees have exclusive control
over approval of plats and appeals. The Plan Commission is an advisory body
concerning changes to this appendix (including Zoning Map), changes to the
subdivision control ordinance, and proposal for PUD District ordinances.
Advisory decisions of the Plan Commission calling for recommendations to the
Town Council shall be certified by the Plan Commission’s Secretary to the
Town Council by delivering the certification to the town’s Clerk-Treasurer
promptly and in the manner prescribed by law.



   B.   Prior to receiving secondary plat approval for a subdivision,
including secondary plat approval for subdivision that involve PUD District
ordinances, the petitioner must provide the appropriate guarantees for the
installation of infrastructure improvements, sidewalks, and/or maintenance
guarantees as required in § 1000-24B.2. of this appendix. All guarantees
pursuant to this section and the above-described section of the town code
shall be submitted to the Town Attorney for compliance with legal
requirements and then returned to the Planning Director and file the original
in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. Secondary plat approval may occur at
any time within two years after primary plat approval. The only exception to
this rule is that no secondary plat approval shall take place for any plats
approved by the Plat Committee until the ten-day appeal time has run from the
Plat’s Committee’s initial approval in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-710.



   C.   No building permits shall be issued for any subdivision
including PUDs until a copy of the recorded plat is on file in the town’s
Building Commissioner’s office.



   D.   All petitioners for secondary plat approval for subdivisions,
including PUDs, shall present ten black or blue lined prints and three Mylar
sepias of the plat which provides for the signatures of the Planning Director
and Secretary showing the plans have been approved. Additional Mylars may be
submitted for the developer’s use. Once the Mylars are signed, 12 black or
blueline prints of the signed and approved secondary plat shall be submitted
to the Building Commissioner for recording purposes. All subdivisions,
including PUDs, shall have the following statement on them:



“In the event there is a conflict between any items shown on the approved
Mylar and the standards contained in the Town Code as it exists at the time
of Secondary Plat approval, the approved Mylar will be governed and
interpreted by the standards contained in the Town Code.”



   E.   The town’s department heads inspect the infrastructure in
subdivisions and PUDs for which improvement guarantees, sidewalk guarantees
and/or maintenance guarantees exist. The Plan Commission requests that the
department heads submit a written report concerning the required
infrastructure installation or infrastructure maintenance to the Plan
Commission at least 30 days prior to the expiration of all guarantees.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-14-2008)



ARTICLE VIII. AMENDMENTS TO OR SUSPENSION OF RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE



   Amendments to these rules of practice and procedure may be made by the
Plan Commission at any public meeting upon the affirmative vote of a majority
of the members of the entire Plan Commission. The suspension of any rule of
practice and procedure in a particular case may be ordered at any public
meeting upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the entire
Plan Commission.



 



These Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Chesterton Advisory Plan
Commission were approved by the affirmative vote of                
                  out of seven members of said Plan Commission at
its regular public meeting held on                            
            , 20        .

 

                                             
                                                   
         

                  President

                  Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

 

ATTEST:

 

                                             
                                                   
         

Secretary

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

 



 



CHECKLIST A. FOR ALL PUBLIC HEARINGS



This Checklist is available in PDF, click Checklist A



              Petition on form prescribed by Plan Commission.



              Seventeen copies of Petition, along with all
accompanying documents, filed by 12:00 noon ten days prior to regular meeting
day of Plan Commission. (If in doubt as to ten-day deadline, call Plan
Commission Secretary to confirm.)



              Petition complete with necessary exhibits.



              Public hearing set at regular meeting of Plan Commission.



              Notice of public hearing published in Chesterton Tribune
at least ten days before regular meeting by Petitioner. Proof of publication
and publication fees paid. (Exhibit “E” cannot be used for PUD
publication. Must conform to I.C. 36-7-4-604 - Proposed zoning ordinances -
Hearings - Notice.)



              Written notice mailed or delivered to owners of property
within 300 feet of the proposed site. Such notice being mailed or delivered
at least ten days before date set for hearing.



              Plan Commission Secretary to submit petition and
necessary plans and specifications attached thereto to the Town Engineer,
Utilities Department, Building Department, Attorney, Park, Police, Fire and
Street Departments for their comments to the petition and Commission.



              Petitioner to submit 17 copies of scaled plat showing
ownership within 300 feet.



              Hold public hearing.



              Review comments from various town officials.



              Gather such additional information as Plan Commission
may require to make proper determination.



              Make written recommendations to Town Council where
required by law.



              Ordinance passed by town, if applicable.



CHECKLIST B. SUBDIVISIONS



This Checklist is available in PDF, click Checklist B



              An advisory meeting with the Plan Commission as set out
in § 1000-22 of the town code is advisable.



              Meet with Park Board and Utility Board pursuant to town
code.



              The developer shall follow all the requirements for a
public hearing as set forth on “Checklist A - For All Public Hearings”.



              The primary plat shall contain all the information
required in § 1000-37 of the town code unless any of those requirements are
waived by the Plan Commission. These are:



   A.   Location map showing



      1.   Location within the town;



      2.   Zoning of tract and adjacent properties; and



      3.   Existing related streets including the distances
therefrom.



   B.   Site map of subdivision and land within 100 feet of its
boundaries showing:



      1.   Contours of the site at vertical intervals of two feet if
the general slope is less than 10%, and at intervals of five feet if the
general slope is greater than 10%;



      2.   Character and location of natural or artificial features
existing on the land which would affect the design of the subdivision, such
as wooded areas, streams, direction and gradient of ground slope,
embankments, retaining walls, buildings or non-residential usage of land;



      3.   Names of owners of properties contiguous to the
subdivision;



      4.   Existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way,
including dedicated widths, roadway widths, approximate gradients; types and
widths of pavements, curbs and sidewalks;



      5.   Existing and proposed easements, including widths and
purposes;



      6.   Utilities, including the size, capacity and location of
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage facilities, water lines, gas lines,
gas mains, power lines and telephone lines;



      7.   Areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or storm
waters;



      8.   Subsurface conditions, including information about ground
water levels and stability of subsoils;



      9.   Tract boundary lines by calculated distances and
bearings; and



      10.   Title, graphic scale, north point and date.



   C.   A subdivision plat of the proposed subdivision drawn at a scale
no smaller than 100 feet to one inch showing:



      1.   Subdivision name;



      2.   Names and addresses of owner, subdivider and person who
prepared the plan;



      3.   Street pattern, including the names (which shall not
duplicate existing streets in the town unless it is an extension of an
existing street), widths of rights-of-way of streets, widths of easements for
alleys and approximate grades of streets;



      4.   Layout of lots, including dimensions, numbers, building
setback lines or front yard lines and street addresses;



      5.   Parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public or community use; and



      6.   Key plan, legend, notes, graphic scale, north point and
date.



   D.   Engineering plans showing:



      1.   Profiles, cross-sections and specifications for proposed
street improvements;



      2.   Grading plan showing elevation of proposed improvement on
each lot, swales, ditches and storm sewers affecting drainage of each parcel
and of the subdivision generally;



      3.   Profiles and other explanatory data concerning
installation of water distribution systems, storm sewers and sanitary sewers;



      4.   A report on the feasibility of connection to an existing
sewerage system, including distances to the nearest public sewer, and service
load of the subdivision;



      5.   If connection to a public sewerage system is not
feasible, a report on the feasibility of a separate sewerage system and
treatment works for the subdivision, including the design, population, type
and location of the treatment plant and the receiving stream;



      6.   If connection to a public or private sewerage system is
not feasible, a report on the feasibility of on-lot sewage disposal,
including a detailed map of the physical conditions of the site, contours,
finished grades, watercourses, ground water table elevations and the results
of soil percolation tests for each individual lot conducted in accordance
with the recommended practices of the state’s Board of Health;



      7.   A Tree Allocation Plan pursuant to § 1000-78 of the Town
Code; and



      8.   All infrastructure in any subdivision in the town must
comply with the existing requirements of the ADA and be compliance certified
by the engineer for the subdivider



   E.   Restrictions; a draft of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be adopted in the secondary subdivision plat.



   F.   Certificates of approval; a certificate for completion by the
Plan Commission shall be shown on the primary plat as follows:



 



In accordance with the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the Town of
Chesterton, this plat was given conditional approval as a Primary Plat by the
Plan Commission at a                               meeting
held on the                     day of                  
                        ,               .

 

 

                                                   
             

            President

 

                                                   
             

Secretary

 



 



              Secondary plat shall conform to the approved primary
plat and shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to one inch. The
secondary plat shall show:



   A.   Subdivision names, names and addresses of owner and subdivider,
source of title or land as shown by the books of the County Recorder, graphic
scale, north point and date;



   B.   Survey date with certification by a registered land surveyor,
showing:



      1.   Acreage or part thereof of each lot, and calculated
distances and bearings of the subdivision boundaries, lots, utility
easements, streets, alleys, building setback lines and parcels reserved or
dedicated land for community purposes;



      2.   Location and distances to the nearest established street
corners or official monuments and of the streets intersecting the boundaries
of the subdivision;



      3.   Location, type, material and size of monuments;



      4.   Complete curve data; and



      5.   Lot numbers, street names and addresses.



   C.   Notations as to whether improvements are dedicated or not;



   D.   The following certificates:



      1.   Certificate of dedication.



 



We, the undersigned owner of the said real estate shown and described hereon,
do hereby, as shown, plat and subdivide said real estate and designate the
same as                           name                 
    . All streets within the plat are hereby conveyed and dedicated to the
public. An easement is hereby granted to the Town of Chesterton, Indiana,
General Telephone Co., Northwest Indiana Water Company, and Northern Indiana
Public Service Co., severally and their respective successors and assigns to
install, lay, erect, construct, renew, operate, repair, replace and maintain
sewers, water mains, gas mains, conduits, cables, poles, wires either
overhead or underground with all necessary braces, guys, anchors and other
appliances in, upon, along and over the strip of land designated by dotted
line on the plat and marked “easements” or public utilities for the
purpose of service to the public in general with sewer, water, gas, electric
and telephone service, including the right to use the streets where necessary
and to overhang lots with aerial service to serve adjacent lots, together
with the right to enter upon the easement for public utilities at all times
for any purpose aforesaid, and to trim and to keep trimmed any trees, shrubs
or saplings that interfere with such service. No permanent building shall be
placed on said easement, but same may be used for any purposes that do not
interfere with the use of said easement for such public utilities.

 

 

WITNESS our hands this                   day of              
                            ,               .

 

 

   (SEAL)                                          
                       

                                                   
           

 



 



      2.   Certificate of acknowledgment.



 

   State of Indiana

   Chesterton, Indiana

   

Before me, the undersigned, a notary public in and for said Town and State
aforesaid, personally appeared said           (individual, partnership
or corporation)      , by                       for the said
individual, partnership or corporation who acknowledges the execution of the
foregoing plat of     name        with the dedications and restrictions
thereon expressed to be their (his)(her) voluntary act and deed for the uses
and purposes therein set forth.

 

   WITNESS my hand and notarial seal this                 day of
                                    ,              
    .

 

   (SEAL)                  Notary Public          
                                                   
         

My commission expires                                     ,
                 

The county of my residence is                                
                .



 



      3.   Land surveyor’s certificate.



 



I,                                                  
          , hereby certify that I am a Land Surveyor licensed in
compliance with the laws of the State of Indiana, and certify that this plat
correctly represents a survey completed by me on                  
                    ,                       , and that
all monuments shown actually exist and that their location, type and material
are accurately shown.

 

                                                   
                             

Land Surveyor

 

                                                   
                               

Ind. Reg. No.

 



 



      4.   Certificate of approval.



 



Under the authority provided by Chapter 174, Acts of 1947, enacted by the
General Assembly of the State of Indiana, and all Acts amendatory thereto,
this plat was given Secondary Plat approval by its Planning Director on
behalf of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana, on the               day of
                            ,                   .

 

 

                                            
                                             

                     PLANNING DIRECTOR

 

                                            
                                             

                     Secretary

 



 



      5.   Mylar. The Mylar must carry the following statement:
“In the event there is a conflict between any items shown on the approved
Mylar and the standards contained in the town code as it exists at the time
of secondary plat approval, the approved Mylar will be governed and
interpreted by the standards contained in the town code.”



              Procedure required for secondary plat are as follows:



   A.   Submission. After primary plat approval is obtained, the
subdivider shall submit a secondary plat to the Planning Director as set
forth in § 1000-38 of this chapter. The secondary plat shall be filed not
later than two years after the primary plat approval. If two years have
elapsed following the approval of the primary plat without the secondary plat
approval, the Planning Director may require the subdivider to submit a new
primary plat for approval.



   B.   Accompanying material. The secondary plat shall be accompanied
by:



      1.   Ten black or blue line prints and three Mylar sepias of
the plat. Additional Mylars may be submitted for the developer’s use. Once
the Mylars are signed, 12 black or blueline prints of the signed and approved
secondary plat shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for recording
purposes;



      2.   A certificate from the appropriate town department that
all improvements required by this chapter and all other applicable town
ordinances have been installed in strict accordance with the standards of
construction of the town, or guaranteed that the improvements will
subsequently be installed by the owner in the form of a surety bond, an
irrevocable letter of credit or any other guarantee that is first approved by
the Planning Director that will cover 100% of the costs of all required
improvements as estimated by the Town Engineer and approved by the Planning
Director. The aforementioned guarantee for the costs of requirement
improvements shall be posted at the time of secondary plat approval
consistent with § 1000-24.B.2. of this appendix and using the appropriate
forms as labeled Exhibit I through Exhibit P;



      3.   The Mylar sepias of the secondary plat shall be submitted
within 90 days after receiving tentative approval of the secondary plat; and



      4.   Street light and fire hydrant agreement entered into
pursuant to § 1000-81 of this appendix, and proof of payment shown (Exhibit
H).



   C.   Approval or disapproval. The Planning Director, (or his or her
designees), after consultation with legal counsel, the Town Engineer and
other department heads, is authorized to approve secondary plats for the
town. He or she may, however, refer the secondary plat to the Advisory Plan
Commission for consideration if, in his or her sole discretion, he or she
determines that the secondary plat constitutes a substantial deviation from
the approved primary plat. In such cases, the Plan Commission shall review
the submitted secondary plat to determine whether the developer shall be
required to submit an amended primary plat. If the Planning Director, after
consultation with legal counsel, the Town Engineer and other department
heads, finds that the secondary plat is in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, he or she shall affix the Plan Commission’s seal upon the
plat, and shall endorse the plat and return it to the subdivider. If
disapproved, he or she shall attach to the original tracing of the secondary
plat a statement of the reasons for such action and return it to the
subdivider.



   D.   Recording. At the time of secondary plat approval, developers
will be required to submit three Mylars, 12 blueprints and a check made out
to the County Recorder in an amount sufficient to pay all recording fees.
Additional Mylars may be submitted for the developer’s use. The Building
Commissioner will record all subdivision approved Mylars with the County
Recorder.



   E.   Copy to be filed with Building Commissioner. A copy of the
recorded plat shall be filed with the Building Commissioner within 30 days
after the same has been recorded with the County Recorder. The Building
Commissioner shall note any deviation in the approved secondary plat and the
recorded Plat and the recorded plat and report the same to the Planning
Director and/or the Plan Commission for appropriate action.



(Ord. 2008-05, passed 4-14-2008)



CHECKLIST C-A. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - CONCEPT PLAN REQUIREMENTS



This Checklist is available in PDF, click Checklist C-A



   A.   An area map showing the property proposed to be developed as a
PUD and also adjacent property owners and existing uses located within 300
feet of the parcel in question;



   B.   A legal description of the parcel proposed as a PUD;



   C.   A list of all requested variances from the Unified
Comprehensive Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance that the petitioner
wishes to be a part of this PUD;



   D.   A list including location of all proposed uses to be contained
within the PUD; and



   E.   A sketch plan approximately to scale, though it need not be to
the precision of a finished engineering or architectural drawing, that
clearly shows the following:



      1.   The existing features of the site including topography;



      2.   The proposed location of the various uses and their areas
in acres;



      3.   The general outlines of the proposed interior roadway
system and all existing rights-of-way and easements, whether public or
private;



      4.   Delineation of the various residential areas indicating
for each such area its general extent, size and composition in terms of total
number of dwelling units and approximate percentage allocation by dwelling
type;



      5.   Delineation of the various non-residential areas such as
business or industrial areas, indicating for each such area its general
extent, size and composition in terms of total number of buildings and
approximate percentage allocation by unit type;



      6.   A calculation of the residential density in dwelling
units per gross acre including interior roadways;



      7.   The interior open space system including land to be
utilized for park and recreational purposes;



      8.   Where portions of the site are subject to flooding, the
plan shall indicate extent and frequency;



      9.   Where areas lie in aircraft approach and holding patterns
such areas shall be indicated;



      10.   The proposed provision for disposition of storm water
and sanitary sewage and source of water service;



      11.   The substance of any covenants, grants, easements or any
other restrictions to be imposed upon the land or buildings including
easements for public utilities;



      12.   The proposed provisions for streets, walkways and
parking including locations and widths;



      13.   The general description of the availability of other
community facilities such as schools, fire protection services, parks and how
these facilities will be affected by the proposal;



      14.   General statement as to how common open space is to be
owned and maintained; and



      15.   If the development is to be phased, a general indication
of how the phasing is to proceed.



CHECKLIST C-B. PUD DISTRICT ORDINANCE - WRITTEN TEXT PORTION



This Checklist is available in PDF, click Checklist C-B



   A.   Name and address of petitioner;



   B.   Legal description of proposed PUD District;



   C.   A copy of the recorded document showing petitioner’s
ownership interest in this parcel;



   D.   All town standards, use and development standards unless the
variances to same are specifically delineated;



   E.   Delineation of all uses and area in acres of each proposed use;



   F.   Total number of residential units and percent of each type of
each residential uses;



   G.   Delineation of each business and/or industrial use, and total
area in acres of each business and/or industrial use;



   H.   Phasing schedule of development;



   I.   Detailed description of location and proposed use for all
proposed open and/or recreational spaces;



   J.   General description of community services available to the
proposed PUD District’s residents including schools, fire protection, parks
and all public/private utilities;



   K.   General statement on proposed ownership and maintenance of
common open space;



   L.   Proposed construction schedule;



   M.   A general statement demonstrating how the proposed PUD District
ordinance conforms to:



      1.   The objectives of PUD Districts as set forth in § 702 of
this appendix, which shall include a specific written submission concerning
§ 708S. of this appendix, having to do with preservation of natural
topographical and geological features of the land in a proposed PUD District;
and



      2.   A list of all proposed written commitments concerning the
use and development of the land contained in the proposed PUD District
ordinance.



CHECKLIST C-C. PUD DISTRICT ORDINANCE - DRAWING (PLAT) PORTION



This Checklist is available in PDF, click Checklist C-C



   A.   An area map showing the property under consideration and all
properties and easements within 300 feet of petitioner’s property;



   B.   A topographic map showing contour intervals of not more than
two feet of elevation shall be provided;



   C.   The drawing shall include:



      1.   The name and address of the petitioner;



      2.   Legal description of proposed PUD District;



      3.   North point, scale and date;



      4.    Boundaries of the properties platted to scale;



      5.   Existing water courses;



      6.   A development plan showing location, proposed use and
height of all buildings;



      7.   Location and proposed development of all open spaces
including parks, playgrounds and open reservations;



      8.   All areas where natural vegetation will be preserved
shall be noted;



      9.   Location of outdoor storage, if any; and



      10.   Location of all existing and proposed infrastructure
improvements, including roads, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bike paths and the
like, drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences, retention or detention
ponds and the like, descriptions of the methods of sewages and solid waste
disposal and water utility, and location of such facilities, location and
size of all signs, location and design of all streets, parking and truck load
areas with ingress and egress drives relating to same and including proposed
lighting for parking or truck loading areas;



   D.   A transparent overlay or separate map showing all soils, areas
and their classifications, including those areas with moderate to high
susceptibility to flooding and moderate to high susceptibility to erosion.



CHECKLIST D. FOR ISSUANCE OF FINAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT



This Checklist is available in PDF, click Checklist D



              The right to occupy or use any new structure on any land
within the town is conditional upon the issuance by the Building Commissioner
for the town of an occupancy permit. Said permit shall not be issued until:



   A.   After completion of heating, electrical, plumbing and enclosure
of structure;



   B.   Filing with Town Engineer and Building Commissioner as-built
drawings showing material, size, and location of water and sewer lines,
shut-off valves, meters and other miscellaneous data;



   C.   Location survey showing location of improvements on parcel; and



   D.   All corners of the lot have been staked by registered land
surveyor.



              Temporary occupancy permits may be issued by the
Building Commissioner only under certain circumstances set forth in the
Unified Comprehensive Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance, Article XI ,
§ 1100-1 B.5.:



   A.   The Building Commissioner has inspected the premises and finds
the same to substantially comply with the ordinances of the town, the rules
and regulations of the Administrative Building Council of the state when
applicable, and that the premises are safe and habitable;



   B.   The reason for the inability of the Building Commissioner to
issue an occupancy permit shall be reduced to writing, delivered to any
person over the age of 18 years who is going to occupy the premises; and



   C.   The Building Commissioner received from all proposed occupants
of the premises over 18 years of age a written indemnity holding the town
harmless from any and all causes of action for damage or injury which may
result by reason of issuing said temporary occupancy permit and a statement
which may be part of the indemnity acknowledging that if the cause is not
cured within the time prescribed by the Building Commissioner those who
occupy the premises agree to vacate unless otherwise so ordered by the
Building Commissioner.



EXHIBIT A. BEFORE THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit A



 

IN RE:    PETITION TO THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

      FOR A CHANGE TO THE CHESTERTON ZONING MAP NO              
.

 

PETITION

 

We, the undersigned, petition the Plan Commission for a change in the
Chesterton Zoning Map for the parcel of property described herein and show to
the Plan Commission the following:

 

1.   That we have received a copy of the Rules of Practice and Procedure
of the Plan Commission on file in the Offices of the Clerk-Treasurer. We have
also received a copy of the checklist also on file as aforesaid.

 

2.   That we have paid to the Clerk-Treasurer the appropriate filing fee
for this Petition.

 

3.   That we own at least 50 percent of the following described real
estate that is the subject matter of this Petition, which is located in
Chesterton, Indiana, to-wit:                                
                                                   
                                                   
        (insert legal description)                         
                                                   
        , which property is commonly known as                  
                                    (address or general
location of property)                                     
                                                   
          .

 

4.   That we attach a copy of the deed or other instrument vesting at
least 50 percent of the legal ownership of the property described in
paragraph 3 above to the undersigned.

 

5.   That the Zoning Map currently shows this property as being zoned  
                                                   
  .

 

6.   That your petitioner(s) believe that the aforesaid property should be
rezoned to                         (state zoning classification
desired)                                      .

 

7.   That the requested zoning pays reasonable regard to:

a.   The Comprehensive Plan for the reasons set forth as follows:      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                  .

b.   Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses
in the land and surrounding area for the reasons set forth as follows:    
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                          .

c.   The most desirable use for the land for which we request a change in
the Zoning Map as adapted for the following reasons:               
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                  .

d.   The conservation of property values throughout the Town for the
following reasons:                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                      .

e.   Responsible development and growth for the following reasons:    
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                  .

 

8.   That your petitioner(s) will take the necessary steps 10 days prior
to any public hearing set on this Petition to notify all owners of property
within 300 feet of the land for which the change in the Zoning Map is sought
of the date, time, and place of any public hearing to be held on this
Petition.

 



 



 

WHEREFORE, your petitioner(s) request that this Plan Commission do the
following:

 

1.   Review this Petition to determine whether it is in proper order and
form and, upon determining so, set this matter for public hearing.

 

2.   The Secretary of this Plan Commission publish notice in the
Chesterton Tribune at least 10 days prior to said public hearing informing
the public of the date, time, and place of the public hearing.

 

3.   That the Plan Commission recommend to the Town Council that an
ordinance be passed changing the Zoning Map for the aforesaid property from
its present zoning classification of                          
                        to the requested zoning classification of
                                                   
                                              .

 

 

                                                   
                             

Petitioner

 

 

                                                   
                             

Petitioner

 

Address of Petitioner(s):

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

 

 

Date:                                              
                                                   
                         

Telephone No.    

 

 

PLAN COMMISSION’S ACTION:

 

Public hearing set for                                    
                                                   
                                         

Results of public hearing                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
.

 

Ordinance No.                             (passed) (rejected)
by the Town Council on                                    
          .

 



 



EXHIBIT B. BEFORE THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit B



 

IN RE:    PETITION TO THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

FOR PLATTAGE OF PROPERTY.                      NO.          
               

 

 

PETITION

 

Your petitioner(s) request plattage of real estate in the Chesterton,
Indiana, and represent and show to the Plan Commission the following:

 

1.   That we have received a copy of the Rules of Practice and Procedure
of the Plan Commission on file in the Offices of the Clerk-Treasurer. We have
also received a copy of the checklist also on file as aforesaid.

 

2.   That we have paid to the Clerk-Treasurer the appropriate filing fee
for this Petition.

 

3.   That we have received and are familiar with the Chesterton Unified
Comprehensive Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance.

 

4.   That we are the legal or equitable owners of the following described
real estate in Chesterton, Indiana, to-wit:                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                          (insert legal
description of property)                                   
                                                   
                                            generally
located at                                            
                                                   
          (address or general location of property)             
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                     

 

5.   That we attach a copy of the deed or other instrument vesting the
legal ownership of the property described in paragraph 4 above to the
undersigned.

 

6.   That attached to this Petition is a plat of the aforesaid real estate
which your petitioner(s) believe conforms to the requirements of the
Chesterton Unified Comprehensive Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance.

 

7.   That your petitioner(s) agree to follow all applicable rules of
practice and procedure of the Plan Commission that apply to this Petition
along with the checklists provided for same.

 

8.   That your petitioner(s) specifically and additionally represent that
they will comply with the notice requirements of the Plan Commission in
giving to all owners of real estate owned within three hundred feet (300’)
of the property which is the subject matter of this Petition as required by
the aforementioned Rules of Practice and Procedure

 

 

 

WHEREFORE, your petitioner(s) request that:

 

1.   This Plan Commission review the Petition and all accompanying
documents and, upon finding same to be in good order, set this Petition for
public hearing on Primary Plat approval for the requested subdivision.

 

2.   The Secretary of the Plan Commission publish notice in the Chesterton
Tribune at least 10 days prior to said public hearing informing the public of
the date, time, and place of the public hearing.



 



 



That the Plan Commission approve the plat at both the Primary and Secondary
Plat approval stages of these proceedings in accordance with the Chesterton
Unified Comprehensive Zoning and Subdivision Control Ordinance.

 

         Petitioner                                
                                                   
   

 

         Petitioner                                
                                                   
   

 

         Address of Petitioner(s):                    
                                               

                                                   
             

 

Date:                                      Telephone No.
                                                   
                             

 

 

PLAN COMMISSION’S ACTION:

 

Public hearing on Primary Plat approval for                      
                                                   
              .

 

Results of public hearing:                                  
                                                   
                            .

 

Matter considered for Secondary Plat approval on                  
                                                   
          .

 

Action on request for Secondary Plat approval and date of same:        
                                                  .

 



 



EXHIBIT C. FORM OF NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS WITHIN 300 FEET



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit C



 



DATE                                                
                     

 

 

Mr. and Mrs.                                          
                       

   (Name)

 

                                                   
                                   

(Street)

                                                   
                                   

(Town, State, Zip)

 

 

Dear Mr. and Mrs.                                        
                                                :

 

We are the owners of the following described real estate in Chesterton,
Indiana, to-wit:                                        
                                                   
                  (insert legal description)               
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                            commonly
known as                                              
    (insert address or general location of property)               
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                      .

 

We have submitted a Petition to the Plan Commission for              
                                                   
                                            (insert the
type of petition filed and the action requested to be taken by the Plan
Commission)                                           
                                                   
                                      for the
above-described property.

 

The Plan Commission has set out Petition for public hearing on          
                                        , 20       
          , at                                      
  o’clock p.m. at the Chesterton Town Hall, 726 Broadway, Chesterton,
Indiana.

 

You are invited to be present for said hearing and to direct your comments to
the Plan Commission concerning this application or to submit your comments to
the Plan Commission in writing prior to the hearing.

 

 

                        Very truly yours,

 

                                                   
                                   

                        (Petitioner’s signature)

 



 



EXHIBIT D. FORM OF ACKNOWLEDGED DELIVERED NOTICE ON OWNERS OF PROPERTY WITHIN
300 FEET



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit D



 



We, the undersigned owners of property within 300 feet of the property owned
by                                                  
                                                   
                                , hereby acknowledge the
receipt of the written notice of a public hearing before the Plan Commission
of the Town of Chesterton to be held at                        
                o’clock p.m. on the                     
                    day of                          
                      , 20                      , for
the purpose of                                          
                                                   
                      (insert the type of petition filed and the
action requested to be taken by the Plan Commission)               
                                                   
              for the property of the petitioner(s)            
                                                   
                        from                        
  to                             .

 

 

SIGNATURE            ADDRESS

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

                                                   
                                                   
                                             
                              

 

 

I,                                                  
                                      , certify that I
delivered the notice referred to above to those who signatures appear above
and that I witnessed those individuals affix their signatures to this
document.

 

 

                                                   
                                               

                           

Note:  If the property is vested in more than one person, i.e., husband and
wife, both should sign.

 



 



EXHIBIT E. NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN
COMMISSION



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit E



 



Notice is hereby given that the Plan Commission will hold a public hearing at
the Chesterton Town Hall, 726 Broadway, Chesterton, Indiana 46304, on the  
                              day of                
                              , 20              , and
will hear the Petition of                                  
                                (insert the type of Petition
being filed and the action requested to be taken by the Plan Commission)   
                                                   
                for the following described real estate in
Chesterton, Indiana, to-wit:                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                          (insert legal
description of property)                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                          which property is commonly known as  
                                                   
      (insert address or location of property)                 
                      .

 

A copy of the Petition is on file at the Office of the Chesterton
Clerk-Treasurer, 726 Broadway, Chesterton, Indiana, for examination by the
public before the public hearing. Written objections to the Petition that are
filed with the Plan Commission’s Secretary prior to the hearing will be
considered. Oral comments concerning the Petition will be heard at the public
hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time as may be found
necessary. The hearing will begin at 6:30 p.m. or as soon thereafter as the
agenda for the Plan Commission will permit.

 

                  CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

 

 

PUBLICATION DATE: (At least 10 days prior to meeting date and the paper must
have the notice 2 days prior to publication.) Publication is required one
time only.

 

Proof of publication can be sent to                            
                (petitioner’s home address)               
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                .

 

 

Note to Petitioner: The Notice must be placed in a newspaper of general
circulation within the town and, at this point in time, the Chesterton
Tribune is the only paper that qualifies as such a newspaper.

 



 



EXHIBIT F. RECOMMENDATION ON A PETITION FOR A CHANGE IN THE CHESTERTON ZONING
MAP
BEFORE THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit F



 



Petition No.                                      

 

 

The application of                                      
              (Name)                                 
                         

Present zoning of property:                                
                                                   
                         

Zoning requested by the Petition:                            
                                                   
                     

 

 

Address:                                              
                                                   
                                     

Date public hearing held:                                  
                                                   
                         

Date public hearing closed:                                
                                                   
                         

 

 

That the Cheseterton Advisory Plan Commission has paid reasonable regard to
the criteria set forth in Indiana Code 36-7-4-603 and all other pertinent
facts surrounding this Petition and recommends that the Chesterton Town
Council GRANT                         REJECT              
        the above Petition for a change to te Chesterton Zoning Map. A
copy of a proposed Ordinance for a change in the Chesterton Zoning Map is
attached to this Recommendation.

 

Dated:                                              
                 

 

                     CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

 

                                                   
                                     

 

                                                   
                                     

 

                                                   
                                     

 

                                                   
                                     

 

                                                   
                                     

 

                                                   
                                     

 

                                                   
                                     

                              

 

ATTEST:

                              

 

                                                   
                                     

Secretary

 



 



EXHIBIT G. FINDINGS AND ACTION TAKEN ON PETITIONER’S REQUEST FOR PRIMARY
PLAT APPROVAL
FOR A SUBDIVISION BEFORE THE CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit G



 



Petition No.                                          
                 

 

 

The application of                                      
              (Name)                                 
                                           

Legal description of subdivision:                            
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                 

 

Address:                                              
                                                   
                                                   
     

Date public hearing held:                                  
                                                   
                                             

Date public hearing closed:                                
                                                   
                                             

 

The Plan Commission now FINDS:

 

1.   That the application for primary plat approval DOES            
        DOES NOT                     conform to all
requirements of the Chesterton Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Control Ordinance, and the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Plan
Commission.

 

In the event “DOES NOT” was checked above, the reasons shall be set forth
in the following space:                                    
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                 

 

The Plan Commission does now GRANT                     REJECT    
                the primary plat approval of the petitioner(s). And
further decides the following condition be imposed: receipt of a final plat
and guarantees as required by §§ 1000-24 and 1000-38 of Appendix A-Zoning;
and                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                     

 

Dated:                                        
      CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

                                                   
                             

 

ATTEST:

                                                   
                     

Secretary



 



EXHIBIT H. STREET LIGHT AND FIRE HYDRANT AGREEMENT



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit H



 



THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into by and between the Town of
Chesterton, hereinafter called “CHESTERTON,” and                
                                                  ,
hereinafter called “DEVELOPER.”

 

WHEREAS, Developer is developing a subdivision/PUD within the corporate
boundaries of the Town of Chesterton known as                    
                                  ; and

WHEREAS, Chesterton will be supplying various municipal services to this
development; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary that fire hydrants and street lights be installed;
and

WHEREAS, those fire hydrants that are located within the public right-of-way
of the proposed development will eventually become the responsibility of
Chesterton to pay a hydrant rental expense to the Indiana-American Water
Company; and

WHEREAS, street lights that are located within the public right-of-way will
eventually become the responsibility of Chesterton to pay a street light
rental expense to the Northern Indiana Public Service Company.

 

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises contained herein, the
parties agree as follows:

1.   That Chesterton shall designate the location of an appropriate number
of fire hydrants for the development which the Developer will install. The
location and number of fire hydrants shall be determined by the Plan
Commission with advice from its Engineer and the Chesterton Fire Chief.
Further, the Town shall, through its Plan Commission with advice from its
staff, designate the style, quantity and location of an appropriate number of
street lights and the Developer shall order the installation of same. All of
the aforementioned shall be done within the applicable time frames.

2.   Developer shall pay all expenses and charges for installation of all
fire hydrants and street lights and shall then pay to the Chesterton
Clerk-Treasurer a sufficient sum of money to cover the fire hydrant rental
and street light utility costs for those hydrants and lights placed in the
public right-of-way for the first three (3) year period under the rate
schedule presently in existence for same. The Developer understands and
acknowledges that all hydrant rental and street light utility costs located
on privately owned property shall be the responsibility of the Developer and
his successors in interest.

3.   As previously stated, this contract shall apply only to fire hydrants
and street lights inasmuch as the same are located within Chesterton’s
public right-of-way. This Agreement does not apply to fire hydrants or street
lights that are on privately owned property such as hydrants and/or lights
that the Plan Commission may require each home in a development to have.

4.   This Agreement shall be binding upon the respective parties hereto,
their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns.

 

                     CHESTERTON TOWN COUNCIL

                                                   
                     

                                                   
                     

                                                   
                     

                                                   
                     

                                                   
                     

 

ATTEST:

                                                   
                                          

Clerk-Treasurer

                  DEVELOPER

            BY:                                
                                                   
 

                  Title:                      
                                                   
         

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT THAT MUST BE UTILIZED
IN THE EVENT THE PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A LETTER OF CREDIT FOR A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AS ITS INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE FOR INFRASTRUCTURE
REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)

 



 



EXHIBIT I. IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit I



 



Date:                                                

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

RE: IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT FOR                          
                                              members
of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                      
                                               
hereby establishes and issues in favor of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana,
its Irrevocable Letter of Credit (“Credit”) pursuant to § 1000-24.B.2.
of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code in the amount of          
                        subject to the following conditions:

 

1.   That this Credit binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of thirty (30)
months from and after          , which date is necessarily the same
date of secondary plat approval by the Plan Commission. Accordingly, the
expiration date for this letter of Credit is                      
    .

2.   That all improvements required by the Town of Chesterton shall be
completed by                                     ,
hereinafter referred to as “Owner,” in accordance with all requirements
of the Town Code and the plans that have been approved by the Plan Commission
for this                     (insert Subdivision or PUD)       
          no later than                                
                                , which date is necessarily
two (2) years from the date of secondary plat approval.

3.   That the failure of owner to complete the public improvements secured
by this Credit on or before two (2) years from secondary plat approval shall
be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of this
Credit.

4.   That the failure of Owner to submit the maintenance guarantee in
accordance with Section 1000-24. B. 2. f. upon the expiration of this Credit
shall be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of the
Credit. This default shall cause an immediate stop work order place upon all
construction in the Subdivision or PUD and no work shall continue in said
Subdivision or PUD until the default is cured.

5.   That the issuing institution of this Credit will pay all attorney’s
fees and other out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the
Town, incurred in enforcing collection of this Credit in the event the
issuing institution fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under the
terms of this Credit.

6.   That this Credit may be reduced or partially discharged only by the
Plan Commission upon receipt of a sworn statement by the Owner’s engineer
of the costs of work performed and estimating the amount of improvement
remaining to be performed. Such a reduction of partial discharge may only
take place one time and only at such time as the conforming work is performed
is equal to at least 50 percent of the total amount of the guarantee. Upon
receipt of the sworn statement of the Owner’s engineer, the Town of
Chesterton’s engineer shall review said sworn statement and determine after
inspection if the improvements conform with the approved plat and the Town of
Chesterton’s standards concerning their construction. The Town of
Chesterton’s engineer shall further determine whether the Owner’s
engineer’s sworn statement is accurate and then report his findings to the
Plan Commission as to the costs of the conforming work performed. This Credit
may then be reduced and partially discharged by the Plan Commission in the
amount of the costs of the conforming work performed as determined by the
Town of Chesterton’s engineer. However, in no event shall this Credit be
reduced to an amount less that 110 percent of the estimated costs of the
balance of the improvements to be constructed. Furthermore, at such time that
the guarantee required is discharged completely by the Plan Commission, the
Owner must submit a maintenance guarantee guaranteeing said improvements
against defects in materials or workmanship in the amount of 10 percent of
the total estimated costs of the improvements to be effective for a period of
two (2) years from and after final acceptance of all improvements required
for the Subdivision or PUD.

 



 



 



7.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Plan Commission,
wishes to draw upon this Credit, it shall give a signed statement by its
designated representative that the aforementioned improvements have not been
completed within the time limit set in paragraph 2 of this Credit.      
                                                   
    shall then issue a check payable to the Town of Chesterton within 10
days of receipt of the signed statement. No additional action is required by
the Town of Chesterton other than giving its signed statement and indicating
the amount of money required to be paid by the issuing institution pursuant
to this Credit.

8.   That to the extent they do not conflict in any way whatsoever with
this Credit, this Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits (1993 revision), International Chamber of Commerce
publication #500, enforced as of January 1, 1994.

 

 

Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT THAT MUST BE UTILIZED
IN THE EVENT THE PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A LETTER OF CREDIT FOR A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AS ITS INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE FOR SIDEWALKS REQUIRED
TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)

 



 



EXHIBIT J. IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT SIDEWALK GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit J



 



Date:                                                
                       

 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

RE: IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT FOR                          
                                                   
   

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                      hereby establishes and issues in favor of
the Town of Chesterton, Indiana, its Irrevocable Letter of Credit
(“Credit”) pursuant to Section 1000-24. B. 2. of Appendix A-Zoning of
Chesterton Town Code in the amount of                          
                              subject to the following
conditions:

 

1.   That this Credit binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of four (4) and
six (6) months from and after                                
      , which date is necessarily the same date of secondary plat approval
by the Plan Commission. Accordingly, the expiration date for this letter of
Credit is                                             
    .

2.   That the sidewalks required by the Town of Chesterton shall be
completed by                                         ,
hereinafter referred to as “Owner,” in accordance with all requirements
of the Town Code and the plans that have been approved by the Plan Commission
for this                         (insert Subdivision or PUD)   
                  no later than                        
                    , which date is necessarily four (4) years from
the date of secondary plat approval.

3.   That the failure of owner to complete the public improvements secured
by this Credit on or before four (4) years from secondary plat approval shall
be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of this
Credit.

4.   That the failure of Owner to submit the maintenance guarantee in
accordance with Section 1000-24. B. 2. f. upon the expiration of this Credit
shall be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of the
Credit. This default shall cause an immediate stop work order place upon all
construction in the Subdivision or PUD and no work shall continue in said
Subdivision or PUD until the default is cured.

5.   That the issuing institution of this Credit will pay all attorney’s
fees and other out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the
Town, incurred in enforcing collection of this Credit in the event the
issuing institution fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under the
terms of this Credit.

6.   At such time that this guarantee is discharged completely by the Plan
Commission, the Owner must submit a maintenance guarantee guaranteeing said
improvements against defects in materials or workmanship in the amount of 10
percent of the total estimated costs of the improvements to be effective for
a period of two (2) years from and after final acceptance of all improvements
required for the Subdivision or PUD.

7.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Plan Commission,
wishes to draw upon this Credit, it shall give a signed statement by its
designated representative that the aforementioned improvements have not been
completed within the time limit set in paragraph 2 of this Credit. shall then
issue a check payable to the Town of Chesterton within 10 days of receipt of
the signed statement. No additional action is required by the Town of
Chesterton other than giving its signed statement and indicating the amount
of money required to be paid by the issuing institution pursuant to this
Credit.

 



 



 

8.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Plan Commission,
wishes to draw upon this Credit, it shall give a signed statement by its
designated representative that the aforementioned improvements have not been
completed within the time limit set in paragraph 2 of this Credit. shall then
issue a check payable to the Town of Chesterton within 10 days of receipt of
the signed statement. No additional action is required by the Town of
Chesterton other than giving its signed statement and indicating the amount
of money required to be paid by the issuing institution pursuant to this
Credit.

9.   That to the extent they do not conflict in any way whatsoever with
this Credit, this Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits (1993 revision), International Chamber of Commerce
publication #500, enforced as of January 1, 1994.

 

 

Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF SURETY BOND THAT MUST BE UTILIZED IN THE EVENT THE
PETITIONER WISHES TO USE A SURETY BOND AS AN INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)

 



 



EXHIBIT K. SURETY BOND INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit K



 



Date:                                                
 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

RE: SURETY BOND OF CREDIT FOR                                
                                                   
   

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
hereby establishes and issues in favor of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana,
its Surety Bond (“Surety”) pursuant to § 1000-24B.2. of Appendix
A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code in the amount of                  
          subject to the following conditions:

 

1.   That this Surety binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of thirty (30)
months from and after                                     ,
which date is necessarily the same date of secondary plat approval by the
Plan Commission. Accordingly, the expiration date for this Surety is      
          .

2.   That all improvements required by the Town of Chesterton shall be
completed by                                       ,
hereinafter referred to as “Owner,” in accordance with all requirements
of the Town Code and the plans that have been approved by the Plan Commission
for this           (insert Subdivision or PUD)      no later than  
            , which date is necessarily two (2) years from the date of
secondary plat approval.

3.   That the failure of owner to complete the public improvements secured
by this Surety on or before two (2) years from secondary plat approval shall
be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of this
Surety.

4.   That the failure of Owner to submit the maintenance guarantee in
accordance with Section 1000-24. B. 2. f. upon the expiration of this Surety
shall be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of the
Surety. This default shall cause an immediate stop work order place upon all
construction in the Subdivision or PUD and no work shall continue in said
Subdivision or PUD until the default is cured.

5.   That the issuing institution of this Surety will pay all attorney’s
fees and other out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the
Town, incurred in enforcing collection of this Surety in the event the
issuing institution fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under the
terms of this Surety.

6.   That this Surety may be reduced or partially discharged only by the
Plan Commission upon receipt of a sworn statement by the Owner’s engineer
of the costs of work performed and estimating the amount of improvement
remaining to be performed. Such a reduction of partial discharge may only
take place one time and only at such time as the conforming work is performed
is equal to at least 50 percent of the total amount of the guarantee. Upon
receipt of the sworn statement of the Owner’s engineer, the Town of
Chesterton’s engineer shall review said sworn statement and determine after
inspection if the improvements conform with the approved plat and the Town of
Chesterton’s standards concerning their construction. The Town of
Chesterton’s engineer shall further determine whether the Owner’s
engineer’s sworn statement is accurate and then report his findings to the
Plan Commission as to the costs of the conforming work performed. This Surety
may then be reduced and partially discharged by the Plan Commission in the
amount of the costs of the conforming work performed as determined by the
Town of Chesterton’s engineer. However, in no event shall this Surety be
reduced to an amount less that 110 percent of the estimated costs of the
balance of the improvements to be constructed. Furthermore, at such time that
the guarantee required is discharged completely by the Plan Commission, the
Owner must submit a maintenance guarantee guaranteeing said improvements
against defects in materials or workmanship in the amount of 10 percent of
the total estimated costs of the improvements to be effective for a period of
two (2) years from and after final acceptance of all improvements required
for the Subdivision or PUD.



 



 

7.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Plan Commission,
wishes to draw upon this Surety, it shall give a signed statement by its
designated representative that the aforementioned improvements have not been
completed within the time limit set in paragraph 2 of this Surety.      
                                                shall
then issue a check payable to the Town of Chesterton within 10 days of
receipt of the signed statement. No additional action is required by the Town
of Chesterton other than giving its signed statement and indicating the
amount of money required to be paid by the issuing institution pursuant to
this Surety.

 

 

Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT THAT MUST BE UTILIZED
IN THE EVENT THE PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A LETTER OF CREDIT FOR A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AS ITS INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE FOR INFRASTRUCTURE
REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)

 



 



EXHIBIT L. SURETY BOND SIDEWALK GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit L



 



Date:                                                
               

 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

RE: SURETY BOND FOR                                      
                                           

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                            hereby establishes and issues in
favor of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana, its Surety Bond (“Surety”)
pursuant to Section 1000-24. B. 2. of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town
Code in the amount of                                    
                          subject to the following conditions:

 

1.   That this Surety binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of four (4) years
six (6) months from and after                                
                    , which date is necessarily the same date of
secondary plat approval by the Plan Commission. Accordingly, the expiration
date for this Surety is                                    
                                    .

2.   That the sidewalks required by the Town of Chesterton shall be
completed by                                           ,
hereinafter referred to as “Owner,” in accordance with all requirements
of the Town Code and the plans that have been approved by the Plan Commission
for this                   (insert Subdivision or PUD)         
      no later than                                   
                                          , which date
is necessarily four (4) years from the date of secondary plat approval.

3.   That the failure of Owner to complete 100 percent of sidewalk
installation secured by this Surety on or before four (4) years from
secondary plat approval shall be considered a default by the Owner and the
issuing institution of this Surety.

4.   That the failure of Owner to submit the maintenance guarantee in
accordance with Section 1000-24. B. 2. f. upon the expiration of this Surety
shall be considered a default by the Owner and the issuing institution of the
Surety. This default shall cause an immediate stop work order place upon all
construction in the Subdivision or PUD and no work shall continue in said
Subdivision or PUD until the default is cured.

5.   That the issuing institution of this Surety will pay all attorney’s
fees and other out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the
Town, incurred in enforcing collection of this Surety in the event the
issuing institution fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under the
terms of this Surety.

6.   At such time that this guarantee is discharged completely by the
Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission, the Owner must submit a maintenance
guarantee guaranteeing said improvements against defects in materials or
workmanship in the amount of 10 percent of the total estimated costs of the
improvements to be effective for a period of two (2) years from and after
final acceptance of all improvements required for the Subdivision or PUD.

7.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Advisory Plan
Commission, wishes to draw upon this Surety, it shall give a signed statement
by its designated representative that the aforementioned improvements have
not been completed within the time limit set in paragraph 2 of this Surety.
shall then issue a check payable to the Town of Chesterton within 10 days of
receipt of the signed statement. No additional action is required by the Town
of Chesterton other than giving its signed statement and indicating the
amount of money required to be paid by the issuing institution pursuant to
this Surety.

 



 



 



 

Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT THAT MUST BE UTILIZED
IN THE EVENT THE PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A LETTER OF CREDIT FOR A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AS ITS INFRASTRUCTURE GUARANTEE FOR INFRASTRUCTURE
REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)



 



EXHIBIT M. IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit M



 



Date:                                                
               

 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

RE: IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT TO BE USED AS MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE PURSUANT
TO § 1000-24B2f OF APPENDIX A-ZONING OF CHESTERTON TOWN CODE FOR        
                                                   
          SUBDIVISION OF THE TOWN OF CHESTERTON.

 

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                                          hereby
establishes and issues in favor of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana, its
Irrevocable Letter of Credit (“Credit”) to be used as a maintenance
guarantee pursuant to § 1000-24B.2.f. of Appendix A -Zoning of Chesterton
Town Code in the amount of                                  
  subject to the following conditions:

 

1.   That this Credit binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of two (2) years
from and after                                         ,
which date is necessarily the same date of the acceptance of the hereinafter
mentioned improvements by the Plan Commission.

2.   That the improvements that are subject of this Credit to be used as a
maintenance guarantee are all of the infrastructure improvements that are
required by the Town of Chesterton for         (insert name of
subdivision)    . The improvements that this Credit applies to include, but
are not limited to, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, sewer and water lines,
detention pond(s), lift stations, storm sewers, street signs, street lights
and hydrants. This Credit guarantees the aforementioned improvements against
failure or deterioration for any reason for a period of two (2) years from
and after                               , (date of
acceptance of the improvements by the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission).

3.   That this institution will pay all attorney’s fee and other
out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the Town, incurred in
enforcing collection of this Credit in the event the issuing institution
fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under terms of this Credit.

4.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, through its Advisory Plan
Commission, wishes to draw upon this Credit, it shall give a signed statement
by its designated representative that the aforementioned improvements need
repair and include the amount of money necessary to repair same. The
undersigned issuing institution shall the issue its check payable to the Town
of Chesterton within 10 days of receipt of the signed statement. No
additional action is required by the Town of Chesterton other than giving its
signed statement and indicating the amount of money required to be paid by
the issuing institution pursuant to this Credit.

5.   That to the extent they do not conflict in any way whatsoever with
this Credit, this Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits (1993 revision), International Chamber of Commerce
publication #500, enforced as of January 1, 1994.

 



 



 



Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT THAT MUST BE UTILIZED
IN THE EVENT THE PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A LETTER OF CREDIT FOR A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF A MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR
SIDEWALKS REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)



 



EXHIBIT N. IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit N



 



Date:                                                
               

 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

 

RE: IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT TO BE USED AS MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR
SIDEWALKS PURSUANT TO § 1000-24B.2.f. OF APPENDIX A-ZONING OF CHESTERTON
TOWN CODE FOR                                          
                          SUBDIVISION TO THE TOWN OF CHESTERTON.

 

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                                  hereby establishes and
issues in favor of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana, its Irrevocable Letter of
Credit (“Credit”) to be used as a maintenance guarantee pursuant to §
1000-24B.2. of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code in the amount of  
                                    subject to the
following conditions:

 

1.   That this Credit binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of two (2) years
from and after                                          
  , which date is and must necessarily be the same date of the acceptance of
the hereinafter mentioned improvements by the Plan Commission.

2.   The improvements that are the subject of this Credit to be used as a
maintenance guarantee are all sidewalks that are required by the Town of
Chesterton for                   (insert name of subdivision)   
                  . This Credit guarantees the aforementioned
sidewalks against failure or deterioration for any reason for a period of two
(2) years from and after                     (insert date of
acceptance of sidewalks by Plan Commission)                     
    .

3.   That this institution will pay all attorney’s fees and other
out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the Town, incurred in
enforcing collection of this Credit in the event the issuing institution
fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under the terms of this Credit.

4.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Plan Commission,
wishes to draw upon this Credit, it shall give a signed statement by its
designated representative that the aforementioned improvements need repair
and include the amount of money necessary to repair same. The undersigned
issuing institution shall then issue its check payable to the Town of
Chesterton within 10 days of receipt of the signed statement. No additional
action is required by the Town of Chesterton other than giving its signed
statement and indicating the amount of money required to be paid by the
issuing institution pursuant to this Credit.

5.   That to the extent they do not conflict in any way whatsoever with
this Credit, this Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits (1993 revision), International Chamber of Commerce
publication #500, enforced as of January 1, 1994.

 

 



 



 



Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT THAT MUST BE UTILIZED
IN THE EVENT THE PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A LETTER OF CREDIT FOR A
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF A MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR
SIDEWALKS REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)



 



EXHIBIT O. SURETY BOND INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit O



 



Date:                                                
               

 

 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

 

RE: SURETY BOND TO BE USED AS MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE PURSUANT TO §
1000-24B.2.f. OF APPENDIX A-ZONING OF CHESTERTON TOWN CODE FOR          
                                                   
      SUBDIVISION OF THE TOWN OF CHESTERTON.

 

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                  hereby establishes and issues in favor of the Town
of Chesterton, Indiana, its Surety Bond (“Surety”) to be used as a
maintenance guarantee pursuant to § 1000-24. B. 2. f. of Appendix A-Zoning
of Chesterton Town Code in the amount of                        
                                        subject to the
following conditions:

 

1.   That this Surety binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns firmly for a period of two (2) years
from and after                                          
  , which date is necessarily the same date of the acceptance of the
hereinafter mentioned improvements by the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission.

2.   That improvements that are subject of this Surety to be used as a
maintenance guarantee are all of the infrastructure improvements that are
required by the Town of Chesterton for     (insert name of subdivision) 
  . The improvements that this Surety applies to include, but are not
limited to, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, sewer and water lines, detention
pond(s), lift stations, storm sewers, street signs, street lights and
hydrants. This Surety guarantees the aforementioned improvements against
failure or deterioration for any reason for a period of two (2) years from
and after             (date of acceptance of the improvements by the
Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission)      .

3.   That this institution will pay all attorney’s fee and other
out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the Town, incurred in
enforcing collection of this Surety in the event the issuing institution
fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under terms of this Surety.

4.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, through its Advisory Plan
Commission, wishes to draw upon this Surety, it shall give a signed statement
by its designated representative that the aforementioned improvements need
repair and include the amount of money necessary to repair same. The
undersigned issuing institution shall the issue its check payable to the Town
of Chesterton within 10 days of receipt of the signed statement. No
additional action is required by the Town of Chesterton other than giving its
signed statement and indicating the amount of money required to be paid by
the issuing institution pursuant to this Surety.

 



 



 



Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF SURETY BOND THAT MUST BE UTILIZED IN THE EVENT THE
PETITIONER WISHES TO USE A SURETY BOND AS A MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)



 



EXHIBIT P. SURETY BOND SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit P



 



Date:                                                
               

 

 

 

Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission

Town of Chesterton

726 Broadway

Chesterton, Indiana 46304

 

 

 

RE: SURETY BOND TO BE USED AS MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR SIDEWALKS PURSUANT TO
§ 1000-24B.2.f. OF APPENDIX A-ZONING OF CHESTERTON TOWN CODE FOR        
                                                   
          SUBDIVISION TO THE TOWN OF CHESTERTON.

 

 

Members of the Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission:                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                 
hereby establishes and issues in favor of the Town of Chesterton, Indiana,
its Surety Bond (“Surety”) to be used as a maintenance guarantee pursuant
to § 1000-24B.2.f. of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code in the
amount of                                     subject to
the following conditions:

 

1.   That this Surety binds the undersigned, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns, firmly by these presents, for a
period of two (2) years from and after                          
                                , which date is and must
necessarily be the same date of the acceptance of the hereinafter mentioned
improvements by the Plan Commission.

2.   The improvements that are the subject of this Surety to be used as a
maintenance guarantee are all sidewalks that are required by the Town of
Chesterton for                   (insert name of subdivision)   
                . This Surety guarantees the aforementioned sidewalks
against failure or deterioration for any reason for a period of two (2) years
from and after                    (insert date of acceptance of
sidewalks by Chesterton Advisory Plan Commission)                  .

3.   That this institution will pay all attorney’s fees and other
out-of-pocket costs, including costs of paid staff of the Town, incurred in
enforcing collection of this Surety in the event the issuing institution
fails to honor the Town’s demand for payment under the terms of this Surety.

4.   That in the event the Town of Chesterton, by its Advisory Plan
Commission, wishes to draw upon this Surety, it shall give a signed statement
by its designated representative that the aforementioned improvements need
repair and include the amount of money necessary to repair same. The
undersigned issuing institution shall then issue its check payable to the
Town of Chesterton within 10 days of receipt of the signed statement. No
additional action is required by the Town of Chesterton other than giving its
signed statement and indicating the amount of money required to be paid by
the issuing institution pursuant to this Surety.

 



 



 



Issued this                               day of        
                                              ,    
                , by                                
                                               
(issuing institution)                                     
                                .

 

 

                     (Issuing Institution)

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

 

Accepted this                               day of        
                                    ,              
    , by the Plan Commission.

 

 

               CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION

By:                                                
                                   

Its:                                                
                                     

(Print Title)

                           

                                                   
                                       

                  (Printed Signature)

 

(NOTE: THIS IS A FORM OF SURETY BOND THAT MUST BE UTILIZED IN THE EVENT THE
PETITIONER WISHES TO USE SUCH A SURETY BOND AS A MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE FOR
SIDEWALKS REQUIRED TO BE INSTALLED IN PETITIONER’S SUBDIVISION.)



 



EXHIBIT Q. BEFORE THE CHESTERTON TOWN COUNCIL AND CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN
COMMISSION



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit Q



 



IN RE: THE PETITION OF                                    
                                                   
TO THE CHESTERTON TOWN COUNCIL AND CHESTERTON ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION FOR A
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
ORDINANCE                     NO.              
                   

 

 

PETITION FOR A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ORDINANCE

 

                        (Petitioner)                   
    applies for and requests that the Chesterton Town Council, after
receiving the advice of its Plan Commission, approve a PUD District Ordinance
for real estate located in the Town of Chesterton, Indiana. In support of
this Petition, the undersigned would state the following:

 

1.   That the undersigned has received and reviewed a copy of:

   a.   Ordinance 2001-03, which is Appendix A – Zoning to the Town
Code, which provides for, among other things, Planned Unit Development
District Ordinances;

   b.   The Chesterton Town Standards (latest edition); and

   c.   The Rules and Regulations of the Chesterton Advisory Plan
Commission.

All the aforementioned documents are on file in the office of the Chesterton
Building Commissioner located at the Chesterton Town Hall, 726 Broadway,
Chesterton, Indiana. Additionally, a copy of the checklist for these
proceedings has also been reviewed by the undersigned.

2.   That the undersigned has paid to the Chesterton Clerk-Treasurer a
filing fee in the amount of

      $                          which has been computed
as follows:

      $                          $500 application fee; plus

$                          $50 for each 1 or 2 family
residential dwelling unit proposed for the development; plus

$                            $100 for each multi-family
dwelling unit or business or industrial building proposed to be located in
the                                                
                          PUD District.

$                          Total

Additionally, the undersigned has read Article VII of Appendix A-Zoning of
Chesterton Town Code and agrees to pay all consultant fees, engineering fees,
and attorney’s fees as same are specifically delineated in Article VII.

3.   That the undersigned is the owner of the legal or equitable title of
the following described real estate in Chesterton, Porter County, Indiana
to-wit:

 

See attached Exhibit “A”

 

Generally located at                                      
                                                   
  (address or general location of property)                     
                                                   
                                                   
            .

 

The document showing the undersigned to be the owner of this property is a  
                                                   
                                                   
                      and is attached to this Petition as Exhibit
“B.”

 

4.   That the undersigned represents that the concept plan process as
required pursuant to Section 710 of Article VII of Appendix A-Zoning of
Chesterton Town Code has been concluded by the Plan Commission.

5.   That the undersigned agrees to comply with all notice requirements
set forth in Article VII of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code and the
Plan Commission’s Rules and Regulations.

 



 



 



6.   Attached to this Petition is 17 copies of the written text portion of
the proposed PUD Ordinance and 17 copies of the drawing portion of the
proposed PUD Ordinance with all information that is required pursuant to
Section 711 of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code.

 

 

                                                   
                         

Petitioner

Petitioner’s Address:

 

                                                   
                         

                                                   
                         

                              

                              

                                                   
                         

Telephone No.

 

Date:                                                
           

 



 



EXHIBIT R. PROPOSED ORDINANCE



This Exhibit is available in PDF, click Exhibit R



 



ORDINANCE NO.                                  

 

 

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF CHESTERTON, PORTER COUNTY, INDIANA

ESTABLISHING A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

 

 

 

WHEREAS, a public hearing has been held as required by law and the Plan
Commission has recommended the adoption of a PUD District Ordinance for
certain land located within the corporate boundaries of the Town of
Chesterton; and

 

WHEREAS, the Chesterton Town Council concurs in the recommendation of its
Plan Commission.

 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Chesterton Town
Council as follows:

 

 

 

SECTION 1. That a PUD District is approved for the following described real
estate, to-wit: (See attached Exhibit “A”)

which real estate is generally located at                        
                                                   
                              .

 

SECTION 2. That the name and address of the petitioner for this PUD District
Ordinance is:            
                                                   
                                                   
                     
                                                   
                                                   
                     
                                                   
                                                   
     

SECTION 3. That the attached as Exhibit “B” is the recorded document
showing the petitioner’s ownership interest in this parcel, which document
is in the form of a            
                                                   
                                                   
                     
                                                   
                                                   
                      .

 

SECTION 4. That Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code, along with the
Chesterton Town Standards, latest edition, shall apply to the development of
this property, except for the following variances to same:

a.   Appendix A-Zoning (development standard variances):

i.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

ii.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

iii.                                              
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                 

iv.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

v.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 



 



 

b.   Appendix A-Zoning (use variances):

i.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

ii.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

iii.                                              
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                 

iv.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

v.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.   Appendix A-Zoning (subdivision regulations):

i.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

ii.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

iii.                                              
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                 

iv.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

v.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.   Variances to Chesterton Town Standards:

i.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

ii.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

iii.                                              
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                 

iv.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

v.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

               

SECTION 5. That all uses and the area in acres of each use in this PUD
District are as follows:

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 



 



 

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

f.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 

SECTION 6. The total number of residential units in this District is      
                                                   
and the percent of each type of each residential use is:

a.                               %   for          
                        use;

b.                               %   for          
                        use; and

c.                               %   for          
                        use.

 

SECTION 7. That the delineation of each business and/or industrial use and
total area in acres of each business and/or industrial use is as follows:

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

f.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

g.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

h.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 

SECTION 8. That the following phasing schedule of development shall apply in
the District:

 



 



 



 

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 

SECTION 9. That the detailed description of location and proposed use for all
proposed an open and/or recreational space is as follows:

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

f.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 

SECTION 10. That the general description of community services available to
this PUD District’s residents, including schools, fire protection, parks,
and all public/private utilities, is as follows:

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

f.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 



 



 

SECTION 11. That a general statement on proposed ownership and maintenance of
common open space is as follows:                              
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                   

 

SECTION 12. That the proposed construction schedule for this PUD District
shall be as follows:                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                           

 

SECTION 13. That the objectives of PUD Districts as set forth in § 702 of
Appendix A-Zoning, including a specific written submission concerning §
708A. of Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Code, is as follows:          
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
   

 

SECTION 14. That the reasonable conditions or written commitments concerning
the use and development of the land contained in this PUD District are as
follows:

 

Reasonable Conditions:

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 

   Written Commitments:

a.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

b.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

c.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

d.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

e.                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                               

 



 



 



 

SECTION 15. That the drawing portion of the PUD District Ordinance showing
the plan of development for this parcel, as required by Section 711 of
Appendix A-Zoning of Chesterton Town Code, is attached hereto, incorporated
herein, and marked as Exhibit “C.”

 

SECTION 16. That any violation of this PUD District Ordinance shall
constitute a violation of the Town Code punishable by a fine from $1.00 to
$2,500 per violation for each day said violation exists in accordance with
the general penalty provisions found in Section 1-9 of the Town Code.

 

SECTION 17. That this appendix shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and publication as required by law.

 

 

 

ALL OF WHICH IS PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Chesterton Town Council

this                            day of                
                , 20                  .

 

 

 

                        CHESTERTON TOWN COUNCIL

                  By:                        
                                                   
         

                                                   
                               

                                                   
                               

                                                   
                               

                                                   
                               

 

 

ATTEST:

                                                   
                               

Clerk-Treasurer

Town of Chesterton

 



 



 



APPENDIX III. RULES OF PRACTICE & PROCEDURE
CHESTERTON ADVISORY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS



ARTICLE I
(Meetings)



   1.   The regular meeting of the Chesterton Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals (hereinafter referred to as “BZA”) shall be the second Thursday
of each month at 6:30 p.m., where there is business pending before the BZA,
unless otherwise announced by the Chairperson at the last preceding regular
meeting. If it appears that the public hearings will be lengthy, the BZA can
have an extra meeting that month to accommodate the heavy agenda, which will
be held on a date set by the BZA during the extra meeting as well, and the
paperwork must be submitted at the same time as the deadline for the regular
Thursday meeting.



   2.   Special meetings of the BZA may be called by the Chairperson or
by two members upon written request to the Secretary. The Secretary shall
send to all the members and press entitled to notice, at least two days in
advance of a special meeting, a written notice fixing the time and place of
the meeting.



   Petitioner may request a special meeting of the BZA. If granted, the
petitioner is required to bear the cost of the special meeting, which is $900.



   Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the
special meeting has been fixed in a regular meeting, or if all members are
present at the regular meeting.



   3.   Emergency meetings may be called by the Chairperson or
Secretary giving notice as provided in I.C. 5-14-1.5-5.



   4.   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. No action
of the BZA is official, however, unless authorized by a majority of the BZA
at a regular or properly called special meeting.



   5.   Decisions of the BZA shall be by voice vote of the members.
Upon request of any member of the BZA, any vote shall be taken by written
ballot, signed by the member voting, and then read aloud by the Secretary.
All members present shall vote on every question unless they disqualify
themselves or are excused from voting by a majority of the members present.



   6.   The Secretary of the BZA or, in his or her absence, a Secretary
pro tem appointed by the Chairperson or presiding officer shall keep the
official minutes of al proceedings which shall include:



      i.   Date, time and place of meeting;



      ii.   The members present and absent;



      iii.   The general substance of all matters proposed,
discussed or decided; and



      iv.   A record of all votes taken, by individual members if
there is a roll call. The Secretary shall submit the minutes of the previous
meetings to the next regular meeting of the BZA for approval. When approved
the record shall be signed by the Chairperson and attested by the Secretary.
Once approved, the minutes shall be filed with the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town and shall be open to the public for inspection
and copying.



   7.   A member of the BZA may not participate in a hearing or
decision of the BZA concerning a matter in which he has a direct or indirect
financial interest or for other reasons brought to the attention of the BZA
and which disqualification is approved by the BZA. The BZA shall enter in its
records the fact that a regular member has such a disqualification and the
name of the alternate member, if any, who participates in the hearing or
decision. Said alternate member, if any shall be appointed by the authority
of the appointing body of the regular member who has been disqualified.
Communication with BZA members by any person with intent to influence action
prior to a hearing or decision regarding matters pending before the BZA is
prohibited. However, the staff may file with the BZA a written statement
setting forth any facts or opinions relating to the matter.



(Ord. 2009-17, passed 10-26-2009)



ARTICLE II
(Officers and Employees)



   1.   At its first regular meeting following the first day of
January, the BZA shall elect from its members a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson.



   2.   The Vice-Chairperson shall have the authority to act as
Chairperson of the BZA during the absence, disability or resignation of the
Chairperson. In the case of resignation, the new Chairperson shall be elected
from the membership and shall fill the unexpired term of such departing
Chairperson.



   3.   The BZA may appoint and fix the compensation of a Secretary and
such employees necessary to the discharge of duties and responsibilities of
the BZA. Such compensation shall conform to and comply with the compensation
and salaries theretofore fixed by the Town Council.



ARTICLE III
(Hearings)



   1.   The BZA shall hear and determine appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an Administrative
Official or Staff member made in relation to the enforcement of the
Chesterton Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance and the enforcement of building
and occupancy permits as adopted under I.C. 36-7 and all Sections therein
applicable. A preliminary hearing in accordance with these rules is required
for petitions pursuant to this paragraph. No public hearing is required.



   2.   In exercising its powers, the BZA may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from as, in its opinion, ought to be done in the premises and to
that end shall have all the powers from whom the appeal is taken.



   3.   A petitioner seeking relief outlined in § 1 above must file a
petition with the office of the Clerk-Treasurer no later than 12:00 noon on
the Monday, ten days prior to the next regular meeting date, such petition to
be forthwith forwarded by said Clerk-Treasurer to the Secretary of the BZA.



   4.   A separate petition shall be required for each lot in which a
petitioner is seeking a variance. When we use the term “lot”, we are
utilizing the definition of lot as found in Article II, Definitions of the
Chesterton Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, which is “a parcel of land
occupied or to be occupied by one principal structure and its accessory
buildings with such open spaces and off-street parking spaces as are required
by the provisions of this appendix and having frontage on a public street”.



   5.   The BZA also shall approve or deny all variances, development
standard variances, and special exceptions. A petitioner seeking the relief
outlined in this paragraph must file petition BZA: one for variances and BZA;
two for special exceptions with the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer no later
than 12:00 noon on the Monday, ten days prior to the next regular meeting of
the Board, such petition to be immediately forwarded by said Clerk-Treasurer
to the Secretary of the BZA.



   6.   Such petitions must be filed with the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and the Secretary no later than 12:00 noon on Monday, ten
days prior to the next regular meeting of the BZA. Petitions filed too late
to comply with the section shall be heard at the next succeeding regular
meeting of the BZA. However, the BZA may waive the requirements of this
section by a unanimous vote of the members present, upon showing that an
emergency exists. The purpose of this section is to enable the members to
examine and study the pending appeals and to conduct any investigation deemed
advisable.



   7.   A non-refundable filing fee shall accompany all such petitions,
as follows:



Development Standard Variance



   Residential
Zone…...………………………………………………...…………
..$50



   Business
Zone………………………………………………………………..�
��….$175



   Industrial
Zone…………………………………………………………………
…..$300



Use
Variance……………………………………………………………�
�………………….$300



   Administrative Decision
Appeal………………………………………………….....$50



   Special
Exception……………………………………………………………�
��…......$300



   Special
Meeting………………………………………………………………
……......$900



   To help defray the administrative and investigative expenses of the
BZA, petitioner shall bear all costs of publication and notification that is
required by the BZA.



   8.   When the petition is filed with the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, the petitioner also shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer
proposed findings and decision for the immediate forwarding to the Secretary
of the BZA. Samples of the findings and decision forms are attached to these
rules and are marked “BZA 8”, “BZA 9” and “BZA 10”.



   9.   At least ten days prior to the date set for public hearing, the
BZA Secretary shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town, a notice of the time and place of the hearing. The petitioner is
required to pay for such publication and provide proof of payment of
publication prior to having a public hearing.



   10.   At least 14 days prior to the date set for public hearing, the
petitioner shall notify the owner(s) of all real estate within a radius of
300 feet of the affected property of the date of hearing and substance of the
appeal by certified mail with return receipt requested (see BZA 4 or BZA 5)
or by hand-carried forms with the same information and a place for signature
or property owner(s) (see BZA 6 or BZA 7) to acknowledge receipt. These
receipts and/or forms are to be turned in to the Clerk-Treasurer by Monday of
the week of the public hearing, for forwarding to the BZA Secretary.



   11.   If the BZA finds that a petition is in good order with
sufficient information, it will set a time and place for holding a public
hearing and announce same publicly.



ARTICLE IV
(Agenda)



   1.   Each case to be presented before the BZA shall be filed in
proper form with the required date, shall be numbered serially, and placed on
the docket of the BZA. The docket numbers shall include the year and begin
anew on January 1 of each year.



   2.   As soon as the case receives a docket number, it shall be
placed upon the agenda of the BZA and a date set for preliminary hearing.



   3.   Cases shall come before the BZA in the regular order of their
consecutive numbers unless otherwise ordered by the BZA, or hereinafter
otherwise provided.



ARTICLE V
(Conduct of Hearing)



   1.   At a public hearing before the BZA, the presentation of a case
by the petitioner should, in most situations, take no more that five minutes
to address all pertinent facts necessary for the BZA to decide this matter.
Those who oppose the petitioner shall follow, after which petitioner shall
have five minutes for rebuttal. To maintain orderly procedure, each side
shall proceed without interruption by the other. Each speaker shall have
three minutes to speak, and shall speak only once. Each speaker shall address
the Chair and be recognized before speaking. If a person has submitted
comments in writing to the BZA in support of or in opposition to the
petition, the Chairperson will read them into the record.



   2.   In the presentation of a case, the burden shall be upon the
petitioner to supply all information, including charts, scaled plats,
accurate diagrams and other exhibits necessary for a clear understanding of
the problem. The BZA may continue the hearing when, in its judgment, the
petitioner has not provided sufficient evidence and information on which to
make a determination.



   3.   A use variance from the terms of the Chesterton Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinance may be approved by the BZA only upon a determination in
writing that:



      a)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



      b)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property
included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse
manner;



      c)   The need for the variance arises from some condition
peculiar to the property involved;



      d)   The strict application of the terms of this appendix will
constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the
variance is sought; and



      e)   The approval does not interfere substantial with the
Comprehensive Plan adopted under the 500 series of I.C. 36-7-4.



   4.   A development standards variance from the terms of the
Chesterton Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance may be approved by the BZA only
upon determination in writing that:



      a)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



      b)   Use and value of the area adjacent to the property
included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse
manner; and



      c)   The strict application of the terms of this appendix will
result in practical difficulties in the use of the property.



   5.   A special exception from the Chesterton Zoning and Subdivision
Ordinance may be approved only where specifically allowed in Table A of §
505 of this appendix. There shall be no cases or application therefore nor
any particular situation in which this appendix authorizes special exceptions
without the approval of the BZA. Further, no previous application shall set a
precedent for any other application before the BZA. The BZA may grant a
special exception for a use in a zoning district if, after a public hearing,
it makes findings of facts in writing, that:



      a)   The requirements and development standards for the
requested use as prescribed in this appendix will be met;



      b)   The special exception shall be designed so that it can be
constructed, operated and maintained in a manner harmonious with the
character of adjacent property in the surrounding area;



      c)   The special exception shall not inappropriately change
the essential character of the surrounding area;



      d)   The special exception shall not interfere with the
general enjoyment of adjacent property;



      e)   The special exception shall represent an improvement to
the use or character of the property under consideration and the surrounding
area in general, it shall also be in keeping with the natural environment of
the site; and



      f)   The special exception shall not be hazardous to adjacent
properties, or involve uses, activities, materials or equipment which be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property through
the excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odor, fumes or glare.



   6.   In the presentation of the case, the burden of proof as to the
items in §§ 3, 4 and 5 above, (whichever is applicable), shall be upon the
petitioner. The facts supporting said petitioner’s burden shall be stated
by him or her in the proposed findings and decision on the applicable form.



   7.   Every person appearing before the BZA shall abide by the order
and directions of the Chairperson. Discourteous, disorderly or contemptuous
conduct shall be regarded as a breach of privileges of the BZA and shall be
dealt with as the BZA directs.



   8.   The BZA, at its discretion, may continue or postpone the
hearings of any case upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the members
present.



ARTICLE VI
(Final Disposition of Cases)



   1.   The final disposition of any case shall be in the form of an
order setting forth the findings and determination of the BZA together with
any modification, specification or approval. In addition to reasonable
conditions as aforementioned, the BZA may require the owner of a parcel of
property to make a written commitment concerning the use or development of
that parcel as set forth in Article VII.



   2.   The BZA may dismiss a case for want of prosecution or lack of
jurisdiction. When a petitioner has failed to appear at two consecutive
meetings, the case shall be dismissed for want of prosecution.



   3.   A petitioner may not withdraw a case after a roll call vote has
been ordered by the Chairperson.



   4.   A case which has been withdrawn by the petitioner shall not be
again placed on the docket within a period of six months after the date of
withdrawal.



   5.   A case which has been decided adversely to the petitioner shall
not again be place upon the docket for a period of one year from the date of
the decision.



ARTICLE VII
(Written Commitments)



   1.   The BZA, in its discretion, may impose reasonable conditions as
a part of its approval of any petition. In the event of a violation of the
reasonable conditions imposed by the BZA, the BZA may take any action it
deems necessary including, but not limited to, revoking any variance granted
that contained reasonable conditions that were violated by the petitioner.
Prior to revoking any variance for violation of reasonable conditions imposed
by the BZA, the BZA shall give written notice to the petitioner at his or her
last known address advising the petitioner of the allegation concerning the
reasonable conditions and giving the petitioner notice of the time and place
of a meeting at which the BZA will consider this matter.



   2.   In the case of any approval by the BZA, it may permit or
require the owner of a parcel of property to make a written commitment(s)
concerning the use or development of that parcel.



   3.   The written commitments shall be in typewritten form and
subject to the approval of the BZA’s attorney.



   4.   The written commitments shall take effect upon the approval of
the special exception, development standard or use variance.



   5.   Unless modified or terminated by the BZA, a commitment is
binding upon:



      a.   The owner of the parcel;



      b.   A subsequent owner of the parcel; and



      c.   A person who acquires an interest in the parcel.



   6.   A written commitment may be modified or terminated only by a
decision of the BZA made at a public hearing after ten days notice has been
given by the BZA to the petitioner of said public hearing. No other notice is
required with the exception of the legal publication that is required
pursuant to Indiana law for public hearing.



ARTICLE VIII
(Termination or Revocation of Variance or Special Exception)



   1.   A variance or special exception granted by the BZA may be
terminated by the BZA on its on motion or upon the filing of an application
theretofore by an interested person, or a member of the staff or Plan
Commission and, upon a finding made at a public hearing with ten days’
notice given to the property owner for which the variance or special
exception was given, that the terms of this appendix or conditions of
approval or written commitments have not been complied with.



NOTE:



   An informational packet for the Chesterton Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals has been adopted as part of the general overview and appropriate
forms that must be used for petitions before the BZA. A complete
informational packet, as may be amended from time to time, is available in
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. The BZA informational packet includes the
rules of practice and procedures, information designed to assist petitioners
before the BZA, and forms and checklists.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




APPENDIX B: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU OFFENSES



 

Town Code Section
 
Offense Description
 
Fine For First Offense




 
ANIMAL VIOLATIONS
 


4-1
 
Running at large
 
$100


4-2
 
Leashes/muzzles and the like required
 
$100


4-3
 
Keeping, harboring and the like noisy animals
 
$100


4-10
 
Permitting animal to defecate or leave waste on public/private property
without permission
 
$100


4-11
 
Keeping prohibited animals
 
$100


 
BUILDING VIOLATIONS
 


5-22
 
Silt fence violations
 
$100


5-24
 
Building site cleanup required
 
$100


5-81
 
Contractor license required
 
$100


5-175
 
Address numbers required for apartments
 
$100


5-176
 
Address numbers required for residences
 
$100


5-177
 
Address numbers required for public accommodations
 
$100


 
EXCAVATIONS
 


7-31
 
Excavation permits required
 
$100


7-36
 
Time limit on excavations
 
$100


7-37
 
Barriers and lights required
 
$250


7-38
 
Removal of guards from excavation without authorization
 
$250


 
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION AND SMOKE DETECTORS
 


8-1
 
Obstructing fire prevention equipment
 
$250


8-3
 
Installation required
 
$250


8-4
 
Maintenance/tampering
 
$250


8-6
 
Certificate of compliance required
 
$100


8-8
 
Fire lane violations
 
$250


 
GARBAGE, RECYCLING, REFUSE AND RUBBISH
 


10-3
 
Trash containers placed no more than 1 day before or 1 day after pick up day
 
$100


10-8
 
Unauthorized removal of items from recycling container
 
$100


10-9
 
Illegal dumping at yard waste recycling site
 
$100


 
HEALTH AND SANITATION
 


11-16
 
Unlawful growth of weeds excess of 10 inches
 
$100


 
BUSINESS REGISTRATIONS
 


12-5
 
Failure to display business registration
 
$100


12-6
 
Business registration required
 
$100


 
MOTOR VEHICLES/TRAFFIC
 


13-16
 
U-turns
 
$100


13-17
 
Entrance/exit public parking areas
 
$100


13-20
 
One way streets/alleys
 
$50


13-21
 
Speeding
 
$100


13-22
 
Regulations for school properties
 
$100


13-23
 
Weight restrictions during certain periods
 
$100


13-24
 
Truck weight, parking and height restrictions
 
$100


13-25
 
Stop/yield restrictions
 
$100


13-26
 
No passing zone (11th Street)
 
$100


13-27
 
Trucks prohibited in excess of 3 tons on alley between 107 and 109 S. Calumet
 
$100


13-51
 
Two-hour parking
 
*


13-52
 
Obedience to signs, markings prohibiting parking
 
*


13-53
 
Method of parking
 
*


13-54
 
Prohibited parking areas
 
*


      Fines: * Fine shall be $10 if paid within 10 days of the date of
alleged offense; fine shall be $20 if paid within 10 to 30 days of offense;
if fine is not paid within 30 days of offense, this matter shall be assigned
to a court of competent jurisdiction and general penalty provisions of the
town code shall apply.

 

It should be noted that this fine might be in addition to any costs of towing
that may be required under the circumstances.


13-68
 
Snow parking restrictions (specific areas)
 
$100


13-69
 
Snow parking restrictions (general)
 
$100


13-70
 
Snow parking restrictions (alleys)
 
$100


13-86
 
Traffic regulations also apply to bikes/skateboards
 
$100


13-92
 
Parking violations bikes/skateboards
 
$100


13-94
 
Bike/skateboard violations/permitting
 
$100


13-113
 
Handicap parking
 
$100


 
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 


16-1
 
Discharging firearms
 
$250


16-17
 
Parade permits required
 
$100


 
PARKS AND RECREATION
 


17-32
 
Prohibited acts
 
$100


17-33
 
Hours of operation
 
$100


17-35
 
Picnic (prohibited areas)
 
$100


17-37
 
Dunes friendship land rules
 
$100


 
PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
 


18-2
 
License required
 
$100


18-7
 
Exhibition of license on demand
 
$100


18-8
 
Hours of operation
 
$100


 
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
 


23-1
 
Obstruction prohibited
 
$250


23-2
 
Posting notices on utility poles or public property
 
$100


23-3
 
Littering
 
$100


23-61
 
Snow removal/depositing snow upon streets and alleys
 
$100


      The fines as set forth above shall be only in the event of a
first violation by the defendant. Any subsequent violations of the same
ordinance shall be subject to the general penalty provisions § 1-9 of this
code of ordinances. It should be noted that each day a violation occurs is a
separate violation pursuant to the town code.


 
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
 


24-32A.
 
Prohibition of illegal discharges
 


   Non-hazardous materials - first offense
 
$100


   Non-hazardous materials - second offense
 
$250


   Hazardous materials per occurrence
 
$250


24-32C.
 
Prohibition of illegal connections
 


   Non-hazardous materials - first offense
 
$100


   Non-hazardous materials - second offense
 
$250


   Hazardous materials per occurrence
 
$250


24-37
 
Notification of spills
 


   First offense
 
$100


   Second offense
 
$250


24-53D.
 
General requirements for storm water quality control
 


   Dry weather violations - first offense
 
$100


   Dry weather violations - second offense
 
$250


   Wet weather violations
 
$250


24-58A.
 
Self-monitoring requirements
 


   Dry weather violations - first offense
 
$100


   Dry weather violations - second offense
 
$250


   Wet weather violations
 
$250




 



(Ord. 2006-20, passed 8-14-2006)



APPENDIX C:  PERSONNEL POLICY HANDBOOK



Section



A. Introduction



   1.   Purpose of manual



   2.   Applicability



   3.   Personnel policy review



   4.   Equal employment opportunity



   5.   Authorized alien status and citizenship



   6.   E-verify



   7.   Classification of employees



   8.   Applicant information



   9.   Pre-employment interviews



   10.   Conditional offer of employment



   11.   Medical examinations



   12.   Orientation/exit interviews



   13.   Probationary period



   14.   Employee information



   15.   Personnel files policy



   16.   Employee evaluations



   17.   Outside employment



   18.   Requests for information



   19.   Final pay upon termination of employment



   20.   Return of property



   21.   Elective officer and town employment restricted



B. Benefits



   1.   Employee leave donation policy



   2.   Employee education reimbursement



   3.   Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)



   4.   Insurance; employee and family



   5.   Insurance; COBRA



   6.   Insurance; worker’s compensation, on-the-job injury reporting



   7.   Leave of absence for instances not covered under Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA)



   8.   Major illness, injury, maternity leave



   9.   Longevity pay



   10.   Military leave



   11.   Health Insurance Portability and Accountability (HIPAA)



   12.   Indiana Public Retirement System (INPRS)



   13.   Work hours



   14.   Flex time



   15.   Overtime compensation



   16.   Timekeeping



   17.   Work time restricted



   18.   Rounding



   19.   Multiple positions



   20.   Timesheets



   21.   Pay policies



   22.   Pay corrections



   23.   Paid holidays



   24.   Sick leave, personal leave, funeral leave, jury duty



   25.   Vacation leave



   26.   Vacation leave; Fire Department



   27.   Vacation leave; Police Department



   28.   Snow policy



C. Policies



   1.   Alcohol and drug-free workplace policy



   2.   Alcohol and controlled substance testing policy for commercial
drivers’ license (CDL)



   3.   EEO policy statement



   4.   Prevention of violence in the workplace



   5.   Progressive discipline policy



   6.   Limitation on the possession of firearms



   7.   Inspections on town premises



   8.   Computer, internet and social media policy



   9.   Cell phones



   10.   Town credit card policy



   11.   Lodging and meal policy while traveling on town business



   12.   Policy regarding political activity



   13.   Take home vehicle policy; non-police



   14.   Take home vehicle policy; Police Department



   15.   Use of equipment and vehicles



   16.   Personal use of town property and facilities



   17.   Appearance of work areas



   18.   Lactation support



   19.   Attendance and punctuality



   20.   Employee conduct and work rules



   21.   Personal appearance



   22.   Commission of a felony or unlawful act



   23.   Ethics



   24.   Nepotism



   25.   Gifts and gratuities



   26.   Ghost employment



   27.   Solicitation/distribution



   28.   Confidentiality/request for information



   29.   Non-smoking policy



   30.   Open door policy



   31.   Severability



   32.   Indemnification



   33.   Title VI policy



D. Forms and Receipts



   Employee Personnel Policy Manual Receipt



   EEO/Sexual Harassment Policy Receipt



   Alcohol and Drug-Free Workplace Receipt



   Internal Controls Compliance Certification



   Title VI Policy Receipt Certification



Editor’s note:



   This appendix was passed by Ord. 2017-18, passed 11-13-2017.



A. INTRODUCTION



§ 1.  PURPOSE OF MANUAL.



   This Personnel Policy Manual has been prepared for the employees of the
Town of Chesterton (hereinafter referred to as “town”) to promote and
maintain a positive work environment for all employees. Since it is not
possible for this manual to cover each and every aspect of employment, the
policies, procedures and benefits described in this manual are summary
descriptions and are not intended to be all encompassing or applicable to
every situation. The town retains the right to add, modify or terminate its
policies, procedures or benefits at any time for reasons related to the
appropriate business operations of the town. This manual is not intended to
be a contract of any kind, express or implied, between any employee and the
town. Indiana is an employment-at-will state. This means that either the
employee or the town may end the employment relationship with or without
cause.



   Each employee is expected to read and become familiar with the
provisions in this manual. Any questions about this material should be
referred to your department head. All employees are required to sign a
receipt acknowledging that they have received a copy of the manual and have
read and understand the contents of the manual.



§ 2.  APPLICABILITY.



   This Personnel Policy Manual shall be applicable to all town employees,
unless specifically stated otherwise herein.



§ 3.  PERSONNEL POLICY REVIEW.



   The Town Manager and department heads shall meet as deemed necessary to
review the application of town personnel policies and perform certain
advisory functions such as:



      1.   Monitoring personnel policies and procedures and making
recommendations for revisions, modifications, additions and deletions as
deemed necessary; and



      2.   Reviewing all standard operating procedures adopted by
any department.



§ 4.  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.



   It is the policy of the town to provide equal opportunity in employment
to all employees and applicants for employment and to prohibit discrimination
in employment because of race, religion, color, sex, age, national origin,
disability, military status or any other classification protected under
applicable law.



   This policy applies to all terms, conditions and privileges of
employment, including, but not limited to, hiring, probation, training,
promotion, transfer, compensation, benefits, layoff, recall, employee
facilities, discharge and retirement.



§ 5.  AUTHORIZED ALIEN STATUS AND CITIZENSHIP.



   All new hires must cooperate with the town in its compliance with the
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 and in verifying employment
eligibility. New employees shall complete an I-9 form and show proof of
identity and employment eligibility within the first three days of
employment. Employees who refuse to or are unable to supply the documentation
necessary to prove that they are American citizens or aliens authorized to
work in the country will be terminated. I-9 forms are maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 6.  E-VERIFY.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall administer the e-verify enrollment of all
town new-hires; and shall ensure that appropriate forms are properly
completed and retained as required by law.



§ 7.  CLASSIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.



   It is the intent of the town to clarify the definitions of employment
classifications; therefore, employees understand their employment status and
benefit eligibility. These classifications do not guarantee employment for
any specified period of time. Accordingly, the right to terminate the
employment relationship at-will at any time is retained by both the employee
and the town. Each employee is assigned to one of the following employment
categories. Any changes to an employee’s employment category shall be in
writing. No change in employment classification is to be construed or
inferred without written notification from the hiring authority.



   Full-time: an employee who works at least 32 hours per week and 1,664
hours per year.



   Part-time: an employee who works less than 1,664 hours per year.



   Temporary: an employee who is hired for a specific period of time,
usually six months or less.



§ 8.  APPLICANT INFORMATION.



   Applications are accepted for open positions with the town and are
maintained for a period of one year in the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
Applicants are required to complete an application and also provide a limited
criminal history. In addition, prospective employees are asked to sign a form
to authorize a credit report in compliance with the Fair Credit Reporting Act
(FCRA).



   To ensure that individuals who are employed by the town are well
qualified and have a strong potential to be productive and successful, it is
the policy of the town to check the employment references of all applicants.



   For employment reference checks requested by outside employers of past
or current town employees, the town will respond in writing only to those
reference check inquiries that are submitted in writing.



   Applicants are subject to a complete criminal history check that is
performed by the department. Also, the applicant and hiring procedure are
part of I.C. 36-8-8 and I.C. 36-8-9 (1977 Police Officer and Firefighters
Disability and Pension Fund and the Board of Metropolitan Police
Commissioners). Whether or not the applications are handled by the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office, the listed statutes govern the hiring of police
officers.



§ 9.  PRE-EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWS.



   Pre-employment interviews may be used to gather information and screen
applicants for town employment. Initial interviews may be conducted by the
department head or designee receiving the application or the applicable board
with jurisdiction over the employee.



§ 10.  CONDITIONAL OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT.



   Applicants may receive a conditional offer of employment conditioned on
the successful completion of all established prerequisite requirements of the
position, including passing medical, physical and mental examinations or
requirements, reference and criminal background checks and driving record
requirements and a pre-employment drug screen conducted at the town’s
expense. Applicants who receive a conditional offer of employment are not
employees of the town unless they receive an official letter of employment.
The town may withdraw the conditional offer of employment at any time for any
reason.



§ 11.  MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS.



   To help ensure that employees are able to perform their duties safely,
medical examinations may be required of those positions responsible for
public safety and health prior to hiring or any time during the course of
employment with the town.



   After a conditional offer of employment has been extended, applicants
may be required to undergo a pre-employment medical examination by a health
professional of the town’s choice, at the town’s expense.



   Employees shall be required to submit to fitness for duty medical or
psychological evaluations prior to returning from military leave or employee
illness or injury leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), or to
meet terms and conditions associated with performing job duties.



   Information on an employee’s medical condition or history shall be
kept in a confidential medical file that is separate from other employee
information. Medical information shall be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office. Access to this information will be limited to the
employee, department head of the employee, designated employees responsible
for processing insurance and worker’s compensation claims and others on a
need-to-know basis.



§ 12.  ORIENTATION/EXIT INTERVIEWS.



   Once employed by the town, the department head or designee shall
conduct an informal orientation to familiarize the new employee with the
town; the employee will receive a copy of the town’s Personnel Policy
Manual and any applicable workplace rules, including the drug-free workplace
policy. It is the responsibility of the employee to read and understand the
Personnel Manual. Each employee shall sign the employee acknowledgment form;
periodic updates will also be acknowledged.



   Upon termination of the employment relationship with an employee, the
department head should attempt to conduct an exit interview with the
employee. Exit interviews give employees the opportunity to provide feedback
on policies, practices and working conditions in their previous positions.



§ 13.  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   The probationary period is intended to give new, rehired, promoted
and/or transferred employees the opportunity to demonstrate their ability to
achieve a satisfactory level of performance and to determine whether the new
position meets their expectations.



   The town uses this period to evaluate employee capabilities, work
habits and overall performance.



   With the exception of police and fire who have specific guidelines for
probationary status, the town employees will follow a probationary period
established by the department head and agreed to by the employee. All new,
rehired, promoted and/or transferred employees work on an introductory basis
for the first 30 days after their “dates of hire”.



§ 14.  EMPLOYEE INFORMATION.



   Each employee is required to notify his or her department head
immediately of any change in name, address, phone number, marital status,
dependents or beneficiaries. Keeping this information accurate enables the
town to reach the employee in an emergency, forward his or her mail and W-2
forms, maintain his or her insurance and other benefits and compute his or
her payroll deductions. This personal information will be handled in
confidence. The town will not supply personal information to unauthorized
individuals. The employee’s failure to provide the required information may
jeopardize the coverage of the employee’s benefits.



§ 15.  PERSONNEL FILES POLICY.



   The employment selection procedure shall be documented and recorded and
will remain strictly confidential. Accurate personnel records should be kept
on file for each employee in accordance with the state’s Retention Schedule
and for a period of not less than seven years and may be used to substantiate
employment decisions in the event of inquiry. The employee’s personnel file
may also contain such medical and personal records, and the personnel file
shall therefore be deemed as confidential personnel records and exempt under
the state’s Public Records Law.



§ 16.  EMPLOYEE EVALUATIONS.



   The supervisor will work with the employee on an on-going basis to help
the employee improve the performance of his or her duties. In this way, he or
she will be able to give the employee constructive suggestions about how to
improve. Periodically, the Supervisor will meet with the employee to review
his or her work. If there are any questions about his or her duties, the
employee should feel free to talk to the supervisor at any time.



   The department head or immediate supervisor shall conduct work
performance evaluation reviews on an annual basis. All employees will receive
a written evaluation based upon job-related criteria as set forth in the
employee’s position description. The written evaluation will be based upon
the employee’s ability to perform the duties and responsibilities to which
he or she is assigned and upon other job-related criteria. Employees will
have an opportunity to respond to the written evaluation.



§ 17.  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.



   An employee may hold a job with another organization as long as he or
she satisfactorily performs his or her job responsibilities with the town.
All employees will be judged by the same performance standards and will be
subject to the employer’s scheduling demands, regardless of any existing
outside work requirements.



   Employees who are provided Family and Medical Leave under the town’s
FMLA policy for their own serious illness or injury shall not be engaged in
outside employment while on FMLA.



   If the town determines that an employee’s outside work interferes
with performance or the ability to meet the requirements of the town as they
are modified from time to time, the employee may be asked to terminate the
outside employment if he or she wishes to remain employed with the town.



   Employees may not enter into dealings or financial interests in
contracts and services performed by the town. This includes deriving any
direct or indirect profit resulting from the sale, service, contracting or
purchases made on behalf of the town.



   Town employees may not accept financial benefits that would reasonably
tend to influence decisions or encourage that employee to disclose
confidential town information. Any offers of money, services, benefits,
favors or other possible conflicts should be reported to the department head
and/or the Town Manager. Employees having financial interest in a town or
substantial investments in a corporation that might benefit from their
dealings with the town must file a conflict of interest statement with the
town’s Clerk-Treasurer with a copy to the state’s Board of Accounts.



§ 18.  REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION.



   Occasionally, employees of the town are contacted by outsiders for
information about current or former employees, or about the organization’s
policies, practices or projects. Communication with the public about town
issues is the responsibility of the designated official/department head. Any
request or question from the public must be referred to that official.
Employees are advised to consult with their supervisor before releasing
information which is confidential or privileged by law. It is a violation of
state law for a public servant to knowingly or intentionally disclose
information classified as confidential.



§ 19.  FINAL PAY UPON TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.



   Upon termination of employment, employees will receive their final pay
in accordance with applicable state law. Employee benefits will be affected
by employment termination in the following manner: all accrued, vested
benefits that are due and payable at termination will be paid in accordance
with state law and the terms of this handbook. Some benefits may be continued
at the employee’s expense if the employee so chooses. The employee will be
notified of the benefits that may be continued and of the terms, conditions
and limitations of such continuance.



§ 20.  RETURN OF PROPERTY.



   Employees are responsible for all property, materials or written
information issued to them or in their possession or control. All property
must be returned by employees on or before their last day of work. The town
may take all legal action deemed appropriate to recover or protect its
property.



§ 21.  ELECTIVE OFFICER AND TOWN EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTED.



   Effective 1-1-2013, I.C. 3-5-9 specifies that a town employee is
considered to have resigned from employment with the town if the employee
assumes the elected executive office of the town or becomes an elected member
of the town’s legislative or fiscal body.



   A volunteer firefighter may not assume or hold a position on the
executive, legislative or fiscal body of the town if the town receives fire
protection services from the department in which the volunteer firefighter
serves. Fire protection services provided under mutual aid agreements are
excluded. An employee or volunteer who assumes or holds an elected office on
1-1-2013 may continue to hold the office and be employed by the town or serve
as a volunteer firefighter until the expiration of the term of office.



B. BENEFITS



§ 1.  EMPLOYEE LEAVE DONATION POLICY.



   A.   Purpose. The intent of this employee leave donation policy is
to allow employees to voluntarily provide assistance to their co-workers who
are in critical need of paid leave due to serious illness or injury of the
employee. Under this policy, employees may donate accrued, unused paid leave
to a fellow employee who is otherwise eligible to accrue and use paid leave.
SERIOUS ILLNESS OR INJURY shall mean an illness, injury or impairment,
physical or mental, which requires inpatient care or continuous treatment by
a health care provider. For purposes of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER
shall mean the employee’s spouse, child or parent.



   B.   Donation of leave. Employees may donate accrued, unused leave
to an employee eligible to receive donated leave; provided that:



      1.   The employee voluntarily elects to donate leave with the
understanding that the donated leave will not be returned;



      2.   The employee designates in writing the specific employee
to whom the leave is being donated and the type and number of hours to be
donated; and



      3.   The employee retains a minimum of 40 hours of combined
(sick, personal or vacation) leave and 480 hours of major illness, injury or
maternity leave.



   C.   Receipt of donated leave. An employee may receive donated leave
pursuant to the provisions of this policy; provided that:



      1.   The employee is a full-time employee of the town and is
otherwise eligible to accrue and use paid leave;



      2.   The employee has no accrued leave;



      3.   The employee has applied for any paid leave, worker’s
compensation or other benefits for which the employee is eligible;



      4.   The employee has not been approved to receive other paid
leave or benefits;



      5.   The employee has not received more than a cumulative
total of 12 workweeks of donated time under this policy within any 12-month,
consecutive period; and



      6.   The employee or a member of the employee’s immediate
family has a serious illness or injury.



   D.   Procedure. Any employee who would like to donate unused,
accrued leave to a coworker shall make the request in writing to the
employee’s department head on a form prescribed by the town. The department
head shall forward the request to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall verify the
eligibility of the employee to donate leave and the employee to receive
donated leave. The written request shall identify both employees, the type of
leave and number of hours to be donated and shall certify that the request is
irrevocable, made voluntarily and that the donating employee retains a
balance of at least 40 hours of combined leave and 480 hours of major
illness, injury or maternity leave after making the donation.



§ 2.  EMPLOYEE EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT.



   Any employee who undertakes further education may request reimbursement
from the town based on the following criteria.



      1.   The training must relate directly to the employee’s
position as determined by the employee’s department head either for his or
her current position or for future advancement within that department.



      2.   The employee must be employed by the town for at least
one year before applying for reimbursement.



      3.   Recommendation must be made to the appropriate
board/commission or Town Manager by the employee’s department head prior to
the start of training for approval of reimbursement.



      4.   The employee shall receive reimbursement upon
satisfactory completion of the course with a 70% or C grade for tuition fees
only, presentation of a paid-in-full receipt with proof of course completion.
All student fees, textbook costs and travel expenses shall be incurred by the
employee and are not reimbursable.



      5.   An employee who fails to successfully complete the
training will not be eligible for reimbursement.



      6.   Classes will be attended on employees own time. A maximum
of one class per semester per employee or up to three classes a year allowed
depending on available department funds.



      7.   In the event an employee who has received education
reimbursement from the town pursuant to this section leaves the town’s
employment less than three years after receiving reimbursement, the employee
shall reimburse the town for any completed college level courses paid for by
the town.



§ 3.  FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT (FMLA).



   A.   Introduction.



      Full and part-time employees who have worked for the town for at
least 12 months and at least 1,250 hours during the prior 12 months may take
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during any calendar year.



      This FMLA leave may be given for one or more of the following
reasons:



      1.   Birth and/or care of a child of the employee;



      2.   Placement of a child into the employee’s family by
adoption or by foster care arrangement;



      3.   Care of the employee’s spouse, child or parent who has
a serious health problem; and



      4.   Inability of the employee to perform the functions of the
employee’s position due to serious health condition.



      In any case in which a husband and wife are both employees of the
town and are entitled to FMLA leave for a qualifying reason, the aggregate
amount of leave for the husband and wife attributable for said qualifying
reason shall be 12 weeks during any 12-month period.



      FMLA leave taken by an employee during the preceding 12-month
period will be used to determine the amount of available leave pursuant to
the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.



      The town will use the calendar year, or January 1 through
December 31, in determining the 12-month period in which the 12 weeks of
leave entitlement occurs.



   B.   Definition of “serious health condition”.



      For purposes of FMLA, a SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION is defined as an
illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition that involves
inpatient care (an overnight stay in a hospital, hospice or residential
medical care facility), including any period of incapacity or any subsequent
treatment in connection with such inpatient care, or a condition that
requires continuing care by a licensed health care provider. This policy is
intended to cover illnesses of a serious and long-term nature resulting in
recurring or lengthy absences.



      For purposes of FMLA, a CHRONIC SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION requires
periodic visits, defined as at least twice a year, for treatment by a health
care provider or by a nurse under direct supervision of a health care
provider. Such condition continues over an extended period of time, including
recurring episodes of a single underlying condition, and may cause episodic
rather than a continuing period of incapacity.



      A period of incapacity, which is permanent or long-term due to a
condition for which treatment may not be effective, represents a “permanent
or long-term health condition”. The employee or family member, with such
condition, must be under the continuing supervision of, but need not be
receiving active treatment by a health care provider. This policy is intended
to cover chronic, permanent and long-term health conditions as defined by the
FMLA.



   C.   Procedure.



      Employees requesting FMLA leave must exhaust their existing paid
sick leave and vacation time when receiving FMLA non-paid leave. Paid sick
leave and vacation time taken as part of a FMLA leave will be counted toward
the 12-week FMLA leave. Employees taking FMLA leave for the birth or adoption
of a child are not required to exhaust existing paid leave time.



      Employees should contact the Town Manager, the Clerk-Treasurer or
their department head to secure such forms and procedures used for requesting
leave under the town’s family and medical leave policy.



      If an absence is foreseeable because of planned medical
treatment, the employee must provide the town with 30 days’ notice of his
or her intention to take such leave. Employees who experience emergency
medical conditions or unforeseen changes in health may obtain a leave even if
they are unable to give 30 days’ notice. Employees are required to make a
reasonable effort to schedule medical treatment so as not to disrupt town
operations.



      In the case of birth, adoption or placement of a foster child,
employees are required to give 30 days’ notice before the date the proposed
leave would begin. If this is impractical, employees must provide the town
with as much notice as possible.



      Verbal notice is sufficient to advise the town of the need for
such leave. However, the appropriate written medical certification will be
required within 15 days of the date verbal notice is given, or as soon
thereafter as practicable under the circumstances.



   D.   Intermittent leave. FMLA leave may be taken “intermittently
or on a reduced leave schedule” under certain circumstances. Where leave is
taken because of the birth or placement of a child for adoption or foster
care, an employee may take leave intermittently or on a reduced leave basis
if approved by the town. Where FMLA leave is taken to care for a sick family
member or for an employee’s own serious health condition, leave may be
taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically necessary.



   E.   Key employees. An employee who qualifies as a “key”
employee may be denied restoration of employment after requesting a FMLA
leave. A “key” employee is an employee who is salaried and is “among
the highest paid 10%” of the work force. Upon requesting FMLA leave, an
employee will be notified by the town of his or her status as a “key”
employee if there is any possibility that the town may deny reinstatement
after leave.



   F.   Required information.



      In the event the town may have reason to doubt validity of an
eligible employee certificate, the town may require the employee to obtain
the opinion of a second health care provider approved and paid for by the
town. This health care provider may not be employed by the town on a regular
basis. In the event of a conflict between the first and second opinions, the
town may, at its own expense, obtain a third opinion from a health care
provider jointly selected by the town and the employee. This third opinion
would be final and binding.



      The town may require an employee to report periodically during
the leave period on the employee’s leave status and the employee’s
intention to return to work.



      The town may seek recertification for leave taken due to an
employee’s own serious health condition or the serious health condition of
a family member, no more than every 30 days unless the employee requests an
extension of leave, circumstances described by the previous certification
have changed significantly or the town receives information that casts doubt
upon the employee’s stated reason for the absence or the continuing
validity of the certification.



      Where the employee’s need for leave, due to the employee’s
own serious health condition or the serious health condition of the
employee’s covered family member, lasts beyond a single leave year, the
town shall require the employee to provide a new medical certification in
each subsequent leave year.



      The employee must provide the requested recertification to the
town within 15 calendar days after the employer’s request.



   G.   Continuation of benefits.



      Employees on approved FMLA leave will continue receiving health
care coverage under the same terms and conditions that would apply if he or
she had remained working during the FMLA leave period. The town may recapture
the full payment amount of insurance paid on behalf of the employee for the
leave period when the employee notifies the town that he or she will not
return to work.



      Employees should discuss the effect of length of service issues
with INPRS when taking FMLA leave. Town personnel will assist the employee in
consulting INPRS.



      Employees will not accrue any leave benefits (major illness and
vacation) while on an approved FMLA leave.



      While an employee is on FMLA leave for their own serious illness
or injury, he or she shall not be engaged in employment by an outside
employer.



§ 4.  INSURANCE; EMPLOYEE AND FAMILY.



   After 30 days of employment, all full-time employees are eligible for
health, vision, dental and life insurance coverage as provided to all
employees of the town.



§ 5.  INSURANCE; COBRA.



   Employees and their families have the opportunity for a temporary
extension of health insurance coverage in certain instances where coverage
under the town’s health plan would otherwise end. Only those employees,
employees’ spouses and their dependents who were covered under the town’s
plan on the day before the event that triggered termination of coverage are
eligible to elect continuation coverage.



   If he or she is an employee of the town and is covered by its health
insurance plan, he or she has a right to elect continuation coverage if he or
she loses his or her health coverage because of a reduction in his or her
hours of employment or termination of his or her employment (for reasons
other than gross misconduct on his or her part).



   When a qualifying event occurs, the town will provide the employee with
the appropriate notice. For further information on continuation of coverage,
the employee sees his or her department head.



   Events that qualify to trigger the option to continue coverage are as
follows:



      1.   Termination of the covered employee’s employment
(except for gross misconduct);



      2.   Death of a covered employee;



      3.   Divorce or legal separation of a covered employee from
his or her spouse;



      4.   A covered employee becoming entitled to receive Medicare
benefits; or



      5.   A dependent child of a covered employee ceasing to be a
dependent.



   A.   Coverage after termination (continuation of coverage; COBRA).



      A covered person, whose coverage has been terminated for any
qualifying event enumerated below, has the right to continue coverage for the
medical, dental and/or prescription drug benefits of this plan if covered for
such benefits on the day immediately preceding the termination date. A child
who is born to the covered person or who is placed for adoption with the
covered person during a period of COBRA continuation coverage is also
considered a qualified beneficiary.



      The time period for which the continuation is available is
indicated below in conjunction with the corresponding qualifying event.



      If continuation of coverage is elected, coverage will continue as
though termination of employment or loss of eligible status had not occurred.
Any accumulation of deductibles or benefits paid prior to termination or loss
of eligibility, which had been credited toward any deductible or maximum
benefit of this plan, will be retained.



      Also, no new or additional waiting periods, pre-existing
condition limitations or evidence of good health requirements will apply. If
any changes are made to the coverage for employee in active service, the
coverage provided to individuals under this continuation provision will be
similarly changed.



   B.   Qualifying events.



      1.   An 18-month continuation is available to covered
employees and/or covered dependents in the event of any one of the following
qualifying events:



         a.   A covered employee’s termination of employment
for any reason, except gross misconduct; and



         b.   A covered employee’s loss of eligibility to
participate due to reduced work hours.



      2.   A 29-month continuation shall be available to covered
employees and/or covered dependents in the event of the following:



         a.   A covered person is disabled, per a determination
under the Social Security Act, on the date of the covered employee’s
termination of employment or reduction in work hours, or within the first 60
days of continuation of coverage.



      The covered person must provide the plan sponsor with notice of
the disability within 60 days of the determination of the disability by
Social Security and before the end of the original 18-month COBRA coverage
period. The covered person must notify the plan sponsor of a determination by
Social Security that the individual is no longer disabled within 30 days of
such determination. If the individual entitled to the disability extension
has non-disabled family members who are entitled to COBRA continuation
coverage, those non-disabled family members are also entitled to the 29-month
coverage period.



      3.   A 36-month continuation shall be available to a covered
dependent spouse and/or child in the event of any of the following qualifying
events:



         a.   A covered employee’s death;



         b.   Divorce or legal separation from a covered employee;



         c.   A covered dependent child’s loss of eligibility
to participate due to age, marriage or a change in student status; and



         d.   A covered dependent’s loss of eligibility to
participate in this plan due to the covered employee becoming covered by
Medicare as a result of the total disability or choosing Medicare in place of
this plan at age 65.



      4.   A lifetime continuation shall be available to a covered
retiree or the covered dependent of a retiree in the event of the following
qualifying event: the employer’s filing of a bankruptcy proceeding under
U.S.C. Title 11.



      Continued coverage must be offered when coverage is substantially
reduced within one year before or after the filing for bankruptcy. Retirees
and widows or widowers of retirees who died before the bankruptcy filing are
also covered by lifetime continuation coverage. Surviving spouses and
dependent children of retirees who die after the bankruptcy filing may elect
an additional 36 months of continuation coverage.



      Individuals may be covered under multiple qualifying events, but
in no case (except bankruptcy) will coverage be continued for more than 36
months.



      If an employee becomes covered by Medicare, but no loss of
coverage results for the employee of the covered dependents, and a subsequent
qualifying event occurs, the duration of the coverage for all qualified
beneficiaries other than the covered employee must be at least 36 months from
the date on which the employee became covered by Medicare.



   C.   Notice of continuation.



      A covered person has at least 60 days from the date of loss of
coverage as a result of a qualifying event or 60 days from the date the plan
sponsor mails or otherwise provides the covered person with a notification of
the covered person’s rights pursuant to a qualifying event to elect
coverage. Payment of initial contribution is not required until the
forty-fifth day after the election. All payments for coverage after the date
of election are subject to a 30-day grace period.



      The covered person is required to notify the plan sponsor within
60 days of any qualifying event of which it would not otherwise be aware,
such as divorce, legal separation or loss of dependent status by a dependent
child. You also have the responsibility to inform the plan sponsor that he or
she has a newborn infant or a child under age 18 who has been placed with him
or her for adoption in order that he or she may be added to his or her COBRA
coverage or that he or she may change his or her election for coverage.



      The covered person is also required to provide the plan sponsor
with all information needed to meet its obligation of providing notice and
continuing coverage.



   D.   Cost of continuation. Contact the employer for details
regarding the cost of continuation.



§ 6.  INSURANCE; WORKER’S COMPENSATION, ON-THE-JOB INJURY REPORTING.



   The town provides a comprehensive worker’s compensation insurance
program at no cost to employees. This program covers any injury or illness
sustained in the course of employment that requires medical, surgical or
hospital treatment as approved by the carrier. Subject to applicable legal
requirements, worker’s compensation insurance provides benefits after a
short waiting period. While on worker’s compensation disability, employee
benefits shall accrue. Employee income received while on leave under this
policy shall not exceed wages the employee would have normally received
pre-major illness in-line-of-duty leave.



   Employees should contact the Clerk-Treasurer to obtain information and
forms regarding filing worker’s compensation claims. Medical certifications
are required. Once completed, all such forms are to be filed directly with
the Clerk-Treasurer, not the insurance carrier. The Clerk-Treasurer will
process forms as appropriate.



   If the employee becomes injured at work, he or she must report his or
her injury to his or her supervisor as soon as practicable under the
circumstances. Supervisors should also be notified immediately of any fires,
hazardous conditions or injury to others.



   It is the town’s policy to comply with the state’s worker’s
compensation laws and to aid any employee whose injury or illness is
determined to be compensatory under those laws. The town pays for all costs
associated with providing coverage, and the insurance carrier will make all
payments and decisions pertaining to compensatory injuries or illnesses.



   If the employee is hospitalized or incurs medical costs as a result of
a job-related injury or illness, his or her department head should be
notified as soon as possible. If absence from work is required as a result of
a job-related injury or illness, he or she will be required to furnish a
statement from a physician stating that he or she is able to work before
returning to work.



   An employee suffering a job-related injury and/or illness must report
in writing the condition as soon as practicable under the circumstances.
Additional requirements and conditions of reporting include, but are not
limited to:



      1.   The employee shall go to a doctor or hospital as soon as
the injury is reported and he or she may not make the decision whether they
are to go or wait;



      2.   The employee shall complete the employer’s report of
injury/illness of employee form. Three copies, plus the original, will be
given to the Clerk-Treasurer no later than one work day following the
reported incident. One copy shall be kept by the supervisor or department
head and placed in a confidential file;



      3.   An incident report shall be completed by the injured
employee’s supervisor or department head and will accompany the
employer’s report of injury/illness of employee form. One copy, plus the
original, will be given to the Clerk-Treasurer at the same time as the
employer’s report form. A copy shall be kept by the supervisor or
department head and placed in a confidential file; and



      4.   Right to report injuries and illnesses free from
retaliation. Employees have the right to report work-related injuries and
illnesses. The town is prohibited from discharging or in any manner
discriminating against any employee for reporting a work-related injury or
illness.



   Failure to report an injury or illness could result in jeopardizing his
or her worker’s compensation claim.



   The Clerk-Treasurer will submit the original, plus two copies, of the
employer’s report and the original incident report to the town’s
insurance agent within one day of receipt from the supervisor or department
head. It shall be the insurance agent’s responsibility to forward the
information to the state within seven days of the accident/injury. It is
possible that the accident/injury may not be covered by workers’
compensation if the report fails to reach the proper state agency within this
time period.



   As specified by the state’s worker’s compensation statutes, when a
compensable injury renders an employee unable to work, compensation for lost
wages is paid starting on the eighth day. However, on the twenty-second day
of disability, the employee will receive compensation for the first seven
days.



   The first weekly installment of compensation is due 14 days after the
disability begins. Not later than 15 days from the date that the first
installment is due, the employer/carrier must tender to the employee an
agreement of compensation, along with compensation due.



   However, if the employer/carrier denies liability, a written notice of
denial must be mailed within 29 days after the employer’s knowledge of the
alleged injury.



   The employer may obtain an additional 30-day period if it establishes
that the delay is due to an inability to obtain the medical information
necessary to make a determination as to liability.



   Certain injuries are excluded from workers’ compensation coverage,
including, but not limited to, employee intoxication, self-inflicted
injuries, failing to use safety appliances, committing a violation of work
rules, failing to obey a reasonable written or printed safety rule and
knowingly failing to perform a statutory duty.



   Neither the town or the insurance carrier will be liable for the
payment of worker’s compensation benefits or major illness/injury
in-line-of-duty leave pay for off-duty injuries or illnesses that occur
during an employee’s voluntary participation in any off-duty recreational,
social or athletic activity sponsored or not-sponsored by the town.



   While an employee is on worker’s compensation leave, he or she shall
not be engaged in outside employment.



   Holiday pay will not be paid in addition to major illness/injury
in-line-of-duty leave pay.



   During worker’s compensation leave, employees may be required to
submit periodic medical certifications on their serious health condition.



   Before returning to work, the employee shall provide medical
certification from a health care provider verifying that he or she may safely
return to work.



   For eligible employees, workers’ compensation leave is considered
FMLA leave beginning with the first day of leave. All FMLA leave time used
counts against the employee’s 12-week FMLA entitlement.



§ 7.  LEAVE OF ABSENCE FOR INSTANCES NOT COVERED UNDER FAMILY AND MEDICAL
LEAVE ACT (FMLA).



   An employee may be granted a leave of absence not directly related to
family or health, without pay, if approved by the department head and the
appropriate governing board. The employee will be required to return to work
at the expiration of the leave of absence or be terminated.



   A leave of absence may be for a period of up to 60 calendar days, with
two renewals possible. The entire leave of absence shall not exceed six
calendar months.



   Copies of both denials and granted leaves without pay will be kept by
the Clerk-Treasurer, the department head and the employee.



   Leave without pay will not count toward vacation days, paid holidays or
major illness leave in all forms.



   Health and life insurance benefits can be continued only at the expense
of the employee.



§ 8.  MAJOR ILLNESS, INJURY, MATERNITY LEAVE.



   Every full-time employee, with the exception of the non-exempt
firefighters, shall earn major illness, injury or maternity leave, with full
pay, at the rate of eight hours per month of continuous service. This earned
leave may accumulate up to a maximum of 960 work hours. All full-time
employees of the town shall at once be entitled to major illness, injury or
maternity leave as described herein as if this section was in full force and
effect at the time they began employment with the town. No more than 960 work
hours may be used for any major medical problem. No major medical leave days
may be accumulated while employee is on major medical leave status. After an
employee returns to work from any major medical illness, that employee may
again begin to accumulate up to 960 major illness work hours.



   The purpose of major illness, injury or maternity leave is to provide a
source of payment to an employee during a previously approved leave of
absence. All leaves of absence must be approved in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this manual. Requests for leaves of absence with
payment from an employee’s accumulated major illness, injury or maternity
leave must be qualified in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section.



   All non-exempt firefighters shall earn major illness, injury or
maternity leave, with full pay, at the rate of 12 hours per month of
continuous service. This earned leave may accumulate to a maximum of 1,440
work hours. All non-exempt firefighters of the town shall at once be entitled
to major illness, injury or maternity leave as described herein as if this
section was in full force and effect on 4-1-1999. No more than 1,440 work
hours may be used for any major medical problem. No major medical leave days
may be accumulated while employee is on major medical leave status. After an
employee returns to work from any major medical illness, that employee may
again begin to accumulate up to 1,440 major illness work hours.



   Accumulated leave is to be utilized for major illness, injury or
maternity of the employee and not for additional sick days.



   In order to qualify for major illness pay, the following are
prerequisites that all employees must comply with to receive major illness
pay after 40 consecutive work hours (48 hours for members of the Fire
Department) missed as a result of major illness, injury or pregnancy.



      1.   A physician must certify on town’s form that the
employee is pregnant or suffers from major illness or injury. In the case of
a major illness or injury, part of the certification must include that the
major illness or injury prevents the employee from performing his or her
essential job functions and why.



      2.   In order to contest a physician’s certification, the
Town Council or applicable governing board of the employee shall choose the
physician to examine the employee and also review the physician’s
certification previously submitted by the employee. The physician shall then
determine whether the employee is suffering from a major illness that
prevents him or her from performing his or her essential job functions. The
determination of the physician chosen by the Council shall bind both the town
and the employee as to whether the employee qualifies for major illness pay.



      3.   A physician must provide a recertification each calendar
month that the employee continues to suffer from the major illness or injury.
This recertification must be on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer
prior to the expiration of the preceding calendar month or the employee will
not receive major illness pay until the date the recertification is received.
The Council or applicable governing board of the employee may contest a
physician’s recertification under the same terms and conditions set forth
in subsection 2. above. The employee’s department head may request a
re-certification at any time during the period of major medical leave.



      4.   During the period in which the employee receives major
medical leave, the employee may not engage in any employment requiring duties
the employee would not be able to perform based upon the physician’s
certification.



   The department head may grant up to 40 hours of major illness leave for
payment to a qualifying employee for a major illness, injury or pregnancy.
Department head must certify to the Town Manager that the employee qualifies
for major illness, injury or pregnancy leave. The Town Manager must approve
the request and may require additional information prior to approving the
request. Employees shall not be entitled to major medical leave if they are
receiving worker’s compensation payments or other benefits from the town.
Time loss shall not be deducted from accumulated sick leave, except for that
portion of time not covered by worker’s compensation, which is equivalent
to two hours of each workday. (This paragraph does not apply to the Police
and Fire Departments because they are governed by membership in the 1977
Police and Fire Fighters Disability and Pension Fund.)



   Part-time and temporary employees will not be entitled to accumulate
major illness leave in all forms described in this section.



   With regards to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), employees may
request payment from any accumulated, major illness, injury, dependent or
maternity leave during the 12 weeks of FMLA leave.



§ 9.  LONGEVITY PAY.



   In addition to all other benefits and compensation, full-time employees
shall receive longevity pay for continuous employment at the rate established
by the Salary Ordinance then in effect for each year of service.



§ 10.  MILITARY LEAVE.



   If an employee is called to military service, he or she may be entitled
to reemployment and other rights under the Uniform Services and Reemployment
Rights Act of 1994 (“USERRA”). To qualify under USERRA, the separation
from military service must be under honorable conditions and the employee
must meet the other requirements of the law. Those requirements include, but
are not limited to, the following.



      1.   The employee must provide the town with sufficient
advance notice of his or her need for military leave.



      2.   The employee must apply for reemployment at the
conclusion of his or her military leave within the time frames established by
USERRA.



   The town will comply with its obligations under USERRA when this law
covers an employee’s military leave.



   Military Family Leave



   Employees who:



   • Have been employed for at least 12 months;



   • Have worked at least 1,500 hours during the 12 months before the
leave begins; and



   • Are the spouse, parent, grandparent or sibling of a person who is
ordered to full-time active duty for a period that exceeds 89 consecutive
calendar days.



   The eligible employee may take up to ten working days unpaid leave of
absence each year during the 30 days before or after active duty or during
the period of active duty. This leave may exhaust paid vacation or leave,
except for sick and medical leave at the option of the employee or employer.



§ 11.  HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY (HIPAA).



   The town is compliant with applicable requirements and standards of the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), and has
established guidelines regarding the privacy of individually identifiable
health information accordingly.



   The town has designated the Clerk-Treasurer as the town’s “privacy
official” who is responsible for developing and implementing privacy
policies and procedures.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is the contact person who is responsible for
receiving complaints regarding compliance.



   All town HIPAA inquiries shall be directed to the Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 12.  INDIANA PUBLIC RETIREMENT SYSTEM (INPRS).



   INPRS (formally PERF) pays benefits to covered workers or their
dependents upon retirement, death, and in certain cases, serious illness or
injury. The town contributes a percentage to the pension account. The amount
the town contributes varies and is determined actuarially annually. The
employee’s contributions and accumulated interest credits are refundable
when an employee terminates employment prior to being eligible for benefits.
INPRS employer financed pension requires ten years of service to become
vested, and is paid by the town based on an employee’s length of
employment, average salary, retirement option selected and age at retirement.
Questions concerning the program should be directed to: Indiana Public
Retirement System, One North Capital, Suite 001, Indianapolis, IN 46204.



§ 13.  WORK HOURS.



   The standard workday for all town employees (except for fire and
police) is an eight-hour work day, with a one-half hour paid lunch break
(e.g., 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.). If employees take more than the paid one-half
hour for lunch, it is subject to the supervisor or department head’s
approval and then extends the work day to an eight and one-half hour day
(e.g., 8:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m.).



   Employees are expected to call their supervisor or department head
prior to their start time if they anticipate they will be late to work.



   It is the policy of the town to restrict work that would require
overtime compensation to the employee to the minimum possible number of hours
consistent with the completion of necessary work. Overtime must be approved
by the employee’s supervisor or department head prior to being worked.
Repeated instances of working overtime without approval is subject to
disciplinary action. Whenever it is necessary to provide an employee with
overtime compensation, compensatory time off in lieu of additional pay will
be the preferred and normal method of providing such overtime compensation.
All department heads and the Clerk-Treasurer shall administer such procedures
as are necessary to carry out this policy in conjunction with applicable
state and federal laws.



§ 14.  FLEX TIME.



   The town may utilize “time-off” or flexible hours for positions to
avoid having employees work in excess of 40 hours in a week. Flex-time
scheduling shall be approved in advance by the department head. Any flex-time
shall be used by the end of the following pay period.



§ 15.  OVERTIME COMPENSATION.



   Each town employee’s position is designated as non-exempt or exempt
from federal and state-wage and hour laws.



   Exempt: an “exempt” employee is excluded from specific overtime
provisions of federal and state wage and hour laws, and are not eligible for
or entitled to receive overtime compensation or compensatory time off. The
following employees shall be defined as exempt employees:



      Town Manager



      Chief of Police



      Street Commissioner



      Park Superintendent



      Division Fire Chief



      Utility Superintendent



      MS4 Superintendent



      Assistant Chief of Police



      Fire Chief



      Deputy Fire Chief



      Building Commissioner



      Town Engineer



   Non-exempt: an employee, whether hourly or salaried who is
“non-exempt” is entitled to overtime and/or compensatory time under the
Fair Labor Standards Act for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a
workweek, with the exception of certain Police and Fire Department staff.



   The following terms and conditions are applicable to non-exempt town
employees, except employees of the Fire Department and Police Department: all
non-exempt town employees covered by this policy shall be paid at the rate of
one and one-half times his or her regular pay for all time worked in excess
of eight hours per day and/or 40 hours per workweek. Fire employees working
24 hour shifts will receive overtime for hours worked in excess of their
24-hour shift. Police officers working a 12-hour shift, will receive overtime
for hours worked in excess of their 12-hour shift. Only time actually worked
by an employee will be used for the purposes of calculating overtime pay. In
other words, compensation for hours attributed to paid time off, holidays and
compensatory time off will not be included for the purposes of calculating
overtime pay. The calculation of overtime shall include base salary,
longevity and any certification pay.



   Due to budgetary constraints, the town encourages the use of
compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay. Compensatory time is earned at the
rate of one and one-half times the actual time worked. For example, an
employee who works one hour of overtime will receive one and one-half hours
of compensatory time.



   Each department head will be authorized to establish a limit on the
amount of compensatory time employees in his or her department shall be
permitted to accrue. Under no circumstances will an employee be allowed to
accrue in excess of 40 hours of compensatory time without prior approval of
the employee’s department head and the Town Manager. At their sole
discretion, department heads may schedule employees’ use of compensatory
time.



   Any accrued time shall be used by December 1 of the calendar year in
which it is accrued. However, it is preferred that compensatory time is used
within the first pay period after it is accrued. Compensatory time shall be
limited during the month of December. If there is an unusual circumstance in
which compensatory time is accrued in December due to operational necessity,
the compensatory time must be used by December 31 or it will be paid to the
employee in the final payroll of that year.



   Recognizing the town’s preference with respect to employees who agree
to accept compensatory time, every effort should be made where feasible to
allocate overtime evenly among all similarly situated employees within a
department. The equitable distribution of overtime is also an important
consideration with respect to an employee’s ability to utilize his or her
compensatory time. Upon termination of employment, an employee will be paid
all accrued but unused compensatory time in accordance with the standards set
forth in the Fair Labor Standards Act.



§ 16.  TIMEKEEPING.



   Federal and state laws require the town to keep an accurate record of
time worked in order to calculate employee pay and benefits.



   The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA) require that certain records be kept on each covered non-exempt
worker. The record must include accurate information about the employee and
data about hours worked and wages earned. Employers are required to maintain
the following records:



      1.   Employee’s full name, as used for Social Security
purposes, and on the same record, the employee’s identifying symbol or
number, if such is used in place of name on any time, work or payroll records;



      2.   Address, including zip code;



      3.   Birth date if younger than 19;



      4.   Sex and occupation;



      5.   Time of day of week when employee’s workweek begins,
hours worked each day and total hours worked each workweek;



      6.   Basis on which the employee’s wages are paid;



      7.   Regular hourly rate;



      8.   Total daily or weekly straight-time earnings;



      9.   Total overtime earnings for the workweek;



      10.   All additions to or deductions from the employee’s
wages;



      11.   Total wages paid each pay period; and



      12.   Date of payment and the pay period covered by the
payment.



   I.C. 5-11-9-4 requires that public sector employees maintain records
showing which hours were worked each day by officers and employees. These
records are subject to audit by the state’s Board of Accounts. Time worked
is all the time actually spent on the job performing assigned duties. Every
employee is responsible for accurately recording their time worked on town
forms or time keeping machines (i.e., time cards).



   Employees should accurately record the time they begin and end their
work and the time they begin and end each meal period. Employees should also
record the beginning and ending time of any split shift or departure from
work for personal reasons. Overtime work must always be approved by the
department head before it is performed.



   Tampering, altering or falsifying time records or recording time on
another employee’s time record shall result in disciplinary action, up to
and including termination.



§ 17  WORK TIME RESTRICTED.



   Non-exempt employees shall not commence any work activities on behalf
of the town before seven minutes preceding the start of the work shift, or
continue work activities more than seven minutes after completion of the work
shift, unless specifically authorized by their department head.



§ 18.  ROUNDING.



   Time is to be recorded to the quarter hour, using the seven-minute rule
(i.e., leeway of seven minutes before and seven minutes after scheduled start
and stop times). All employee work commenced more than seven minutes before
the start time work hour will be paid on a quarter hour schedule; all
employee work continued more than seven minutes after the end of the last
work hour will be paid on a quarter hour schedule.



§ 19.  MULTIPLE POSITIONS.



   Non-exempt employees working in more than one town position shall count
the combined hours worked in more than one position in determining overtime
obligations under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).



§ 20.  TIMESHEETS.



   It is the responsibility of those employees who are required to
maintain a time sheet, to properly record the time that he or she has worked
during a payroll period. Employees shall record the use of personal leave,
vacation leave, FMLA leave or any other type of approved leave on their time
sheet. Failure to record the leave in any status may result in the employee
not being paid for the leave.



   Hourly employee time records are to be submitted to the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office with employee attendance reports each payroll.
Time records and employee attendance reports are to match and must be signed
by the department head.



   It is an employee’s responsibility to sign his or her time sheet to
certify the accuracy of all time recorded. The department head will review
and initial timesheets before submitting them for payroll processing. If
corrections or modifications are made to the time sheet, both the employee
and the department head should verify the accuracy of the changes by signing
the time sheet. Should an employee fail to sign such a time sheet, the time
sheet shall be submitted by the department head with an acknowledgment that
the employee has reviewed the modification.



   For detailed instructions on how and when to complete time sheet,
employees should consult with their department head.



   Department heads shall be required to complete a general payroll form
with each day’s hours worked and submit it to the Clerk-Treasurer with
first payroll in January, for the preceding year.



§ 21.  PAY POLICIES.



   Regular full-time employees and part-time employees are paid bi-weekly,
following the pay period worked. Each pay will include earnings for all work
performed through the end of the previous payroll period. If a regularly
scheduled payday falls on a holiday, employees will be paid by the last day
of work before the regularly scheduled payday.



§ 22.  PAY CORRECTIONS.



   The town takes all reasonable steps to ensure that employees receive
the correct amount of pay and that employees are paid properly on the
scheduled payday. The town prohibits improper deductions from wages.



   Any employee who thinks that he or she has had incorrect deductions
from his or her pay or was not paid the proper amount should give notice on
the day of receipt of such pay or any day thereafter, in writing, to his or
her department head with a copy of the notice sent to the Clerk-Treasurer.



   The prompt reporting of errors is in everyone’s best interest. All
reports will be investigated. If it is determined that an improper deduction
was made, the error will be corrected on the next payroll date.



§ 23.  PAID HOLIDAYS.



   All full-time employees will receive the same number of holidays each
year. Holidays shall consist of eight hours for all full-time employees.
These holidays shall be:



      New Year’s Day - January 1



      Presidents’ Day - Third Monday of February



      Spring Holiday - The Friday before Easter Sunday



      Memorial Day - Last Monday in May



      Independence Day - July 4



      Labor Day - First Monday in September



      Veterans’ Day - November 11



      Thanksgiving Day - Fourth Thursday in November



      Friday after Thanksgiving Day



      Christmas Eve - December 24



      Christmas Day - December 25



   In addition to the days listed, other days or part of a day may be
designated by the Town Council to be considered a holiday. Said additions or
deletions will be considered as an amendment to this section.



   If the designated day falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be
the observed holiday. If the designated day falls on a Saturday, the
preceding Friday shall be the observed holiday.



   If an employee is off for disciplinary action during a holiday, the
employee will not receive compensation for the holiday.



   If an employee must work on the holiday, the employee will be entitled
to time and one-half, whether or not the employee has accumulated 40 hours of
work previous to the holiday.



   Employees absent the last scheduled working day before a holiday or the
first scheduled working day after a holiday will not be paid for that holiday
unless the absence is authorized by the appropriate governing board or
department head. Additionally, police and fire employees, who do not work
strictly Monday through Friday and who call off on a holiday, will not be
compensated for that day and shall take the day as a sick, personal, funeral
or vacation day, whichever is applicable. (This does not include an employee
who is on vacation. See previous paragraph.)



§ 24.  SICK LEAVE, PERSONAL LEAVE, FUNERAL LEAVE, JURY DUTY.



   Every full-time employee shall be granted annual sick leave, with full
pay, at the rate of four hours per month of continuous service. After one
complete year of continuous service, the full-time employee will receive a
maximum of 48 hours sick leave per year. Effective 1-1-2014 sick leave will
not “roll over” into the following year. Those employees with accrued
sick leave as of 1-1-2014, will be compensated for one-half of their accrued
sick leave at the time of resignation of employment at the then- current
hourly rate.



   After 1-1-2014, employees may elect to be paid for up to three unused
sick days or to have the equivalent deposited into their health savings
account.



   Each full-time employee shall be granted two personal days, with full
pay, for one year of continuous service at the sole discretion of the
department head, and up to three funeral leave days (one 24-hour day for Fire
Department), per bereavement, for one-year continuous service. Inasmuch as
all “work days” for the Fire Department consist of 24-hour periods, Fire
Department employees shall receive one funeral leave day, with full pay, per
bereavement once they have obtained one year of continuous service.



   Note: after one year of continuous service is complete, all sick leave,
personal leave and funeral leave will be based on the January 1 through
December 31 rather than anniversary date to anniversary date.



   At the end of the first year of employment, an employee who receives
sick leave, or personal leave as part of a hiring incentive at the time of
employment, shall have such sick leave, or personal leave pro-rated to
coincide with the town’s calendar year cycle (January 1 to December 31).



   A.   Sick leave.



      Sick leave is to be utilized solely for the reason of illness or
injury to the employee.



      In order to qualify for sick leave pay, the employee must comply
with the following conditions.



      1.   Employees shall notify their supervisor of their absence
prior to the start of the work shift.



      2.   Employees shall keep their supervisor informed of the
extent of their illnesses and anticipated day of return to work.



      3.   A doctor’s certification of any illness shall be
obtained for any absence of more than two calendar days.



      4.   An employee shall not be entitled to sick leave pay if,
at the time, they are collecting worker’s compensation benefits for illness
or injury.



      5.   Employees requesting leave pursuant to the Family Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) must exhaust their existing paid sick leave time. This paid
sick leave time will also be counted toward the 12 weeks of FMLA leave.



      6.   Sick leave may be taken in one-hour increments.



   B.   Personal days. Personal leave may be taken in one-half hour
increments with prior notice to and approval from the department head.



   C.   Bereavement leave. Paid bereavement leave of three calendar
days may be taken for the loss of an immediate family member (defined as a
spouse, child, sibling, grandparent grandchild or the child, sibling, parent,
grandparent or grandchild of a spouse). Proof of funeral attendance or death
may be required.



   D.   Jury duty.



      If an employee is called for jury duty, he or she will be paid
the difference between his or her regular rate of pay for eight hours and the
amount he or she receives for jury pay. The employee will notify his or her
supervisor promptly of any jury duty summonses or other notices he or she may
receive. The employee is required to submit his or her jury pay voucher or
other proof of payment prior to being reimbursed for his or her pay
difference. If dismissed from jury duty before end of his or her normal work
day, the employee shall immediately contact the department head on when to
report back to work.



      Part-time and temporary employees are not entitled to paid sick
leave, personal leave or funeral leave.



      Sick leave, personal leave, and funeral leave days may not be
accumulated from year to year.



§ 25.  VACATION LEAVE.



   This section applies to all full-time employees, except for 24-hour
Fire Department employees and 12-hour shift Police Department employees. Each
employee must work a full year before he or she is entitled to take a
vacation. This must be taken before the end of the calendar year in which he
or she has completed his or her year’s service.



   One week’s vacation is the equivalent of 40 working hours.



   The official accrued vacation period begins on January 1 of each
calendar year. During years of continuous full-time employment, employees
shall be entitled to vacation as follows:



      1.   After the first anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 40 hours;



      2.   After the second anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 80 hours;



      3.   After the fifth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 120 hours;



      4.   After the tenth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 160 hours; and



      5.   After the twentieth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 200 hours.



   All department heads shall follow the above schedule; except that, they
shall receive 120 hours vacation as a minimum annually. Department heads must
complete a full year of employment before being eligible for the initial 120
hours vacation, unless otherwise determined by the Town Council at the time
of hiring or by official Town Council action during the first year of
employment. At the end of the first year of employment, an employee who
receives vacation leave as part of a hiring incentive at the time of
employment, shall have such vacation leave pro-rated to coincide with the
town’s calendar year cycle (January 1 to December 31).



   By the end of January, all employees will plan vacations with the
department head or appropriate governing board so that due consideration to
the needs of the town will be given. Department heads will do likewise and
notify the Town Manager of their vacations for the year. The Town Manager
needs to know vacations approved for the year for scheduling purposes.
Vacation time may be taken in one hour increments or in full at the approval
of respective department head in one hour increments, or in full, but
vacation time must be taken within a year following the year in which it is
earned, except as otherwise noted.



   A vacation request for a specific time can be denied if it could be
detrimental to the efficiency of the department.



   Upon termination of employment with the town, an employee will be paid
for his or her unused vacation time including a pro rata portion of any
vacation being accrued for subsequent vacation entitlement following the next
anniversary date of employment; except that, employees who are involuntarily
terminated shall not be entitled to any unused vacation time.



   An employee’s termination date will not be extended to accrue
additional vacation time, personal days or sick leave. The employee’s
termination date will not be extended, but shall always be the last day
worked, except for employees on leave for a serious illness or injury.



   Temporary or part-time employees are ineligible for vacation leave with
pay.



   The Clerk-Treasurer will be responsible for maintaining permanent
records for all time covered within this division.



   Payment of vacation benefits may be made in advance of any vacation
taken by an employee (I.C. 5-10-6-1) provided that the Clerk-Treasurer
receives a written request for payment at least 14 days prior to the
beginning of the vacation.



   An employee’s vacation time shall be considered as hours worked for
the purpose of determining vacation leave eligibility.



   Department heads, including fire, who are unable to take all of their
vacation time during the calendar year, may be compensated for unused
vacation time upon approval of the appropriate governing board and if
budgetary funds are available. This is not to exceed 80 hours per year.



   Subject to approval by the appropriate governing board, non-exempt
employees may be allowed to take unused vacation time within 60 days after
the calendar year. This is only to be used in the event of extraordinary
scheduling difficulties.



§ 26.  VACATION LEAVE; FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The vacation benefits contained herein for the Fire Department are
based on a 24-hour workday. Full-time members of the Fire Department shall be
entitled to vacations as follows:



      1.   After the first anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: three work days;



      2.   After the second anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: five work days;



      3.   After the fifth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: seven work days;



      4.   After the tenth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: nine work days; and



      5.   After the twentieth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 12 work days.



   Vacations shall be scheduled in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Fire Department.



   By the end of January, all employees will plan vacations with the Fire
Chief or appropriate governing board so that due consideration to the needs
of the town will be given. Vacation may be taken in part, in one hour
increments or in full, but they must be taken within a year following the
year in which they are earned, except as otherwise noted.



   Upon termination of employment with the town, a member of the Fire
Department will be paid for his or her unused vacation including a pro rata
portion of any vacation being accrued for subsequent vacation entitlement
following the next anniversary date of employment. Employees who are
involuntarily terminated shall not be entitled to any unused vacation time.



   An employee’s termination date will not be extended to accrue
additional vacation, personal or sick time. The employee’s termination date
will not be extended, but shall always be the last day worked, except for
employees on leave for a serious illness or injury.



   Temporary or part-time employees are ineligible for vacation leave with
pay.



   The Clerk-Treasurer and the Fire Chief will be responsible for
maintaining permanent records for all time covered within this section.



   Payment of vacation benefits may be made in advance of any vacation
taken by an employee (I.C. 5-10-6-1) provided that the Clerk-Treasurer
receives a written request for payment at least 14 days prior to the
beginning of the vacation.



   An employee’s vacation time shall be considered as hours worked for
the purpose of determining vacation leave eligibility.



   If an employee is on vacation during the time of a holiday, he or she
receives appropriate compensation.



   Subject to approval by the appropriate governing board, non-exempt
employees may be allowed to take unused vacation time within 60 days after
the calendar year. This is only to be used in the event of extraordinary
scheduling difficulties.



§ 27.  VACATION LEAVE; POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The vacation benefits contained herein for the Police Department are
based on a 12-hour workday.



   Full-time members of the Police Department working a 12-hour shift
shall be entitled to vacations as follows:



      1.   After the first anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: four work days;



      2.   After the second anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: seven work days;



      3.   After the fifth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 11 work days;



      4.   After the tenth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 14 work days; and



      5.   After the twentieth anniversary of continuous full-time
employment: 18 work days.



   Vacations shall be scheduled in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Police Department.



   By the end of January, all employees will plan vacations with the
Police Chief or appropriate governing board so that due consideration to the
needs of the town will be given. Vacation may be taken in part, in one hour
increments, or in full, but they must be taken within a year following the
year in which they are earned, except as otherwise noted.



   Upon termination of employment with the town, a member of the Police
Department will be paid for his or her unused vacation including a pro rata
portion of any vacation being accrued for subsequent vacation entitlement
following the next anniversary date of employment. Employees who are
involuntarily terminated shall not be entitled to any unused vacation time.



   An employee’s termination date will not be extended to accrue
additional vacation, personal or sick time. The employee’s termination date
will not be extended, but shall always be the last day worked, except for
employees on leave for a serious illness or injury.



   Temporary or part-time employees are ineligible for vacation leave with
pay.



   The Clerk-Treasurer will be responsible for maintaining permanent
records for all time covered within this section.



   Payment of vacation benefits may be made in advance of any vacation
taken by an employee (I.C. 5-10-6-1) provided that the Clerk-Treasurer
receives a written request for payment at least 14 days prior to the
beginning of the vacation.



   An employee’s vacation time shall be considered as hours worked for
the purpose of determining vacation leave eligibility.



   If an employee is on vacation during the time of a holiday, he or she
receives appropriate compensation.



   Subject to approval by the appropriate governing board, non-exempt
employees may be allowed to take unused vacation time within 60 days after
the calendar year. This is only to be used in the event of extraordinary
scheduling difficulties.



§ 28.  SNOW POLICY.



   In the event of adverse weather conditions, town staff should make
every effort to get to work, provided it can be done safely. A SNOW EVENT is
defined as adverse weather that causes substantial snowfall or such reduced
visibility with blowing, heavy, drifting snow that makes safely exiting
one’s home and driving into work difficult. The Town Manager will determine
whether conditions warrant the declaration of a snow event. All employees are
essential to the town, especially during a snow event when residents need
town employees to be there for them. In the event of a snow event, the
failure to report to work will be considered unpaid, excused absence, subject
to this policy.



   In the event of a declaration of a snow event prior to the start of
normal business hours, the town will attempt to send a vehicle to the
employee’s residence to pick up the employee and will take the employee
home after the work day is complete. Employees must arrange for such
town-sponsored transportation by phoning their department heads or
supervisors at least one-half hour prior to the start of their shift;
provided, such an arrangement has been made, the employee shall be paid for a
full shift, regardless of the actual time the employee arrives at work. In
the event an employee does not arrange for town-sponsored transportation and
arrives late to work, the employee will only be paid for the time worked and
may be subject to having the absence from work considered unexcused.



   If conditions as determined by the employee’s department head are
such that a town vehicle cannot pick an employee up, or an employee refuses
town-sponsored transportation to report to work, the employee may elect to
take vacation leave or personal time; provided that, such election is made at
least one-half hour before the scheduled start of the employee’s shift. If
no such leave is remaining available to an employee, the employee will be
allowed to work the missed time over the next two pay periods. Town employees
who neither call to arrange town-sponsored transportation or to indicate that
they elect not to report for work will be subject to discipline for an
unexcused absence.



   In the event of a declaration of a snow event during normal business
hours which requires the early dismissal of employees, employees will be paid
only for the actual time worked. However, employees may request to take
annual or personal leave time off as compensation for the balance of the day
which has been canceled due to the snow event.



C. POLICIES



§ 1.  ALCOHOL AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.



   Pursuant to the Federal Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1998 (41 U.S.C.A.
§§ 701 through 707), this is to notify all employees that the unlawful
manufacture, sale, distribution, possession or use of alcohol or any
controlled substance in or on any premises or property owned or controlled by
the town, or at any workplace or work site where an employee is performing
any duty or job responsibility related in any manner to his or her employment
with or for the town, is strictly prohibited.



   A.   Definitions.



      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any controlled substance identified in
Schedules I through V of § 202 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C.
§ 812), and as further defined by regulation 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through
1300.15 or any other federal or state law.



      CONVICTION. A finding of guilt (including a plea of nolo
contendere) to a felony or misdemeanor or imposition of sentence, or both, by
any judicial body charged with the responsibility to determine violations of
the federal or state criminal drug statutes.



      CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE. A federal, state or local criminal
statute, law, rule or ordinance involving the manufacture, distribution,
dispensing, use or possession of any controlled substance.



      DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE. A site for the performance of work done in
connection with any duties or business as an employee of the town or any
specific federal grant at which employees of the town are prohibited from
engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or
use of a controlled substance.



      EMPLOYEE. An employee of the town engaged in the performance of
work pursuant to the provisions of a federal grant or any other job-related
function or business of the town.



      FEDERAL AGENCY or AGENCY. Any United States executive department,
military department, government corporation, government-controlled
corporation, any other establishment in the executive branch (including
executive office of the President), or any independent regulatory agency of
the Federal Government or the state.



      GRANT. An award of financial assistance, including a cooperative
agreement, in the form of money or property in lieu of money, by a federal or
state agency directly to the town. The term GRANT includes block and
entitlement grant programs, whether or not exempted from coverage under the
grants management government-wide regulation (“uniform governments”). The
term does not include technical assistance, which provides services instead
of money, or the assistance in the form of loans, loan guarantees, interest
subsidies, insurance or direct appropriations; or any veteran’s benefits to
individuals (i.e., any benefit to veterans, their families or survivors by
virtue of the service of a veteran in the Armed Services of the United
States).



   B.   Policy.



      The town is committed to the prevention and elimination of drug
abuse among its work force. This policy will complement existing policies
against alcohol and drug abuse, in order to comply with interim regulations
adopted by federal agencies to carry out the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988.
This policy shall be a condition of employment and continued employment for
all town employees.



      All town employees are required to report to work in a fit
condition to perform their duties. If an employee reports to work under the
influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substance, it will be considered a
violation of this policy. Such employee will be subject to disciplinary
actions pursuant to the disciplinary provisions of any town ordinance, work
rules, policies or procedures.



      The town has an employee assistance program that refers employees
or their families to appropriate substance abuse rehabilitation programs.
These programs are often subsidized by the employee’s health insurance
plan. Employees with substance abuse problems are encouraged to voluntarily
contact the employee assistance program and enroll in a rehabilitation
program certified by that agency. Voluntary contact of the EAP or enrollment
in a substance abuse program will not adversely affect employment. However,
any unacceptable job performance, attendance and/or behavioral problems will
result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination.



      Any employee who unlawfully manufactures, sells, distributes,
possesses or uses a controlled substance, drug or alcohol in or on premises
or property owned or controlled by the town, or in any location where the
employee conducts official town business, regardless of whether such activity
results in the imposition of a penalty under a criminal statute, will be
subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including termination, or will be
required to participate satisfactorily in an approved drug assistance or
rehabilitation program or both. The town further prohibits all employees on
official business, on or off the workplace, from purchasing, transferring,
using or possessing illegal drugs, or abusing alcohol, or abusing
prescription drugs in any way that is illegal.



      Each employee is required to notify his or her department head
within five days after he or she is convicted of a violation of any federal
or state criminal drug law or statute where such violation occurred at the
workplace or any location where official business is conducted. The
department head shall notify the appropriate federal or state agency with
which it has a contract or grant within ten days after receiving notice from
the employee or otherwise actual notice of such conviction. Any employee who
fails to report such a conviction will be subject to immediate termination.
Within 30 days of such notification, or upon notification of any positive
drug test administered by the town pursuant to this policy, the department
head shall take appropriate disciplinary action against such an employee, up
to and including termination. The department head may also refer the employee
to the employee assistance program for referral and treatment.



      All department heads and supervisors shall be provided training
about the alcohol and drug-free workplace policy and shall be responsible for
implementation, enforcement and monitoring of the policy to ensure it is
administered consistently, fairly and within appropriate legal parameters.



      Employees will be provided with periodic alcohol and drug-free
workplace training. The training will include information regarding:



      1.   The dangers of alcohol and drug abuse in the workplace;



      2.   The town’s alcohol and drug-free workplace policy;



      3.   The employee assistance program and other available
treatment programs; and



      4.   Penalties that may be imposed upon employees for alcohol
and/or other drug abuse violations occurring at the workplace or any location
where official business is conducted.



      The town will enforce this policy through management supervision
and alcohol and/or other drug testing, which may include the following
components.



      1.   Reasonable suspicion testing. Any employee may undergo
alcohol and/or other drug testing based on a for-cause determination by
management. Any employee involved in a significant incident in which the
health or safety of himself or herself or other individuals is involved, or
in which extensive property damage has occurred, will undergo alcohol and/or
other drug testing as deemed appropriate by his or her supervisor and/or
department head.



      2.   Follow-up testing. Any employee referred to a counseling
or rehabilitation program as a result of that employee’s on-the-job
substance abuse or a positive drug test result may be subject to follow-up
testing according to specifications and provisions of any established policy.



      Confidentiality about alcohol and/or other drug test results will
be maintained to the extent provided by law, and employees shall have the
opportunity to refute results of any alcohol and/or other drug tests. All
costs associated with refuting results of any alcohol or other tests shall be
paid by the employee. The Town Manager shall have the responsibility for
overseeing the administration of this policy and the drug testing under this
section. The Town Manager shall determine the conditions pursuant to which an
employee may be referred to counseling and/or rehabilitation following a
positive drug test result. All costs associated with a positive drug test
result, including the cost of counseling, rehabilitation and follow-up
testing, shall be borne by the employee as a condition of maintaining
employment with the town.



      Outside contractors or vendors who are working on town projects
or property may be required to sign a certificate of drug-free workplace
compliance adopting the terms of this policy as a condition of such contract
or employment.



      Copies of this policy shall be distributed to all employees by
each department head, signed and dated by each employee, and deposited in the
employee’s personnel file. Additional copies shall also be available in the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office or workplace of each department.



§ 2  ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING POLICY FOR COMMERCIAL
DRIVER’S LICENSE (CPU EMPLOYEES).



      A.   Alcohol and drug testing.



      The Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) is hereby adopted inasmuch as it
applies to the town (hereinafter referred to as “the employer”), its
officers and employees. Two copies of the Act are on file for inspection at
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town. The provisions of the Act
applicable to the town became effective 1-1-1996.



      Under 49 C.F.R. § 382.103 of the Act, the rules set forth here
for alcohol misuse and controlled substance requirements apply to all drivers
who are required by nature of his or her job description to have a CDL under
federal law while performing safety-sensitive functions.



      For purposes of this policy, each employee’s respective
department head and/or the town’s designated representative will serve as
the person designated to answer the employee’s question about this policy.



      Employees are required to be in compliance with this policy for
the entire workday, or any time he or she reports for emergency or
after-hours duty or performing (a safety-sensitive function) as defined in 49
C.F.R. § 382.107.



      A safety-sensitive function means any of those on-duty functions
set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 382.107 and any listed below:



         1.   All time at a carrier or shipper plant, terminal,
facility or other property waiting to be dispatched, unless relieved of duty
by the employer;



         2.   All time inspecting equipment as required by the
federal motor carrier safety regulations, or otherwise inspecting, servicing
or conditioning any commercial vehicle at anytime;



         3.   Any time spent at the driving controls of a
commercial motor vehicle in operation;



         4.   Any time, other than sleeper berth time, spent on
or in a commercial vehicle;



         5.   All time loading or unloading a commercial motor
vehicle, supervising or assisting in the loading or unloading, attending a
vehicle being loaded or unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate the
vehicle, or in giving or receiving receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded;



         6.   All time spent performing the driver requirements
associated with an accident; and



         7.   All time repairing, obtaining assistance, or
remaining in attendance upon a disabled vehicle.



      B.   Prohibitions.



      Alcohol use is prohibited within four hours of performing a
safety-sensitive function and while performing safety-sensitive functions (49
C.F.R. §§ 382.205 and 382.207).



      No driver required to have a CDL shall report for duty or remain
on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive functions while using
alcohol.



      No driver required to have a CDL shall report for duty or remain
on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive functions while having
a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.02 or greater.



      A driver with a BAC of 0.02 or greater, but less than 0.04 BAC,
may not perform safety-sensitive functions until 24 hours from the time the
test has elapsed (49 C.F.R. § 382.505).



      A driver with a BAC of 0.04 or greater has failed the alcohol
test and is prohibited from performing safety-sensitive functions until the
requirements of 49 C.F.R. § 382.501 and 49 C.F.R. § 382.503 are satisfied.



      No driver shall refuse to submit to an alcohol test required
under 49 C.F.R. part 382.



      No driver required to take a post-accident test, as required by
federal or state law or regulation, shall use alcohol for eight hours
following the accident, or until he or she undergoes the post-accident test,
whichever occurs first.



      No driver required to have a CDL shall report for duty or remain
on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive functions when the
driver uses or tests positive for any controlled substance, except when the
use is pursuant to instructions of a physician who has advised the driver in
writing that the substance does not adversely affect the driver’s ability
to safely operate a vehicle. The employer may require a driver to inform the
department head of any therapeutic drug use.



      C.   Testing. The employer shall provide for, and the
employees performing safety-sensitive functions requiring a CDL shall submit
to, the following required tests in the manner prescribed by law. Testing
will be performed by an independent third party agency in accordance with all
Department of Transportation rules, procedures and standards as stated in the
Federal Register. In all cases, a designated independent agency, acting on
behalf of the employer, will document all required paperwork for the employer
as detailed in the Act.



         1.   Post-accident testing.



         Drug and alcohol tests are required after any fatality,
regardless of whether the driver receives a citation.



         Drug and alcohol tests are required after any other
recordable accident, if the driver receives a citation.



         Other recordable accidents are:



            a.   Accidents where one or more persons involved
in the accident are treated away from the scene, immediately thereafter, for
injuries sustained in the accident; or



            b.   Accidents where one or more of the vehicles
is towed from the scene due to disabling damage.



         Alcohol testing must be conducted within two hours of the
accident.



            a.   If not administered within two hours, the
employer must document the reason for the delay.



            b.   If not administered within eight hours, the
employer must cease attempts to test and document why the test was not
administered.



         Controlled substance testing must be conducted within 32
hours. If the test is not administered within 32 hours, the employer must
cease attempts to test and document why the test was not performed.



         After an accident requiring the driver to submit to an
alcohol and drug test, the driver may not consume alcohol for eight hours or
until the driver is tested for alcohol, whichever occurs first.



         Exception: the employer may not have to require that a
driver submit to a post-accident alcohol or drug test if:



            a.   An alcohol or drug test was conducted at the
request of federal, state or local authorities having independent authority
to require the test;



            b.   The alcohol test was either a blood or breath
test;



            c.   The drug test was a urine test;



            d.   The test complies with applicable federal,
state or local requirements; and



            e.   The employer obtains the results.



         If the federal, state or local authorities only conducted
one of the two required tests (with the alcohol test or the drug test), the
employer still must ensure the other test is conducted.



         2.   Random testing.



         Alcohol testing must test at an annual rate of 25% of the
average number of driver positions.



         Controlled substance testing must test at an annual rate of
50% of the average number of driver positions.



         The employer must ensure that random selection is conducted
by a scientifically valid method. Each driver must have an equal chance of
being selected.



         A driver selected to be tested returns to the pool for the
next selection. Therefore, in the course of the year some drivers may be
selected more than once, while others may not be selected at all.



         Random selections conducted pursuant to this section shall
be unannounced.



         Random selections must be reasonably spread out through the
year. Therefore, the required number of tests will be conducted on a
quarterly basis.



         Once notified of being selected, the driver must proceed
immediately to the testing site to be tested.



         A driver may be tested for alcohol only while performing
safety-sensitive functions, or just before or just after performing
safety-sensitive functions. If the driver selected for an alcohol test is not
performing safety-sensitive functions, the employer keeps the driver’s
selection confidential until the driver is in a position to be tested.



         3.   Reasonable suspicion testing.



         A driver must be removed from performing safety-sensitive
functions and shall be required to submit to an alcohol or controlled
substances test if there is reasonable suspicion to believe the driver is
under the influence of drugs or alcohol.



         The behavior must be observed by a supervisor or department
head in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 382.603.



         Each person designated to determine reasonable suspicion
must receive:



            a.   A minimum of 60 minutes of training on
alcohol abuse; and



            b.   A minimum of 60 minutes of training on drug
abuse.



         Covering the physical, behavioral, speech and performance
indicators of probable alcohol and drug abuse. If the company official
received training meeting these requirements prior to the effective date of
the rule, the official does not have to be retrained.



         Alcohol testing:



         A driver exhibiting the symptoms of alcohol use may not
perform safety-related functions until an alcohol test is administered with a
BAC result below 0.02, or 24 hours have elapsed.



         The observation must be based on specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations concerning the appearance, behavior, speech or body
odor of the driver.



         The observation must be made during, just before or just
after performing safety-sensitive functions.



         The test must be conducted as soon as possible.



            a.   If not conducted within two hours, the
employer must document the reason for the delay.



            b.   If not conducted within eight hours, the
employer must cease attempts to test the driver and document why the test was
not conducted.



         Drug testing:



         The employer shall require that a driver exhibiting the
symptoms of drug abuse submit to a drug test.



         The reasonable suspicion must be based on specific,
contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning the appearance,
behavior, speech or body odor of the driver. The observations may also
include the chronic and withdrawal effects of controlled substance abuse.



         It is not necessary that the behavior giving rise to the
reasonable suspicion occur just before, during or after performing
safety-sensitive functions.



         Observations giving rise to reasonable suspicion of drug
use must be documented in writing by the observing official within 24 hours
of the observation, or before the return of the results, whichever is earlier.



         4.   Return-to-duty testing.



         Before a driver who either failed an alcohol or drug test
or refused to be tested may return to performing safety-sensitive functions,
the driver must pass a return-to-duty alcohol test if the conduct involved
alcohol or a drug test if the conduct involved drugs.



         If a return-to-duty alcohol test is required, the results
must be less than 0.02 BAC.



         5.   Follow-up testing.



         If the substance abuse professional determines the driver
requires assistance in resolving drug and/or alcohol problems, then the
driver must submit to unannounced follow-up alcohol and/or drug testing after
returning to performing safety-sensitive functions (49 C.F.R. § 382.311(a)).



         The frequency of follow-up testing is determined by the
substance abuse professional, but in no event shall be less than six times in
a 12-month period. Follow-up testing may not proceed for longer than 60
months (49 C.F.R. § 382.605(c)(2)(ii)).



         Follow-up alcohol testing must be conducted just before,
during or just after performing safety-sensitive functions (49 C.F.R. §
382.311(b)).



         The results of the testing shall be completed and retained
by the employer, or its designated agent performing the tests, as required by
49 C.F.R. § 382.403 and any future amendments.



         Records related to the education and training of breath
alcohol technicians, screening technicians, supervisors and drivers shall be
maintained by the employer while the individual performs the functions which
require the training and for two years after ceasing to perform those
functions, as required by 49 C.F.R. § 382.401(b)(4).



         Five-year retention requirement (49 C.F.R. §
382.401(b)(1)).



         • Alcohol test results greater than 0.02 BAC;



         • Verified positive controlled substance test results;



         • Documentation of refusals to test;



         • Calibration documents;



         • Driver evaluations and referrals; and



         • Records relating to the administration of alcohol and
controlled substance testing programs.



         Two-year retention requirement (49 C.F.R. § 382.401(b)(2)).



         • Records relating to alcohol and controlled substances
collection processes.



         One-year retention requirement (49 C.F.R. § 382.401(c)).



         • Records of negative and cancelled drug tests; and



         • Records of alcohol test with result below 0.02 BAC.



         The test results are confidential except as release is
provided for to the employee, medical review personnel or subsequent
employers.



         The employer shall designate supervisors and department
heads to receive training on alcohol misuse and controlled substance use to
comply with state and federal regulations.



         The employer shall make literature concerning the policy
established by this policy available to all employees.



         6.   Required background checks and release of
information.



         The employer shall make a good faith effort to obtain, from
an applicant’s previous employer(s), pursuant to the applicant’s consent,
information regarding the applicant’s previous alcohol and drug tests and
refusals to be tested within the preceding two years.



         The information should be obtained prior to employment, but
in any event not later than 14 days after the driver begins safety-sensitive
functions. After 14 days, the employer may not permit a driver to continue to
perform safety-sensitive functions until the information is obtained.



         The employer must provide a copy of the driver’s signed
written release to the previous employer(s) as provided in 49 C.F.R. §
382.413.



         The employer may not use a driver to perform
safety-sensitive functions if the required background check reveals the
driver tested positive for alcohol or drugs and was not evaluated by a
substance abuse professional.



         The employer, when presented with the driver’s signed
written consent authorizing release of alcohol and drug tests, must release
the information to a requesting employer (49 C.F.R. § 382.405(f)).



         7.   Testing procedures. The employer will use an
independent agency to perform all aspects of the testing and record-keeping
procedures required by the Act.



         8.   Refusal to submit to an alcohol or drug test (49
C.F.R. § 382.107).



         Refusal to submit to an alcohol or controlled substance
test means that a driver:



            a.   Fails to provide adequate breath for testing
without a valid medical explanation after he or she has received notice of
the requirement for breath testing in accordance with the provisions of this
part;



            b.   Fails to provide adequate urine for
controlled substance testing without valid medical explanation after he or
she has received notice of the requirement for urine testing in accordance
with the provisions of this part; or



            c.   Engages in conduct that clearly obstructs the
testing process.



         9.   Consequences for drivers engaging in substance use
- related conduct.



         No driver shall perform safety-sensitive functions,
including driving a commercial motor vehicle, if the driver has engaged in
conduct prohibited by 49 C.F.R. §§ 382.201 through 382.215. Additionally,
no driver who has engaged in conduct prohibited by 49 C.F.R. §§ 382.201
through 215 shall be allowed to perform safety-sensitive functions, including
driving a commercial motor vehicle, unless the driver has met the
requirements of 49 C.F.R. § 382.605.



         No driver tested pursuant to 49 C.F.R. §§ 382.301 through
382.311, who is found to have an alcohol concentration of 0.02 BAC or
greater, but less than 0.04 BAC, shall perform or continue to perform
safety-sensitive functions, including driving a commercial motor vehicle,
until the start of the driver’s next regularly scheduled duty period, but
not less than 24 hours following administration of the test.



         Regardless of the provisions of the preceding, any driver
who is found to have engaged in conduct prohibited by 49 C.F.R. §§ 382.201
through 382.215 may be disciplined and/or terminated at the sole discretion
of the appropriate department head or the appropriate governing board having
jurisdiction over the driver.



         Refusal to take the required test will be treated the same
as a violation of 49 C.F.R. §§ 382.201 through 382.215.



         10.   Responsibility for costs. The cost of referral,
evaluation and/or treatment required of a driver pursuant to 49 C.F.R. §
382.605 shall be the sole responsibility of the driver.



§ 3.  EEO POLICY STATEMENT.



   A.   Anti-discrimination. The town is committed to a policy of equal
employment opportunity for all applicants and employees. Under this policy,
applicants and employees shall be treated fairly and equally and employment
decisions shall comply with all applicable state and federal employment
discrimination laws. In this regard, all employment decisions will be made
without regard to race, color, gender, sex, religion, national origin, age,
disability, veteran’s status or (in the case of U.S. citizens or intending
citizens) citizenship. In addition, the town will not tolerate any
discrimination by anyone, including, but not limited to, recruiting, hiring,
compensation, training, promotion, termination and all other terms and
conditions of employment. Any employee who believes that he or she has
witnessed or been subjected to discrimination has a duty to immediately
report the incident to the town in accordance with this policy.



   B.   Anti-harassment. No employee of the town shall be subjected to
harassment because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. It
is a violation of the town policy for any employee to harass another
employee, citizen or vendor by conduct or by communication of a racial or
sexual nature. Alleged harassment should be reported immediately as set forth
hereafter.



   C.   Discriminatory conduct. Discriminatory conduct is generally
defined as conduct which shows disrespect, hostility or aversion to an
employee because of an employee’s race, color, gender, sex, religion,
national origin, age, disability, veteran’s status or citizenship.
Discriminatory conduct involves verbal, visual or physical conduct relating
to a prohibited factor, which makes an employee feel uncomfortable in the
workplace and which interferes with an employee’s ability to work.



   D.   Sexual harassment/hostile work environment.



      Everyone who works for the town is entitled to a workplace free
from sexual harassment and intimidation. The town is committed to providing a
work environment that is free of any type of discrimination or unlawful
harassment. The town prohibits any form of sexual harassment and will take
corrective action against offenders, including discipline or discharge.



      Definition of SEXUAL HARASSMENT/HOSTILE WORK ENVIRONMENT. Any
request for sexual favors and/or any other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature between employees in the workplace, or job-related contacts
with citizens or persons outside town employment, constitute sexual
harassment and are prohibited. Sexual harassment also includes, but is not
limited to, behavior such as:



         a.   Unwelcome sexual advances;



         b.   Physical or verbal conduct of a sexual nature, or
joking, that is sex-oriented and considered unacceptable by another
individual. Examples of conduct of a sexual nature include: flirtations,
advances or propositions, verbal abuse of a sexual nature, leering, touching,
pinching, assault or coerced sexual acts, or suggestive, insulting; obscene
comments or gestures; written, photo, cartoon or electronic displays in the
workplace of sexually suggestive objects or pictures. This includes
commenting about an individual’s body or appearance where such comments go
beyond mere courtesy, telling “dirty jokes” that are clearly unwanted and
considered offensive by others or any other tasteless sexually-oriented
comments or actions that offend others;



         c.   Any verbal or non-verbal communication expressing
or implying that participation in sexual contact is a condition of
employment, promotion or preferential treatment;



         d.   Printed or electronic display or transmission of
sexually-explicit images, messages and cartoons is not allowed. Other
violations include, but are not limited to, ethnic slurs, racial comments,
jokes or anything that may be construed as harassment or showing disrespect
for others; and/or



         e.   Conduct with sexual implication that has the
purpose or the effect of interfering with work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment is considered sexual
harassment.



      All behavior described above is unacceptable in the workplace
itself and in other work-related settings such as business trips and
business-related social events.



   E.   Reporting discriminatory or harassing conduct.



      Any employee who believes that he or she has either witnessed or
been subjected to discriminatory or harassing conduct shall immediately
report the discriminatory or harassing conduct to the town no later than 30
days after the alleged occurrence. Employees have a duty to report
discriminatory or harassing conduct to the town in order to protect them,
their colleagues and the town.



      In order to ensure that a report of discriminatory or harassing
conduct is properly investigated, an employee who believes that he or she has
witnessed or been subjected to discriminatory or harassing conduct must
report the discriminatory conduct in writing (formal complaint) to his or her
department head. The Town Manager will investigate all formal complaints of
discriminatory or harassing conduct, unless: the complaint clearly appears to
be frivolous; the complaint is filed more than 30 days after the alleged
occurrence and the Town Manager determines that there is no just reason for
the delay; the complaint is currently being investigated by state or federal
authority; or other good reason as determined by the Town Manager. In the
event the employee is not comfortable contacting his or her department head
or the Town Manager, the employee may direct the complaint to the Police
Chief or the Town Attorney. The Town Manger shall issue a written report on
the complaint within 30 days after the complaint is filed. A copy of the
report shall be provided to the complainant.



      Employees who believe they have either witnessed or been
subjected to sexual harassment should report the discriminatory or harassing
conduct in accordance with the town’s sexual harassment policy.



      All reports of discriminatory or harassing conduct shall be
investigated. To the extent feasible, the investigation will be conducted in
a confidential manner in order to protect the rights of all parties involved.
The town will not tolerate any retaliation against an employee who makes a
good faith report of discriminatory or harassing conduct. If the
investigation reveals that the report has merit, corrective action, up to and
including termination will be taken to remedy the situation. However, it is
also important to understand that accusing another individual of
discriminatory or harassing conduct is a serious matter. Consequently, the
town reserves the right to discipline any employee who intentionally makes a
false report of discriminatory or harassing conduct. False reports have the
potential of causing harm to innocent parties and waste the town’s time and
resources.



   F.   Maintaining a written record of the complaint. The town will
maintain a complete written record of each complaint and how it was
investigated and resolved. Written records shall be maintained by the Town
Manager with copies to the Town Attorney. If disciplinary action was taken, a
record shall be maintained in the offender’s personnel file.



   G.   Prevention. Prevention is the best policy for the elimination
of sexual harassment. Employees shall remain cognizant of sexual harassment
to avoid contributing to conditions that would encourage such activity.
Violations of this policy regarding sexual harassment will result in severe
disciplinary action.



   H.   Employees with disabilities.



      It is the town’s policy not to discriminate against qualified
individuals with disabilities in regard to application procedures, hiring,
advancement, discharge, compensation, training or other terms, conditions and
privileges of employment. Additionally, the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) requires employers to reasonably accommodate qualified individuals with
disabilities. It is the policy of the company to comply with all federal,
state and local laws concerning the employment of persons with disabilities.
The town will reasonably accommodate qualified individuals with a disability
so that they can perform the essential functions of the job in question.



      Individuals who can be reasonably accommodated for the job in
question, without undue hardship, will be given the same consideration for
that position as any other employee or applicant.



      All employees are required to comply with safety standards.
Applicants who pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals in the workplace, which threat cannot be eliminated by reasonable
accommodation, will not be hired. Current employees who pose a direct threat
to the health of safety of the other individuals in the workplace will be
placed on appropriate leave until a decision has been made in regard to the
employee’s immediate employment situation. The Town Attorney may be
consulted to implement this policy, including resolution of reasonable
accommodation, safety and undue hardship issues. The town has adopted an ADA
transition plan to facilitate accommodation for employees with disabilities.



§ 4.  PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE IN THE WORKPLACE.



   The town is committed to preventing workplace violence and to
maintaining a safe work environment. Given the increasing violence in society
in general, the town has adopted the following guidelines to deal with
intimidation, harassment or other threats of (or actual) violence that may
occur during business hours or on its premises.



   A.   Scope of policy. All full-time and part-time, active employees
are covered under this policy. Volunteers, such as Police Reserve officers
and volunteer firefighters, are also covered under this policy.



   B.   Procedures.



      All employees, including supervisors and temporary employees,
should be treated with courtesy and respect at all times. Employees are
expected to refrain from fighting, “horseplay” or other conduct that may
be dangerous to others. Firearms, weapons and other dangerous or hazardous
devices or substances are prohibited from the premises of the town without
proper authorization.



      Conduct that threatens, intimidates or coerces another employee,
a customer or a member of the public will not be tolerated. This prohibition
includes all acts of harassment, including harassment that is based on an
individual’s sex, race, age or any characteristic protected by federal,
state or local law.



      All threats of (or actual) violence, both direct and indirect,
should be reported as soon as possible to your immediate supervisor or any
other member of management. This includes threats by employees, as well as
threats by customers, vendors, solicitors or other members of the public.
When reporting a threat of violence, the employee should be as specific and
detailed as possible.



      All suspicious individuals or activities should also be reported
as soon as possible to a supervisor. Do not place yourself in peril. If you
see or hear a commotion or disturbance near your workstation, do not try to
intercede or see what is happening.



      The town will promptly and thoroughly investigate all reports of
threats of (or actual) violence and of suspicious individuals or activities.
The identity of the town individual making a report will be protected as much
as is practical. In order to maintain workplace safety and the integrity of
its investigation, the town may suspend employees, either with or without
pay, pending investigation.



      Anyone determined to be responsible for threats of (or actual)
violence or other conduct that is in violation of these guidelines will be
subject to prompt disciplinary action up to and including termination of
employment.



      The town encourages employees to bring their disputes or
differences with other employees to the attention of their supervisors or
department head before the situation escalates into potential violence. The
town is eager to assist in the resolution of employee disputes and will not
discipline employees for raising such concerns.



§ 5.  PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE.



   Employees not meeting performance expectations will be subject to a
progressive disciplinary approach with the following steps:



      1.   Oral warning;



      2.   Written warning;



      3.   Suspension without pay; and



      4.   Termination of employment.



   Some offenses may warrant skipping over one or more steps, including,
but not limited to, theft, working under the influence of alcohol or illegal
drugs or the possession, distribution, sale or transfer of use of alcohol or
illegal drugs in the workplace, or while operating town-owned vehicles or
equipment, fighting or threatening violence in the workplace, sexual or other
unlawful or unwelcome harassment, possession of dangerous or unauthorized
materials, such as explosives or firearms in the workplace, unauthorized use
of telephones, mail system or other town-owned equipment.



   This section shall not apply to police and firefighters who are
governed by I.C. 36-8-3-4 and 36-8-3-4.1.



§ 6.  LIMITATION ON THE POSSESSION OF FIREARMS.



   The town prohibits the control, possession, transfer, sale or use of
firearms on its premises by employees of the town. This prohibition shall not
apply to those employees required to possess firearms as part of their
employment with the town.



   However, effective on 7-1-2010, I.C. 34-28-7 allows employees who may
lawfully possess a firearm to bring firearms and ammunition onto town
property as long as the firearm and ammunition are locked in a glove box or
trunk or stored out of plain sight in the employee’s personal locked
vehicle. This exception does not apply to employees driving or riding in
town-owned vehicles where firearms and ammunition are prohibited. Employees
of a penal facility or other town facilities listed in I.C. 34-28-7-2(a)(2)
do not have these rights.



§ 7.  INSPECTIONS ON TOWN PREMISES.



   The town, likewise, wishes to discourage theft or unauthorized
possession of the property of employees, the town, visitors and customers. To
facilitate enforcement of this policy the town, or its representative, may
inspect not only desks and lockers but also persons entering and/or leaving
the premises and any packages or other belongings. Any employee who wishes to
avoid inspection of any articles or materials should not bring such items
onto town premises.



§ 8.  COMPUTER, INTERNET AND SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY.



   The town’s policy regarding access and disclosure of computer files
and electronic mail messages created, sent or received by town employees
using the town’s computers and any personal electronic devices provided to
the employee by the town (hereafter “the town’s computer system”) and
the use of the Internet on the town’s computer system is set forth below.



   A.   The town’s computer files and documents and access to the
internet on the town’s computer system are provided to assist in the
conduct of business within the town. All computer documents composed, sent or
received on the town’s computer system are and remain the property of the
town. Computer documents are not the private property of any employee.
Employees are reminded that computer files and documents may also constitute
public records and as such may be subject to disclosure and retention
requirements under Indiana Code.



   B.   An electronic mail “account” is assigned to each
employee-user. Any communication sent from that account is the responsibility
of the employee-user assigned to the account. Employee-users are prohibited
from allowing other individuals to send electronic mail from their account
and may not use another account to send e-mail communications for their own
purposes. You should not expect that electronic mail communications made
through the town system are confidential. Although you will be given a
username and password this does not insulate transmission from employer
review. Use of e-mail is a privilege and may be revoked at any time. Use of
e-mail constitutes acceptance of this policy. Employee-users are expected to
be knowledgeable of these and all policies of the town.



   C.   The town’s computer system and the Internet shall not be used
to create, send (transmit) or receive (download) any offensive, disruptive or
discriminatory messages. Disciplinary action will be left to the discretion
of department head or governing board. Among those that are considered
offensive are any messages that contain sexual implications, racial slurs,
gender-specific comments or any other comment that offensively addresses
someone’s age, sexual orientation, religion, national origin or disability.



   D.   The town’s computer system and the Internet shall not be used
to send (transmit), or receive (download) copyrighted materials, trade
secrets, proprietary financial information or similar materials without prior
authorization.



      The town reserves the right to review, audit, intercept, access
and disclose all messages or materials created, received or sent over the
town’s computer system or the Internet for any purpose. The contents of the
Town’s computer system or the Internet use, properly obtained for
legitimate business purposes, may be disclosed within the town without the
permission of the employee.



      The confidentiality of any computer file or document should not
be assumed. Even when a computer file or document is erased, it is still
possible to retrieve and read that computer file or document. All work
related passwords, except those maintained by the town’s appointed and
elected officials, must be disclosed to department heads.



   E.   Notwithstanding the town’s right to retrieve and read any
computer files or documents, such files and documents should be treated as
confidential by other employees and accessed only by the intended recipient.
Employees should not attempt to gain access to another employee’s computer
file or documents without the latter’s permission. Employees are not
authorized to retrieve or read any computer files or documents that are not
sent to them. Any exception to this policy must receive prior approval of the
department head.



   F.   At any time and without prior notice, the town reserves the
right to examine email, personal file directories and other information
stored on the town computer system, including any personal electronic devices
issued to the employee by the town. This examination helps to ensure
compliance with internal policies, supports the performance of internal
investigations and assists with the management of the town’s information
systems. As such, the Town Manager, a department head, or any member of
management may monitor the content of electronic mail. Use of the electronic
mail system constitutes acceptance of such monitoring.



      This policy should be read and interpreted in conjunction with
all other town policies including, but not limited to, policies prohibiting
harassment, discrimination, offensive conduct or inappropriate behavior.
Employee-users are prohibited from using the town’s computer system for any
unethical purposes, including but not limited to pornography, violence,
gambling, racism, harassment or any illegal activity. Employee-users are
forbidden from using profanity or vulgarity when posting electronic mail.



   G.   Any personal on-line activities, such as checking personal
email, surfing retail websites and the like may be done only during an
employee’s authorized break. Employees should use discretion and visit
internet sites which do not violate any other town policies. If an employee
abuses this privilege by using work time to surf the internet for personal
business or at any time visits inappropriate websites such as those with
graphic content or those sexual in nature, it will result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination.



   H.   SOCIAL MEDIA is a term commonly given to websites and online
tools that allow users to interact with each other in some way by sharing
information, opinions, knowledge and interests. As the name implies, social
media involves the building of communities or networks, encouraging
participation and engagement.



      The Town Manager will identify staff authorized to post
“official” messages and updates on behalf of the town on its social media
sites. All authorized staff will coordinate to ensure accuracy and
consistency in message delivery.



      Unless authorized, town employees shall not view or post messages
to social media during working hours or on town-owned computers or personal
electronic devices. The town neither encourages nor discourages employees’
personal participation (off duty and using personal/non-town equipment) in
social media including personal websites, wikis, blogs and online
communities. The town offers these guidelines and expectations to assist
employees in choosing to participate appropriately and effectively.



      1.   While social networking, blogs, wikis and other forms of
online discourse are individual interactions, employees should remember that,
to our citizens, employees are always representatives of the town. In
addition, employees should be aware that the town’s workplace policies
prohibiting sexual harassment and other misconduct apply equally to
employees’ social media activities conducted outside of their working hours.



      2.   Managers and supervisors should avoid social media
relationships with their subordinate employees except in cases where the
relationship related to professional networking or another legitimate
business purpose.



      3.   Know the legal risks of participating in social media. An
individual can be held personally, legally and financially responsible for
the things he or she says and does. Use your best judgment when posting or
sharing posts of social media.



      4.   When an off-duty employee posts a comment about the town,
or any issue involving the town, the employees should identify himself or
herself by name and, when relevant, role with the town. Employees should
include disclaimers that makes clear that postings are their own and don’t
necessarily represent the position of the town or any of its boards,
commissions, or departments such as “the views expressed are mine alone and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Town of Chesterton.”



      5.   In the course of their employment with the town,
employees occasionally receive information concerning town residents or other
individuals or entities doing business with the town that may be considered
private or confidential. Employees are expected to maintain the
confidentiality of all such information and do not disclose such information
on social media sites or otherwise.



      6.   There is only one official website for the town. Direct
people to www.chestertonin.org for information about town services, programs
and the like. Employees are prohibited from creating social media sites on
behalf of the town or social media sites that are designed to appear as if
they are affiliated with the town without express authorization from the Town
Manager. The Town Manager has identified individuals who are responsible for
posting information on the town’s social media sites.



      7.   Questions regarding the appropriateness of a posting on
either social media sites or the town’s official website may be directed to
the town’s website administrator at 926-1098. Employees are encouraged to
report suspected violations of this policy to their department heads or to
the Town Manager. If any employee feels that he or she is being harassed,
discriminated against or otherwise retaliated against for reporting a
violation of this policy, he or she should immediately report this to his or
her supervisor or to the Town Manager.



§ 9.  CELL PHONES.



   In some instances, cell phones are provided to employees who have a
need for them as a part of their employment with the town. Whether or not the
town issues a cell phone to an employee, situations exist in the workplace
requiring the prohibition or limitation on cell phone use.



   For safety reasons, the town prohibits the use of cell phones,
including text messaging, during the following work-related activities:



      • While operating a moving vehicle (unless a hands free device
is used);



      • While operating or being in close proximity to heavy,
dangerous, moving machinery; and



      • Where use of a cell phone may place yourself or your
coworkers at risk of injury.



   Employees should limit the personal use of cell phones during working
hours. Excessive and/or inappropriate use of cell phones, including text
messaging and/or the sending or receipt of email, may result in disciplinary
action. Except in cases of emergencies or when prior approval by the
employee’s department head, cell phones should not be used in the following
situations:



      • During work-related meetings;



      • During work-related conference calls;



      • During employer training or demonstrations;



      • During times when others are speaking or using the telephone
for work-related purposes; and



      • While performing any customer service duty.



   Employees are expected to be courteous when using cell phones and to
speak quietly in an area away from other coworkers and other persons
interacting within the workplace. Employees should mute or lower the volume
of their cell phone rings and should not leave their cell phones unattended
unless the ring is muted and the buzzer is deactivated.



   Cell phones may contain email addresses, phone numbers or other work or
private information about other employees or other workplace participants,
public records and sensitive and/or confidential workplace information. For
these reasons, employees must immediately report any cell phone issued by the
town that is missing or stolen to their department head or the Town Manager.



   Questions or concerns about this policy should be directed to the
employee’s department head or to the Town Manager.



§ 10.  TOWN CREDIT CARD POLICY.



   A.   Eligibility. To be eligible for a town credit card, personnel
must be employed by the town and be a department head.



   B.   Restrictions. Town credit cards may not be used for cash
advances of any kind, personal use of any kind, purchase of alcoholic
beverages or any expense not otherwise allowed by law or under town policy.



   C.   Limits. The credit limit on each card issued to the department
heads shall not exceed $2,500 unless a higher limit is approved by the Town
Manager.



   D.   Reporting charges. Original receipts are always considered
acceptable documentation. Online purchases also require transactional
documentation. Charge documentation shall include the following:



      1.   Vendor name;



      2.   Detail of items or services charged; must include an
itemized receipt;



      3.   Total amount of charge including applicable tax and
shipping charges;



      4.   Explanation outlining the purpose of the charge(s) and
what station/apparatus/ equipment/person it was for; and



      5.   Signature of the card holder and/or the person
responsible for the charge.



   Documentation shall be provided for each charge. In the rare event that
original documentation is lost or irretrievable, the card holder shall
provide a detailed letter of explanation of the charge(s) to include all
required information as listed above. Charges for meals and light
refreshments must also include a detailed list of those persons whose meals
were charged.



   E.   Payment of charges. Authorized charges to the town’s credit
card account shall be paid in full each month through the claims process.
Payment shall be processed in a timely manner to avoid late penalties and
finance charges. Disallowed charges shall be paid by the cardholder directly
to the credit card company, or when not possible, directly to the town by
check, or salary deduction. The cardholder is responsible for any late fees.
It is the cardholder’s responsibility to ensure monthly charges match
receipts. It is recommended that cardholders create an expense log for
tracking monthly purchases. See unauthorized use below for further
information relating to disallowed charges.



   F.   Card renewal. Cards that are due to expire will receive a
replacement in advance. Old cards will be destroyed at the time the
replacement card is exchanged for the expiring card.



   G.   Lost or stolen cards. Personnel shall notify the issuing bank
and the Town Manager immediately in the event a card is lost or stolen.
Contact information for the issuing financial institution will be made
available to personnel holding a town credit card.



   H.   Account cancellation.



      The town reserves the right to change credit card companies,
terms of use or to cancel a cardholder’s account at any time. Cardholders
will be promptly notified in writing (including email). Upon termination of
employment, the cardholder’s account will be cancelled immediately.



      Cancelled credit cards must be returned to the Town Manager for
destruction within five business days of the employee’s termination.



   I.   Unauthorized use. Any charge against the town’s credit card
account not allowed following the monthly account audit (usually at statement
date or time of payment processing) shall be paid by the cardholder by check,
or salary deduction. Payment shall be received within five business days or
the next payroll processing date when salary deduction is required. Finance
charges resulting from a cardholder’s failure to submit all necessary
receipts and supporting documents within the time allowed may be considered
disallowed charges and as such will be charged to the cardholder. If, for any
reason, disallowed charges are not repaid before the charge card billing is
due and payable, the town shall have a prior lien against and a right to
withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable to the cardholder up
to an amount of the disallowed charges and interest at the same rate as
charged by the issuing credit card company. The town shall have unlimited
authority to revoke use of any charge card issued for failure to repay a
disallowed charge or failure to adhere to the town’s credit card policies
and procedures. The responsible cardholder may be subject to disciplinary
action.



   J.   Credit card security. It is the credit cardholder’s
responsibility to safeguard the credit card and card account number at all
times. Credit card/s must be kept secure at all times. Cardholders must not
allow anyone else to use their assigned card or card number. Cardholders are
not to post account numbers where they can easily be seen by others.



§ 11.  LODGING AND MEAL POLICY WHILE TRAVELING ON TOWN BUSINESS.



   All travel expenses will be paid by the town (cost of room, room tax,
parking, internet connection fees) with the exception of the following:



      1.   Any entertainment expenses (these include, but are not
limited to, valet service, laundry service and movie rental);



      2.   Telephone calls other than business calls for the town,
may not to exceed $5; and



      3.   Alcoholic beverages.



   Meal expenses, including tips, may not exceed $75 per day. All receipts
must be itemized, including tip, to meet the state’s Board of Accounts’
requirements.



   Expenses not put on the authorized individual credit card must follow
the above guidelines in addition to the following for reimbursement.



      1.   Automobile mileage shall be reimbursed at the prevailing
federal reimbursement rate. However, transportation by personal vehicles may
be used only in those instances approved by the department head.



      2.   An accurate record of odometer readings at the beginning
and at the end of any claimed trip shall be maintained and submitted with the
claim.



      3.   Each employee shall have in force sufficient liability
insurance, as per the state’s Financial Responsibility Act, on personal
vehicles used for town business and shall provide certification of said
insurance coverage to the department head and/or Clerk-Treasurer prior to use
of said vehicle for town business.



§ 12.  POLICY REGARDING POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



   Although town employees are encouraged to support the governments in
our political system in an appropriate fashion, there are limits on employee
political activity. Town employees may join civic, partisan or political
organizations, may attend political meetings and advocate the principles or
policies of civic or political organizations in accordance with the
Constitution and laws of the state and nation.



No town employee shall be required to:



      1.   Contribute any money or anything of value to any
candidate for nomination or election to any office;



      2.   Contribute any money or anything of value to any campaign
or political committee; or



      3.   Take part in any political campaign.



   Prohibited activities:



      1.   Engaging in any type of political activities as set forth
herein, during normal working hours or while pursuing regular duties in the
course of employment. Town employees may not take part in any political
activity while in uniform;



      2.   Receiving expenses, gifts, remuneration of any type or
monetary reward in exchange for political activities; and



      3.   Any Town employee violating this section shall be guilty
of improper conduct and shall be subject to corrective action, up to and
including discharge.



§ 13.  TAKE HOME VEHICLE POLICY; NON-POLICE.



   Town employees with “take home” use of town vehicles shall maintain
a valid Indiana driver’s license at all times. This may be in the form of
any operator’s license, chauffeur’s license, CDL or other appropriate
license as established by state law. The Chief of Police shall verify the
validity of this license yearly. Employees who operate town vehicles are
required to notify their department head in the event that their driver’s
license is suspended or revoked.



   Employees using their assigned vehicle while off duty shall not be
permitted use of the vehicle outside the limits of Porter, Lake and LaPorte
Counties, Indiana, unless they have prior consent from the governing board,
department head, Town Manager or the Town Council.



   While on duty, the use of the town vehicle shall be restricted to the
limits of Chesterton, unless official duties require travel outside the town,
such as attending a meeting or seminar. This is not meant to prevent an
employee, who lives outside the town limits, from going home for lunch.



   The vehicle assigned to the employee shall be driven by that employee
only, unless another employee of his or her department needs to use that
vehicle for town business.



   No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed while operating the town
vehicle. Additionally, no alcoholic beverage shall be consumed prior to
operating the town vehicle so as to cause the operator to have any detectable
blood alcohol level in his or her system.



   Each employee is responsible for his or her vehicle, and shall schedule
properly needed maintenance and upkeep with personnel designated to do so by
his or her department. All employees shall keep their assigned vehicle washed
and clean inside and out.



   All employees, except for fire and police, shall maintain a mileage
sheet, which will have noted the date, starting and ending mileage, total
miles traveled and whether the mileage was personal or business. This mileage
sheet shall be submitted with payroll to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



§ 14.  TAKE HOME VEHICLE POLICY; POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Police Department vehicle use is governed as set forth in the
town’s Police Department Policies and Procedures.



   The Internal Revenue Code (IRC) requires the taxable value for the use
of town-provided vehicles be reported as additional compensation to
employees. The town and employee must timely report personal use as a wage.
Such reports are processed by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



§ 15.  USE OF EQUIPMENT AND VEHICLES.



   Town equipment and vehicles essential in accomplishing job duties are
expensive and may be difficult to replace. When using town property,
including telephones, employees are expected to exercise care, perform
required maintenance and follow all operating instructions, safety standards
and guidelines.



   Employees should promptly notify the department head if any equipment,
machines, tools or vehicles appear to be damaged, defective or in need of
repair. Prompt reporting could prevent deterioration of equipment and
possible injury to employees or others. The department head can answer any
questions about an employee’s responsibility for maintenance and care of
equipment or vehicles used on the job. Employees operating town vehicles
shall maintain the ability to legally operate assigned vehicles.



   Improper, careless, negligent, destructive or unsafe use or operation
of equipment or vehicles, as well as excessive or avoidable traffic and
parking violation, may result in disciplinary action, including discharge.



   Employees who operate a town vehicle or operate a personal vehicle for
town business are required to keep a copy of their valid driver’s license,
and proof of insurance and insurance liability for personal vehicle, on file
with the Clerk-Treasurer.



§ 16.  PERSONAL USE OF TOWN PROPERTY AND FACILITIES.



   To minimize unnecessary expenses, prevent the loss of valuable work
time, personal use of town facilities, vehicles and equipment is prohibited,
unless expressly authorized by the Town Council. This policy applies to all
employees and restricts the personal use of organization facilities,
including bulletin boards, vehicles and equipment, computers and fax machines.



§ 17.  APPEARANCE OF WORK AREAS.



   The town expects the work areas of all employees to be well organized,
clean and attractive. These qualities promote health, productivity, safety
and customer respect. This policy applies to all employees.



§ 18.  LACTATION SUPPORT.



   The town shall provide for reasonable paid breaks for employees to
express breast milk for their infant child. The break time, must, if
possible, run concurrently with any break time already provided to employees.
The town is not required to provide break time under this section if
providing break time would unduly disrupt the operations of the town.



   The town shall make reasonable efforts to provide a room or other
location, other than a toilet stall, in close proximity to the work area,
where employees can express their breast milk in privacy during any period
away from their assigned duties.



   The town shall make reasonable efforts to provide a refrigerator or
other cold storage space for storing breast milk; or allow employees to store
their breast milk in their own portable storage device until the end of their
workday.



   Except in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith,
the town is not liable for any harm caused by or arising from the expressing
of employees’ breast milk or the storage of expressed milk occurring on the
town’s premise.



§ 19.  ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY.



   To maintain a safe and productive work environment, the town expects
employees to be reliable and to be punctual in reporting for scheduled work.
Absenteeism and tardiness place a burden on other employees and on the town.
Poor attendance and excessive tardiness are disruptive. Either may lead to
disciplinary action, including termination of employment.



   In the rare instance when an employee cannot avoid being late to work
or is unable to work as scheduled, he or she should notify the appropriate
supervisor at least 30 minutes in advance of the anticipated tardiness or
absence, or as soon as possible in the event of an emergency or unforeseen
circumstances (such as being transported to a hospital for treatment). When
providing notification, the employee is to give the reason and the estimated
length of absence. Failure to notify the supervisor shall subject an employee
to disciplinary actions up to and including termination. This policy applies
to all departments, except for police and fire, which shall be governed by
their own department rules or standard operating procedures.



§ 20.  EMPLOYEE CONDUCT AND WORK RULES.



   Employees are expected to maintain high standards of personal
appearance, conduct, cooperation and efficiency in their work. All employees
should attempt to correct any faults in their performance which are called to
their attention and should also avoid any behavior and actions which conflict
with town rules and regulations. Employee or management conduct that
interferes with the work place or is offensive, dangerous or discredits the
town as an employer cannot be tolerated. Every employee should perform his or
her job duties in accordance with generally accepted standards of conduct
that a reasonable person would be expected to use in a public work place
regardless of whether these standards are expressly set forth in policy.



§ 21.  PERSONAL APPEARANCE.



   Dress, grooming and personal cleanliness standards contribute to the
morale of employees and affect the business image the town presents to
citizens and visitors. During business hours, employees are expected to
present a clean and neat appearance and to dress according to the
requirements of their positions. Employees who appear for work
inappropriately dressed will be sent home and directed to return to work in
proper attire. Under such circumstances, employees will not be compensated
for the time away from work.



§ 22.  COMMISSION OF A FELONY OR UNLAWFUL ACT.



   The town is committed to providing its citizens with qualified staff
who possess good character and standards. This policy provides basic
safeguards in maintaining a safe working environment for employees and
citizens and in fulfilling this commitment.



   Whenever an employee is cited for an infraction while on duty or
arrested for any misdemeanor or felony while on duty, the employee shall
report this matter, in writing, to their department head within 24 hours of
the arrest or citation. Failure to report in accordance with this policy
shall be considered a violation of the personnel policies subject to
disciplinary actions, up to and including termination.



   Citations for moving traffic violations or arrests for misdemeanors or
felonies which occur during an employee’s off-duty hours must be reported
to the department head in writing within five calendar days of receiving the
citation or the arrest.



   An employee who is cited for an infraction or arrested for any
misdemeanor or felony, whether the citation or arrest happened while the
employee was on duty or not, may be suspended without pay pending an
administrative investigation and/or the disposition of any charges filed
against the employee.



   The investigation will be used to determine if the accused employee is
in violation of the personnel policies and to determine if disciplinary
action is warranted, up to and including termination.



   The determination as to whether an employee shall be suspended will be
based upon the nature and circumstances of the alleged offense and the impact
the charges may have on the employee’s ability to adequately perform their
job duties and/or remain in compliance with the town’s personnel policies.



   It is the responsibility of any employee with pending criminal charges
to provide their department head written documentation such as a court record
of the disposition of the charges within five calendar days after receiving
notification. Failure to do so will be considered a violation of this policy
and may subject the employee to discipline, up to and including termination.



   If the employee is on a leave of absence pending administrative
investigation and/or the disposition of any charges, and the employee is not
found to have been in violation of the personnel policies, he or she shall be
returned from suspension.



   Factors to be used in determining appropriate discipline, which may
range from no disciplinary action up to termination of employment, will
include the employee’s assigned duties and responsibilities, the nature of
the offense, sentences imposed, other convictions/infractions, relevant
provisions of state statutes, licensing requirements, risk of recidivism,
reasonable inferences about problems with self-control, propensity for
violence, honesty and damage to the reputation of the employee, the
employee’s department and/or the town of government.



   Any employee found guilty, admitting guilt or pleading no contest or
nolo contendere of/to a felony will be subject to immediate dismissal.



   Unauthorized time away from work shall be subject to the town’s
attendance and wage policies. Time spent under arrest or in jail is not
considered a valid excuse for missing work.



§ 23.  ETHICS.



   Town employees will be held to a high standard when it comes to ethical
conduct in their actions. If there is the potential for a conflict of
interest to exist, the issue should be brought to the department head and
ultimately decided upon by the Town Council, and brought to the attention of
the Town Council for discussion and approval.



§ 24.  NEPOTISM.



   The town has adopted a nepotism policy pursuant to I.C. 36-1-20.2. All
employees and elected officials are expected to abide by the policy.



§ 25.  GIFTS OR GRATUITIES.



   Employees are encouraged to maintain good relations with suppliers and
others with whom the town may have business dealings. However, the practice
of accepting gifts or gratuities may be contrary to the public interest.



   Town employees and officers shall not solicit or receive gifts or
gratuities in any personal or professional capacity from suppliers, those
with business relationship or those who seek to do business with the town,
which could create the impression that the giver was seeking favor or trying
to influence an opinion or a judgment from the employee or official. For the
purpose of this section, GIFTS OR GRATUITIES shall not include any award,
plaque, certificate or other personalized item given in recognition of
positive performance or community service, trade discounts offered to all
town employees, food consumed at a public, professional or community
reception, gifts of nominal value or campaign contributions reported in
compliance with state and federal law.



§ 26.  GHOST EMPLOYMENT.



   The town is committed to providing efficient and lawful services to its
citizens and to maintaining public trust, therefore, ghost employment is a
violation of town policy and of I.C. 35-44.1-1-3. Ghost employment is a Level
6 felony.



   A public servant who knowingly or intentionally hires an employee for a
governmental entity and fails to assign the employee any duties, or assigns
duties not related to the operation of the governmental entity, is committing
ghost employment.



   Additionally, a public servant employed by a governmental entity
knowing that he or she has not been assigned any duties to perform for the
entity and accepts property (compensation) from the entity, or a public
servant who knowingly or intentionally accepts property (compensation) from
the entity for the performance of duties not related to the operation of the
entity, commits ghost employment.



   Examples of violations of this policy include, but are not limited to,
performing work on public property that is not job related, authorizing or
receiving payment for time not worked, and authorizing or receiving payment
for leave time not authorized by town paid leave policies. Violations of this
policy shall result in disciplinary action up to and including termination,
in addition to potential prosecution under I.C. 35-44.1-1-3.



§ 27.  SOLICITATION/DISTRIBUTION.



   This policy is designed to protect the interests of the citizens of the
town by ensuring that only official town business is transacted in work areas
during employees’ work time. Solicitations for gifts or donations may be
made only by department heads or their staff and may only be made for special
programs or functions administered by the department making the solicitation.
No solicitation shall be made by the town for any gifts or donation intended
to benefit a single individual. There shall be no solicitation or
distribution by employees or non-employees any time on town property which
has the effect of distracting an employee from his or her work. This section
does not apply to vendors and/or charity organizations who have received the
approval of the Town Council. Employees violating this policy shall be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.



§ 28.  CONFIDENTIALITY/REQUEST FOR INFORMATION.



   Employees are advised to consult with their department head before
releasing information which is confidential or privileged by law. It is a
violation of state law for a public servant to knowingly or intentionally
disclose information classified as confidential. This includes information
supplied by citizens as well as confidential documents of the town and of
individual employees. Confidential information includes, but is not limited
to, personnel information, medical records, financial data, account and
bookkeeping entries, supplier contracts and invoices, investigative records,
labor relation strategies, litigation and legal records, as well as sensitive
information regarding town services.



   Such information may not be divulged or disclosed to anyone, except the
responsible conduct of job responsibilities, whether or not it has been
specifically identified as “confidential”.



   The town will respond in writing only to those reference check
inquiries that are submitted in writing. Responses to such inquiries will
confirm only dates of employment, wage rates and position(s) held.



   No additional employment information will be released without written
authorization and a release signed by the individual who is the subject of
the inquiry.



   Any employee who improperly uses or discloses confidential information
will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of
employment.



§ 29.  NON-SMOKING POLICY.



   The town recognizes that smoking in the workplace can adversely affect
employees. Accordingly, the town maintains a smoke-free environment for its
employees and visitors to municipal facilities as follows.



   A.   Smoking prohibited in town facilities. Smoking shall be
prohibited in all enclosed facilities owned, leased or operated by the town,
including buildings and vehicles. The town’s Department of Parks and
Recreation shall enact rules concerning non-smoking areas in the town’s
parks. Any violation of the rules adopted by the town’s Department of Parks
and Recreation shall be considered a violation of this policy.



   B.   Smoking prohibited within reasonable distance of town
facilities. Smoking shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this policy, but in no event
closer than 15 feet so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter into
establishments designated smoke-free under this policy through entrances,
windows, ventilations intakes or other means.



   C.   Non-retaliation.



      No town employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate, against any employee or applicant for employment because such
employee or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free environment
afforded by the policy.



      Any employee who discovers a violation of this policy shall
notify his or her department head. Any employee who violates this policy
shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.



§ 30.  OPEN DOOR POLICY.



   The town is committed to making its business a good place for all
employees to work. This goal is achieved by developing and maintaining a
cooperative working relationship among employees based on mutual respect and
understanding. The town believes that the employees’ opinions, thoughts and
feelings are important, and it recognizes the need for procedures that will
allow the employees to bring their questions, suggestions and concerns to its
attention.



   For these reasons, the town endorses an open door policy where
employees are able to discuss any questions, comments or matters of concern
with their supervisor or department head. In order to do this, the following
steps should be taken:



      1.   Organize one’s thoughts on the issue;



      2.   Schedule a meeting with his or her supervisor or
department head; and



      3.   If the issue cannot be resolved with his or her
supervisor or department head, a meeting should be scheduled with the Town
Council or appropriate governing board.



   Remember that while the town may not be able to fully address the
issue, it will make every effort to assist the employee and take his or her
opinions into consideration.



§ 31.  SEVERABILITY.



   The policies and procedures contained in this manual are subject to all
applicable federal and state laws and town rules and regulations, and shall
be interpreted wherever possible so as to comply fully with such laws,
provisions or any judicial interpretations. If an article or section of this
manual shall be held invalid by operation of law or tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, or compliance with or enforcement of any article or section of
this Manual shall be restrained by such tribunal, the remainder of this and
any amendments thereto shall not be affected and shall remain in full force
and effect. The town reserves the right to delete, modify or amend the
policies contained herein or allocate new policies as needed.



§ 32.  INDEMNIFICATION.



   In the event that a department head, or any other town employee becomes
a defendant, either in his or her representative capacity or individually in
any litigation arising out of the administration of this policy, the town
and/or its insurers shall defend the employee of that action and pay any
judgment entered in the action provided by the town, so long as the
department head or town employee has made a good faith effort to comply with
the terms and conditions set out in this manual.



§ 33.  TITLE VI POLICY.



   A.   Policy statement.  To establish a policy of non-discrimination
in the conduct of its business, including its Title VI responsibilities as it
relates to federally funded projects, the town recognizes its
responsibilities to the community in which it operates and to the society it
serves.  It is the town’s policy to utilize its best efforts to assure
that no person shall, on the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any programs funded in whole or in part with federal
funds.  Employees will be expected to follow the Title VI policy and the
guidelines set forth therein.  In addition, town employees should make every
effort to alleviate any barriers to service or public use that would restrict
public access or usage, take prompt and reasonable action to avoid or
minimize discrimination incidences and immediately notify the Title VI
Coordinator, in writing, of any questions, complaints or allegations of
discrimination.



   B.   Complaint procedures.



      The town is expected to take prompt and reasonable actions to
thoroughly investigate concerns or complaints from any individual who
believes they have been subjected to discrimination.  All employees of the
town are expected to implement this policy by immediately reporting
complaints about which they have been made aware to the Town’s Title VI
Coordinator or to their department head.  Complaint forms are available on
the town’s website.



      In order for the complaint to be considered, the complainant must
file the appropriate documentation:



         1.   Within 180 days of the alleged act of
discrimination; or



         2.    Where there has been a continuing course of
alleged discriminatory conduct, on the date in which the alleged conduct was
discontinued.



      Complaints shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the
complainant and/or the complainant’s representative.  Complaints must
contain the following and describe as completely as possible the facts and
circumstances surrounding the alleged discrimination:



         •   Name of the complainant.



         •   Contact information (telephone number, address,
email address).



         •   Basis for the allegation(s) (i.e., race, color,
national origin, gender, age, etc.).



         •   A detailed description of the alleged
discrimination (how, when, where and why they believe they were discriminated
against including the location(s), names(s) and contact information of all
witnesses, if applicable).



         •   Any other information that is deemed significant.



      If the complainant is unable or incapable of providing a written
statement, a verbal complaint may be made to the Town Title VI Coordinator. 
Under these circumstances, the complainant will be interviewed and the Town
Title VI Coordinator will assist the complainant in completing a written
statement.



      Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the complaint, the Title
VI Coordinator will arrange to speak or meet with the complainant to discuss
the complaint and the possible resolutions if applicable.  If a complaint is
deemed incomplete, additional information will be requested.  The
complainant has 60 business days to respond to the request for additional
information.  A complainant’s failure to respond to the request within 60
business days may result in the administrative closure of the complaint.



      If the town does not have sufficient jurisdiction to investigate
the complaint, the Title VI Coordinator will refer the complaint to the
appropriate local, state or federal agency holding such jurisdiction.  The
Title VI Coordinator will notify the complainant or their representative, in
writing, that the complaint is outside the town’s jurisdiction and where
the complaint has been referred for further handling.



      The Title VI Coordinator will conduct a complete and thorough
investigation of complaints inside the town’s jurisdiction and based upon
the information obtained will render a final written response letter to the
complainant or their representative by registered mail or hand delivery
within 60 business days.  The final written response will include a
description of the complaint, a summary of the investigation and the findings
of such, summaries of all individuals interviewed, and if appropriate,
recommendations and resolutions.  All written complaints, investigations and
responses will be retained by the town for at least three years.



      A complainant’s identity shall be kept confidential except to
the extent necessary to complete the investigation.  If it is necessary to
disclose the complainant’s identity to the alleged person who may have
discriminated against the complainant or a third-party, the town must first
obtain the complainant’s written consent.  The town must also obtain the
complainant’s written consent before providing a copy of the complaint to
any other individual(s) involved with the investigation.



      If a complainant is dissatisfied with the final resolution of the
complaint, they have the right to file a complaint with:



   Department of Justice



   Federal Coordination and Compliance Section - NWB



   Civil Rights Division



   U.S. Department of Justice



   950 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.



   Washington, D.C. 20530



D. FORMS AND RECEIPTS

 


 

EMPLOYEE PERSONNEL POLICY MANUAL RECEIPT

 

 

I acknowledge that I have received the Town’s Personnel Policy Manual and
that I have been advised to read it carefully and have been given the
opportunity to bring any questions that I have to the attention of my
Department Head. I understand that this Manual is for my use while I am
employed by the Town.

 

Finally, I understand that the Town reserves the right to change policies and
benefits described in this Manual and may add new policies to this Manual
from time to time.

 

 

                                                   
                                             

Employee

 

                                                   
                                             

Date

 

                                                   
                                             

Department Head/Supervisor

 

 



 


 

EEO/SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY RECEIPT

 

 

I hereby acknowledge that I have received the Town’s EEO Policy and
Statement on Sexual Harassment. I further acknowledge that I have been
instructed to read the updated policies carefully and have been given the
opportunity to bring any questions that I have to the attention of the
Department Head.

 

Finally, I understand the Town reserves the right to make changes to policies
and benefits described in this Manual and to either delete or add new
policies and benefits, as circumstances require from time to time.

 

 

                                                   
                                             

Employee

 

                                                   
                                             

Date

 

                                                   
                                             

Department Head/Supervisor

 

 



 


 

ALCOHOL AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY RECEIPT

 

 

I hereby acknowledge that I have received the Town’s Alcohol and Drug-Free
Workplace Policy Statement. I further acknowledge that I have been instructed
to read the updated policies carefully and have been given the opportunity to
bring any questions that I have to the attention of the Department Head.

 

Finally, I understand the Town reserves the right to make changes to policies
and benefits described in this Manual and to either delete or add new
policies and benefits, as circumstances require from time to time.

 

 

                                                   
                                             

Employee

 

                                                   
                                             

Date

 

                                                   
                                             

Department Head/Supervisor

 

 



 


 

INTERNAL CONTROLS COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION

 

 

I hereby acknowledge and certify that I have reviewed the Internal Controls
Webinar produced by the Indiana State Board of Accounts and have been advised
that additional training is made available upon request.

 

 

                                                   
                                             

Employee

 

                                                   
                                             

Date

 

                                                   
                                             

Department Head/Supervisor

 

 



 


 

TITLE VI POLICY RECEIPT CERTIFICATION

 

 

I hereby acknowledge and certify that I have received a copy of the Town’s
Title VI Non-Discrimination Plan and Policy and that I have been advised that
additional information will be made available by the Town’s Title VI
Coordinator upon request.

 

 

                                                   
                                             

Employee

 

                                                   
                                             

Date

 

                                                   
                                             

Department Head/Supervisor

 

 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Indiana Code



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Section
 
Code Section




1-1-7-1
 
11-17, 11-18


3-5-9
 
App. C


3-11-1.5-32
 
6-1


5-2-1-9(1)
 
21-34


5-3-1
 
8-16


5-4-1
 
2-68


5-10-6-1
 
App. C


5-11-9-4
 
App. C


5-14-1.5-5
 
App. A


5-14-1.5-5(d)
 
App. A


5-22
 
2-100, 2-101


8-1.5-3 et seq.
 
25-1


8-1.5-3-3
 
25-16


8-1.5-5 et seq.
 
24-2


8-1.5-5-4
 
24-16


8-1.5-5-29(b)
 
24-39


9-13-2-69.7
 
13-122


9-14-5
 
13-113


9-17-2-12
 
13-2


9-18.5-5
 
13-113


9-18.5-8
 
13-113


9-21-1-2
 
13-15


9-21-1-3.3
 
13-121


9-21-2 et seq.
 
13-25


9-21-3-1
 
13-25


9-21-16-5.5
 
8-8


9-24
 
13-124, 13-126


9-26-9-3
 
21-3


13-11-2-191
 
8-9


13-11-2-96(b)
 
8-9


14-28-1
 
9-22


14-28-1-26
 
9-22


14-34
 
24-50


22-3-2 through 22-3-6
 
21-32


22-3-7
 
21-32


22-11-14-1
 
16-40


22-12-1-5
 
5-50, 8-3


22-12-6-1.5
 
8-12


22-13-2-7
 
5-38


22-15-4
 
5-39


31-6-4-15.7
 
16-4


31-37-19-27
 
16-4


32-1-6 et seq.
 
App. A


32-39-1
 
25-100


32-30-10.6
 
5-179


33-36-2, §§ 1 through 4
 
1-13


33-36-2 et seq.
 
1-13


34-28-7
 
App. C


34-28-7-2(a)(2)
 
App. C


35-44.1-1-3
 
App. C


36-1-20.2
 
App. C


36-1-3-4
 
12-1


36-1-3-8(10)
 
1-14, 1-15


36-1-6-2
 
26-17


36-1-6-9
 
1-14, 1-15, 24-301, 25-42


36-4-9-2
 
25-20


36-4-9-12
 
25-20


36-5-2
 
6-1


36-7
 
App. A


36-7 et seq.
 
App. A


36-7-4
 
9-1, App. A


36-7-4-200 et seq.
 
App. A


36-7-4-202
 
App. A


36-7-4-500 et seq.
 
App. A


36-7-4-600 et seq.
 
App. A


36-7-4-603
 
App. A


36-7-4-604
 
App. A


36-7-4-608
 
App. A


36-7-4-700 et seq
 
App. A


36-7-4-701
 
App. A


36-7-4-706
 
App. A


36-7-4-708
 
App. A


36-7-4-710
 
App. A


36-7-4-900
 
App. A


36-7-4-900 et seq.
 
16-1


36-7-4-1014
 
App. A


36-7-4-1015
 
App. A


36-7-4-1500 et seq.
 
App. A


36-7-4-1509(c)
 
App. A


36-7-9
 
5-170, 5-181


36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28
 
5-168


36-7-9-2
 
5-167, 5-179


36-7-9-4
 
5-167


36-7-9-14
 
5-173


36-7-9-28
 
5-174


36-7-12-1 et seq.
 
19-1, 19-3


36-7-36 et seq.
 
5-180


36-8-2-10
 
12-1


36-8-3-4
 
21-26, App. C


36-8-3-4.1
 
21-26, App. C


36-8-8
 
App. C


36-8-9
 
App. C


36-8-9-1 et seq.
 
21-16


36-8-9-3.1
 
21-21


36-8-9-4
 
21-26


36-9-2-16
 
25-47


36-9-23-25
 
10-10, 25-47, 25-81


36-9-23-31
 
10-10, 25-86, 25-98, 25-99


36-9-23-32
 
25-50, 25-98


36-9-23-33
 
10-10, 25-86


36-10-3
 
17-1, 17-19


36-10-3-20
 
17-3


36-10-3-22
 
17-2


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




2001-03
 
3-26-2001
 
App. A


2002-27
 
10-28-2002
 
2-2


2002-33
 
10-28-2002
 
13-21


2003-08
 
5-27-2003
 
13-3


2005-03
 
4-10-2005
 
5-22


2005-04
 
4-25-2005
 
13-54


2005-11
 
8-22-2005
 
13-25


2005-12
 
8-22-2005
 
13-25


2005-19
 
11-14-2005
 
App. A


2006-01
 
1-9-2006
 
1-14


2006-04
 
2-13-2006
 
1-15, 24-1, 24-2, 24-16—24-21, 24-30—24-40, 24-50—24-62, 24-300—24-302


2006-05
 
4-10-2006
 
App. A


2006-11
 
5-22-2006
 
13-54


2006-16
 
6-26-2006
 
5-43


2006-15
 
6-30-2006
 
24-1, 24-101—24-105


2006-19
 
8-14-2006
 
11-16, 11-17


2006-20
 
8-14-2006
 
1-9, App. B


2006-21
 
8-28-2006
 
App. A


2006-24
 
9-11-2006
 
5-44


2006-22
 
10-9-2006
 
24-200—24-204


2007-10
 
4-22-2007
 
10-9


2007-13
 
5-29-2007
 
16-40—16-42


2007-14
 
6-25-2007
 
5-46, 5-50


2007-20
 
8-13-2007
 
13-54


2007-23
 
8-27-2007
 
13-20


2007-30
 
10-22-2007
 
13-21


2008-05
 
4-14-2008
 
App. A


2008-06
 
4-28-2008
 
24-1, 24-32, 24-37, 24-38, 24-53, 24-58


2008-07
 
4-28-2008
 
2-2


2008-08
 
5-27-2008
 
13-21


2008-09
 
7-28-2008
 
2-66, 2-71


2009-06
 
5-26-2009
 
16-3, 16-4


2009-16
 
9-14-2009
 
13-121—13-127


2009-17
 
10-26-2009
 
App. A


2010-08
 
12-20-2010
 
25-86


2010-09
 
7-26-2010
 
25-86


2011-05
 
3-28-2011
 
3-1—3-8, 3-15


2012-14
 
12-10-2012
 
6-1—6-3


2013-04
 
4-8-2013
 
16-5


2014-01
 
3-10-2014
 
App. A


2014-04
 
4-28-2014
 
21-2


2014-14
 
11-10-2014
 
10-10


2014-17
 
11-24-2014
 
25-33, 25-34


2014-16
 
12-8-2014
 
25-83, 25-85, 25-86, 25-88


2014-18
 
12-22-2014
 
4-13


2015-01
 
1-26-2015
 
5-26


2015-04
 
4-27-2015
 
App. A


2015-08
 
5-26-2015
 
5-26


2015-07
 
6-8-2015
 
25-47—25-50, 25-85


2015-12
 
6-22-2015
 
25-31, 25-34, 25-35, 25-42, 25-43


2015-13
 
9-14-2015
 
5-178—5-187


2015-18
 
9-14-2015
 
13-54, 13-55, 13-75


2015-19
 
9-28-2015
 
9-1—9-33


2015-22
 
9-28-2015
 
5-55—5-61


2015-25
 
12-14-2015
 
21-4


2016-03
 
4-11-2016
 
App. A


2016-05
 
4-25-2016
 
25-35


2016-06
 
5-9-2016
 
21-4


2016-11
 
6-27-2016
 
13-54


2016-17
 
7-25-2016
 
24-203


2016-23
 
12-12-2016
 
25-83, 25-85, 25-88


2017-02
 
7-24-2017
 
5-50


2017-05
 
5-8-2017
 
10-9


2017-11
 
6-26-2017
 
11-16—11-20


2017-12
 
7-24-2017
 
8-2, 8-3


2017-14
 
9-25-2017
 
10-10


2017-18
 
11-13-2017
 
App. C


 
 
 
 
 




 



 


